
      
         
            
            
            A POSTIL or orderly diſpoſing of certeine Epiſtles vſually red in the Church of God, vppon the Sundayes and Holydayes throughout the whole yéere.
            Written in Latin by Dauid Chytraeus, and tranſlated intoo Engliſh by Arthur Golding.
            Seen and allowed according too the order appoynted.
            
               Jmprinted at London, by Henrie Bynneman.
               
            
            
               for Lucas Harriſon and George Biſhop.
            
            Anno Domini. 1570.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the ryght honourable Sir VValtar Myldmay Knight, Chancelour of the Queenes Maieſties court of Exchequer, and one of hir highneſſe moſt honorable priuie counſel.
                Arthur Golding wiſheth health, proſperitie, and encreaſe of all godly knowledge, with long continuance in the ſame.
            
               
                  RIght honorable, foraſmuch ſince the comming foorth of the Postill of Hemingius vpon the Gospelles in Engliſh, the good liking of his wholeſome doctrine, and his well handling thereof too the playne vnderstanding, euen of the ſimple and too the profitable edifying of al ſortes, haue cauſed many too reade the ſame with great willingneſſe and diligence: The partyes that were the procurers of that benefite too their Countrey, haue with like good meening requeſted me to adde ſome Postill or expoſition vpon the Epiſtles alſo to the intent that the well dispoſed Reader might haue more full inſtruction in thoſe partes of ſcripture which are moſt vſually & continually red in the Christen Churches. In performance wherof, (vppon the ſpeciall good report and commendation of ſuch as are lerned) I haue tranſlated this Postill (or, as the Author himſelf termeth thē, theſe dispoſements) of Dauid Cythraeus, conteyning in ground and ſubstance of matter, the ſelfſame things that the other worke dooth: Howbeit, handled and dispoſed after another ſort. For neyther vſeth he ſo many ſubdiuiſions as dooth Hemingius: and beſydes that, hee conueyeth his matters intoo the manner of Sermons methodically, dispoſed after the order of Rhethoricke, instructing the Reader too
               
               frame the partes of his oration aptly, and too enlarge the ſame plentuouſly, according as oportunitie of tyme, perſone, and matter ſhall require. Alſo in ſuch places as haue any darke phraſes or hid ſenſe, he expoūdeth the woords grāmerlike, opening the propreties of the tūgs and the figuratiue ſpeeches, wherby he giueth great light to the text. Agein, in diuers caſes he draweth the matters into forme of Arguments after the manner of Logicke, too the intent the Reader ſhould looke throughly intoo the matter, and wey it accordingly. In whiche respects although this woorke may ſeeme more neceſsarie for the lerned (or at least wyſe for ſuch as bee well entered in the liberall artes, and foreward in knowledge) than for the ſimple and meaner ſorte: yet notwithstāding there are other respectes alſo for which euen the ſimplest that is of any capacitie may fare the better by him. For like as the termes of art in ſetting down and diſpoſing of matters according too art, are ſomwhat darke to ſuch as are not acquaynted with them, which is not a thing ſo greatly materiall too bee ſtumbled at: So his diſcourſing and ſetting foorth of matters perteyning too fayth, religiō, doctrine, and amēdment of maners (which are the cheef poynts that al men ſhould looke for) are very playn, orderly, manifest, and vtterly voyd of all obſcuritie and darkneſse. Yea and he ſo euidently and effectually beateth into his heerers heads, the right ſenſe and meening of the holy ſcripture, that it may ſeeme he had a ſingular care and regard too bee vnderſtood of all men. And not in theſe Epistles only, but alſo in many other partes of holy ſcripture both of the old Testament and of the new, hath he trauelled right paynfully, lernedly, and godlily, to his own great cōmendatiō among the ſkilful, & to the great cōmoditie and furtherance of the christen cōmon wedle. Wherfore, I am the bolder to match this tranſlatiō with the former of Hemingius (as it were the forme with the matter) and to dedicate it to your honor, trusting that you will of your accustomed goodneſſe giue mee leaue to ſhroud my ſimple dooings vnder the ſhadowe of your fauoure, which thing I moſt humbly requeſt. For I thought it an vnmeet and vnſeemly thing, yea& ageinſt reaſon, to ſeparate thoſe works in dedicatiō, which are al one inſubſtāce of mater. And therfore ſubmitting myſelf & it to your good pleaſure, I ceaſe to trouble your honour any further. Finiſhed at Powles Belchamp, the last day of March▪ 1570.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  Ʋpon the byrthday of the Sonne of God our Lorde Ieſus Christ.
               
                  FOr as much as it is a cuſtome in the Churche of God too begin the Newe yéere at the birthday of the Sonne of God, ſo as the ſame day which was the commencement of our ſaluation, ſhould alſo lead the beginning of the yéere: at this my entrance with moſt earneſt ſute I beſéeche our Lord Ieſus Chriſt ye ſonne of God who was borne for vs, and giuen too vs, that the yéere enſuing may bée luckie and too the welfare of Gods churche, of the common weale, of the ſtudies of lerning, and of vs and our houſholdes. And bicauſe the ſonne of God was to this end ſent, and that his taking vpon him our fraile and weake nature, mainteineth and preſerueth all the whole maſſe of mankind too this end, that out of it he may (by the voyce of his goſpell) gather too himſelfe an euerlaſting Churche, and (aboliſhing ſinne and death) reſtore rightuouſneſſe and eternal life: I beſéeche him with all my hart, that for his glories ſake, he will teach and gouerne vs, and dwell in vs and bée effectuall in vs, and alſo mainteine the light of the true doctrine concerning himſelf, and the knowledge of lerning néedfull for his Churche, & the harbroughes of the Churche, and wholſome peace: that mo may acknowledge him rightly, and ſet out his praiſe for euermore.
               Now in the treatyſes concerning the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who was borne for vs, and giuen too vs, there bée thrée places chéefly too bée conſidered, and ſet foorthe too the people.
               
                  
                     Firſt concerning the perſon of the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt borne of the virgin Marie, in whome the twoo natures of God and man are by a wonderfull leage knit togither.
                  2 Of the cauſes of this woonderfull coupling of the twoo natures in Chriſt: and of the benefites or profites that redound too vs men by the birth of Chriſt.
                  3 Of the applying of Chriſtes benefites, which thing is doone by fayth, which afterward is effectual by good workes.
               
               Therfore after the old cuſtome of the Churche, there are thrée Epiſtles wont to be red in the thrée offices on the birth day of Chriſt, taken out of Heb. 1. Tit. 3. and Tit. 2.
               The firſt Epiſtle (Heb. 1.) dooth chéefly ſet forth the doctrin concerning the perſone of Chriſt.
               The ſecond, (which in Tit. 3.) ſetteth out the benefites of our ſauior Ieſus Chriſt, with moſt cléere & apparant words.
               The third (which is red in the ſecond too Titus) cōteineth a ſumme of the doctrine concerning good works which muſt folow the faith that applieth Chriſtes benefites▪ vntoo vs.
               I will therfore intreat of euery of theſe thrée Epiſtles in order, the expoſition of which may bée diſtributed intoo thrée birthdayes. But firſt of all I will recite a diſpoſement of a ſermon which may bréefly comprehend a ſumme of the doctrine concerning the Incarnation or birth of the ſōne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt too bée vttered too the people.
               
                  ¶ THE ENTERANCE.
                  The conſideration of Gods ſecret purpoſe concerning the redemption of mankind, and the woonderfull coupling of the Godhed and manhod in the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, farre ſurmounteth the wiſdome of all Angels and men. Yet will God haue vs too lerne the beginnings of this wiſdom, in this lyfe, and (toogither with the Angels and all the ſainctes in heauen and earth) too béehold this woonderfull

birthe of the ſonne of God with earneſt mind, and too magnifie it with true faith and thankfulneſſe. For the ſonne of God hath voutſaued this moſt hygh honor chéefly vppon vs men, that he would take the ſubſtance of our nature vppon him. And for our ſaluation ſake is he become man: that ſetting vs frée from ſinne and endleſſe death, he might reſtore vntoo vs rightuouſneſſe and life. This is to be vnderſtode of the memoriall of the promyſed ſeede, kept alwayes in the hartes of the faithfull, and renued by preching and talk and not of the keeping of any appointed holyday. And therefore all the church (euen from the beginning of the world, which is now 5531. yeeres) hath kept this feaſt, renewing and ſpreading abrode the promis concerning the womans ſéede that ſhould cruſh the ſerpents head. Wherfore let vs alſo ioyne our endeuor too the felowſhip of the whole Church, and (toogither with all Sainctes) conſider the beginnings of the doctrine which concerneth the woonderful aliance of the Godhed and manhod in Chryſt, and the benefites that he hath brought vs by his birth: ſpecially ſeeing the euerlaſting ſaluation of vs all, conſiſteth in the true acknowledgment of our Lord and ſauyoure Ieſus Chryſt, the very ſonne of God and of Marie.
               
               
                  The propoſition and partition.
                  Now will wée diſtribute all this moſt large doctrine of this feaſtfull day, intoo thrée places. And firſt (by Gods helpe) wée will ſpeake of Chryſtes perſone iſſuing of the virgin Marie. 2. Of the cauſes of this woonderfull coupling of the twoo natures: and of Chryſtes benefites. 3. Of the applying of the ſame.
               
               
                  Of the firſt.
                  IN our Lord and redéemer Ieſus Chryſt borne of the virginTwoo natures in Chryſt. Marie, there bée twoo natures knyt toogither by an indiſſoluble bond, that is too wit, the Sonne of God, the woord, of one ſelfe ſame ſubſtance and of one ſelfe ſame continuaunce wyth the eternall Father, and the nature of man taken of the ſubſtance of the virgin Marie.

Iohn. 1. The woord became fleſh, that is too ſay, the ſonne of God became man, or the ſonne of God tooke too him fleſh, or the nature of man, ſo as they bée one perſone, Ieſus Chryſt. Philip. 2. Chriſt being in the ſhape of God, thought it no robbery too bée equall with God, but abaſed himſelfe, taking vppon him the ſhape of a ſeruaunt, and became vtterly like too the reſidue of men. Too the intent theſe things may bée the eaſlyer vnderſtoode, the doctrine of the common Cathechiſme is too bée repeted in this place. What God is: how he is too bée diſcerned frō counterfet Gods: how many perſons of the Godhead there bée: how the thrée perſones are too bée diſcerned one from another by euident markes. For only the ſecond perſone the ſonne of God coupled mannes nature vntoo him. And let the deſcription of the perſone of Gods ſonne bée recited out of the Cathechiſme, the which I will expound in the diſpoſement of the foreſayd Epiſtle. Heb. 1. Alſo let the names of the ſonne of God bée declared among which the chéef is, the woord, which is attributed toWhy Chriſt is called the woord. him for many cauſes. But the chéefeſt are two. Firſt, for that the ſonne is the ful and perfect image of the euerlaſting father, like as our ſpéeche is the image that expreſſeth and ſheweth the thoughtes of our mynd. Secondly, for that by the ſonne, Goddiſcloſed his woonderfull purpoſe concerning the creation and redemption of mankind, and vttered to our firſt parentes his promis concerning the ſéede that ſhould cruſh the ſerpents head.
                  
                     Baſilius. Why is he called the woord? Bicauſe he procéeded out of the mind, and was begotten without all affection, and is the image of him that begate him.
                  
                     Nazianzen He is therfore called the woord, bicauſe he is in reſpect of the father, as the woord is in reſpect of the mind, not only bicauſe his generation was voide of all affection, but alſo for the knot of coniunction and the liuely repreſentation.
                  This only begotten ſonne & woord of God, was alwayes

at hand too mankind euen from the beginning of the world.The ſonne of God was alwayes with the fathers. He receiued our firſt parēts: he ſate at the helme in the Ark of Noe: he was a gueſt with Abraham: he ſhewed himſelfe too Iacob face too face, that is too wit, in the ſelfe ſame ſhape and paterne of mannes nature, which he ſhould afterward take vppon him: he appeared too Moyſes in the buſh: he was with the people of Iſraell in the wilderneſſe: and he inſpired all the Prophets. At length when the fulneſſe of time foreſette of God was come, (namely the yéere of the world 3962) he tooke vppon him mannes nature in the wombe of the virgin Marie, and by perſonall vnion cuppled it too himſelfe, according as was foretold of him in the promiſſes, that he ſhould bée borne of a virgin. For in this reſpect is he calledWhy Chriſt is called the womans ſeede. the womans ſeede. Gen. 3. and Siloh, that is too ſay, the virgins iſſue. Gen. 49. And in Eſay the. 7. Behold, a virgin ſhall conceiue, and his name ſhall bée called Emanuell, that is too ſay, God with vs. Now although wée cannot by the ſharpneſſe of our owne wit, ſpye out the maner of this wonderfull cuppling of the Godhed and manhood in Chryſt: yet notwithſtanding, theſe entrances which God hathe opened vnto vs, are too bée faithfully lerned and beléeued. And chilorē may lerne the ſumme of this doctrine out of the Créede of Athanaſius.The creede of Athanaſius. This therefore is the right faith, that wée beléeue and acknowledge, that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God, is both God and man. God, of the ſubſtāce of the father begotten before all worldes, and man of the ſubſtance of his moother borne in the world. Perfect God and perfect man of reaſonable ſoule and humane fleſh ſubſiſting. Equall too the father as touching his Godhead, and leſſe than the father as touching his manhood. Who though he bée both God & man, yet is he not twoo, but one Chriſt. One, not by turning the Godhead intoo fleſh, but by taking manhood intoo God. One altoogither, not by confounding the ſubſtance, but by vnion of perſone. For like as the reaſonable ſoule and fleſh is one man: ſo God and man is one Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                  The .ij. Concerning the cauſes of the coupling of the twoo natures, and of the benefites of Chryſtes birth.
                  THe principall efficient cauſe of the woonderfull coupling of the Godhed and manhod in Chryſt, is the very perſone of the ſonne of God making ſute in that ſecret counſel of the Godhed, for mankind, and turning vppon himſelfe the moſt rightful wrath of God againſt ſin, & ioyning too himſelf our nature by euer laſting and indiſſoluble bond. Secondly the holy ghoſt hath ſanctified the fleſh taken of the ſubſtance of the virgin Marie, and faſhioned in Maries wombe, the body of Chryſt redy too bée borne. Luke. j.
                  The cauſes inforcing the birth and Incarnation of the Sonne of God our mediatoure, were chéefly foure. Firſt theGods mercie and louing kindneſſe. excéeding loue and mercy of God towardes mankind, which he would not haue forlorne for euer. Secondly, Gods iuſtice binding men either too obedience, or too ſufficient puniſhment. Therefore when man had tranſgreſſed, it was ofGods iuſtice. neceſſitie that the puniſhment ſhould be performed by man. Thirdly: Now that the pryce might bée of full value, and the greatneſſe of the deſert, might excéede the greatneſſe of the ſinne: it béehoued the redéemer too excell all creatures, and too bée a perſon of the Godhed. Fourthly: It is the duetieThe duetie of a redeemer & hygh preeſt. of a redéemer and high prieſt, too appeaſe Gods wrathe, and too ouercome ſinne and death, and too bée at hand in all places, and too héere and defend the Churche, and too reſtore ryghtuouſneſſe and eternall life vntoo it. But this can no man doo, that is not alſo Emanuell, that is too ſay, in very déede and by nature, God.
                  The outward forcing cauſe is ſinne, and the moſt ſorowfullSinne & damnation. damnation of all mankind, which God wold not ſhould vtterly periſh.
                  The finall cauſe is ſhewed in the Sermon of the Angell.Mannes ſaluation. Beholde I bring you tidings of great ioy, for there is borne too you a ſauioure, Chryſt the Lord.
                  
                     For the higheſt benefit yt the ſonne of God hath wroughtThe benefites of Chryſtes birth. vntoo vs by his birth, is ſaluation, that is too ſay, deliuerance from Gods wrath, from ſinne, from death, from curſe of the law, from the tirannie of the deuil, and from endleſſe damnation: and on the other ſide attonement with God, ioy of conſcience, adoption too be the ſonnes of God, the gift of the holy ghoſt, rightuouſneſſe, and euerlaſting life. Too bée ſhort, the woord of God Ieſus Chriſt, is become that which wée bée, too the intent he might make vs fully that which he is. For (that I may vſe the woordes of Ciprian,) Chryſt the ſonne of God voutſaued too become the ſonne of man, to the intēt he might make vs men the ſonnes of God: He tooke vppon him the ſhape of a ſeruant, too the intent he might ſet vs frée, that are the ſeruauntes of ſinne and death. He was wounded that he might heale our wounds: and it was his will too die, that he might giue vs mortal wights immortalitie. Theſe benefits are brefly conteined in the promiſes made too Adam & Abraham. In thy ſéede ſhall all nations be bliſſed. Alſo the womās ſéede ſhall tread downe the ſerpents head. And the ſumme is vttered in cléere and lyghtſome woords by Paule, Galath. 4. After that the fulneſſe of time was come, God ſent his ſonne borne of a woman, made vnder the lawe, too the intent he myght redéeme thoſe that were vnder the law, yt wée myght bée adopted the ſonnes of God, of which notable ſentence I will intreat more at large the next Sunday.
               
               
                  The .iij. Of the applying.
                  NOw foraſmuch as theſe are great good things which theHow Chriſtes benefites are applied too vs. ſonne of God bringeth: the ſorowful minds demād how wée wretches defiled with ſinnes, can atteine them. That do ye Angels teach: vnto you is borne a ſauior. And Eſay: a child is born vnto vs, & a ſonne is giuen vntoo vs. And hereuppon is grounded this ſentence. Iohn. 3. So God loued the world that he gaue his only begotten ſonne, to the intent that all y• beleeue in him ſhould not periſh, but haue lyfe euerlaſting.

For too this purpoſe was the ſonne of God ſent, that wée al, whoo are vtterly vnwoorthy and horibly defiled, ſhould bée accepted of God for his ſake, and atteyne remiſſion of ſinnes and eternall ſaluation. And wee are moſt ſtraightly commaunded of God, too beléeue aſſuredly that theſe good things are giuen vs for his ſonnes ſake, and through this faith ſhining before vs, too ſing all our life long with the Angels.
                  
                     1 Glorie bee too God on high, that is too ſay, nowe thatHow and why glory is giuen too God. the ſonne is borne, for the ſame ſonnes ſake is true and perfect glorie yéelded vntoo God: not only for that he is God, wyſe, rightuous, and a iudge: but alſo for that he is mercifall, and certeinly accepteth vs for his ſonnes ſake, and rewardeth vs with eternall life. This glorie doo neyther heathenmen, nor Turkes, nor hipocrites, but only they that beleeue in the ſonne that is borne too vs and giuen too vs, yéelde vntoo God.
                     2 In earth peace, that is too ſay, men haue God reconciledPeace. and fauorable too them, and mainteine mutuall loue among themſelues.
                     3 Too men gladneſſe, that is too ſay, although miſeriesGladneſſe. and diſtreſſes befal them, yet are their hartes quiet and merie, and reſt ſtedfaſtly in this ſouereine goodneſſe, that the ſonne is borne too vs and giuen too vs.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ THE CONCLVSION.
                  In the knitting vp, let the thrée places bée repeted, and let a thankſgiuing bée added for the ſending of the ſonne, and a prayer, that God will voutſaue to gather a churche too his ſonne among vs, and kindle our mindes and hartes with his holy ſpirit, ſo as wée may looke ſomewhat more déepely intoo this woonderfull deuiſe of our redemption, and magnifie it with thankfull hartes.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Ʋppon Christmas day.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Heb. j.
                  
                     GOd in times paſt diuerſly & many ways ſpake vntoo the fathers by Prophets: but in theſe laſt days he hath ſpokē vntoo vs by his own ſonne, whom he hath made heire of all things, by whō alſo he made the worlde. Which ſonne beeing the bryghtnes of his glory and the very image of his ſubſtāce, ruling al things with the woord of his power: hath by his own perſon purged our ſinnes, and ſitteth on the right hand of the maieſtie on hie, beeing ſo much more excellent than the Angels, as he hath by enheritaunce obteined a more excellent name (than haue they). For vntoo which of the Angels ſaid he at any time? Thou art my ſonne, this day haue I begottē thee? And agein: I wil bee his father, and he shal bee my ſonne. And agein when he bringeth in the firſt begotten ſonne intoo the world, he ſaith: And let all the Angels of God woorship him. And of the Angels he ſaith: he maketh his Angels ſpirits, and his miniſters a flame of fire. But vnto the ſōne he ſaith: thy ſeat (o God) shalbe for euer and euer. The ſcepter of thy kingdom is a right ſcepter. Thou haſt loued rightuouſneſſe, and hated iniquitie. Wherefore God euen thy God, hath anointed thee with Oile of gladneſſe aboue thy fellowes. And thou Lord in the beginning haſt laid the foūdation of the earth, And the heauens are the woorkes of thy handes. They shall perish, but thou endureſt. They all shall wex old as dooth a garment: and as a veſture shalt thou chaunge them, and they shalbe chaunged. But thou art euen the ſame, and thy yeeres shall not faile. Vnto which of the angels ſaid he at any time: Sit on my right hand, till I make thyne enemies thy footſtoole? Are they not all miniſtring ſpirits, ſent too miniſter for their ſakes which shall bee heires of ſaluation?
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  The Epiſtle pertaineth too the kind of caſes that teache. The partes or chéefe places are twoo.
                  
                     
                        1 A deſcription of the perſone of the ſonne of GOD our Lord Ieſu Chryſt.
                     2 A gathering togither of the witneſſes which confirme that Chriſt is more excellent than the Angels, & ſhewe the difference betwéene Chriſt and the Angels.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  IT is a great and wōderfull benefite of the ſonne of God, &Chryſts apperings too the Fathers in old tyme. woorthy too bée ſet out cōtinually with thankfull mynd and voyce, that of his excéeding goodneſſe, cōming foorth from hys ſecret dwelling place, he diſcouered himſelfe to mankynd by aſſured & open teſtimonies. Yea, euē he himſelf clothing him with a viſible ſhape or forme of the manhod that was too bée taken vppon him afterward, talked with the firſt men and the reſt of the Fathers face: and with his own mouth reueled the promis of grace whereby the firſt parents were receiued, oftentimes renewing the ſame in his communications had with Abrahā, Jſaac, Iacob, Moyſes, Dauid, Eſay, Ieremie, Daniel. &c, and at the length in ye yéere of the world 3962 was borne man of the virgin Marie, & many yéeres togither ſowed ye doctrin of his goſpel among men & confirmed it with miracles. Of this excéeding great benefit, this epiſtle maketh mention at the beginning, & afterward ioyneth ther vnto a deſcription of the ſonne of God our lord Ieſu Chriſt.
                  The ſonne of God is the ſecond perſone of the GodheadA deſcription of the ſecond perſone in the Trinitie. begotten of the euerlaſting father, and is the ſubſtantiall & full image & brightneſſe of the eternal father, more excellent than al the Angels, by whom al other things in heauen and earth are created & preſerued. The which ſonne tooke mans nature of the virgin Marie, ſo as God and man are one perſone Ieſus Chryſt, who by himſelf through his paſſion and death, hath clenzed our ſinnes, & being rayſed ageyne ſitteth at the right hand of the father, & giueth remiſſion of ſinnes, rightuouſneſſe, & eternal life, to all that flée to him by fayth.
                  This ordinarie deſcriptiō of the perſon of gods ſonne, may

by good lerning bée builded out of the teſtimonies of this firſtProues of Chriſts Godhead. Chapter too the Hebrewes. For, that the ſonne of God is a perſon of the Godhead diſtinct frō the father, it is manifeſtly confirmed by the .xliiij. Pſal. The Lord euen thy Lord hath anoynted thée with the oyle of gladneſſe. Alſo: this day haue I begotten thée. Therefore is he God and a perſone diſtinct from the father that begetteth him.
                  That he is begotten of the father, the very name of Sonne declareth, and ſo dooth the ſaying of the ſecond Pſalme, this day haue I begotten thée.
                  That he is the ſubſtanciall and full image of the father, it is manifeſt, in that he is termed the expreſſe image of the fathers ſubſtance.
                  The Gréeke woord Apaugaſma, ſignifieth the brightneſſe that iſſeweth from another light. Therfore like as light and the brightneſſe that iſſeweth from the light are alwayes togither: ſo the father and the ſonne are coeternall.
                  That he hath created all things & ſuſteyneth al things, it is manifeſt by this ſaying: whō he hath made heire (that is to ſay Lord) of al things, by whom alſo he made ye worlds, that is to ſay al things in the world. By him were al thingsIohn. 1. Iohn. 5. made. My father worketh euē vnto this hour, & I alſo work.
                  Bearing, (that is to ſay carying, vpholding, and maynteyning) all things by the woord of his power, that is to ſay, by his almightie woord.
                  That he tooke vppon him mannes nature, he will ſhewe more at large in the ſecond chapter. Héere he ſetteth foorth but the chéef office and benefite of Chryſte, for which he became man, when he ſayeth, By himſelf purged he our ſins.
                  This ſhort ſaying conteyneth a ſumme of the whole doctrine of the Goſpell concerning Chryſtes benefites, concerning the difference betwéene the Law and the Goſpell, and concerning forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, or iuſtification.
                  The Lawe purgeth not, ne taketh away ſinnes, but encreaſethChryſt onely purgeth ſinne. ſinne, and maketh it out of meaſure ſinful. Rom. 7.
                  
                     The ſacrifiſes of the Leuites purged not ſinne, but were figures of Chriſtes ſacrifice.
                  Our owne woorkes and munkiſh ceremonies purge not ſinnes. Only Chriſt by himſelfe, (that is too ſay by the ſacrifiſe of his body offered vpon the altar of the croſſe,) hath purged vs, and hath for euermore made perfect thoſe that are too be ſāctified, as is ſaid afterward in the 7. 9. & 10. chapters. And 1. Iohn. 1. The blud of Chriſt the ſonne of God clenſeth vs from all ſinne, and iuſtifieth vs & maketh vs heires of euerlaſting ſaluation and glorie. For wee ſhall bée glorified with Chriſt who ſitteth at the right hand of the Maieſtie, that is too ſay, reigneth in equal power and maieſtie with the eternall father.
               
               
                  The .ij. Of the difference betweene Chriſt and the angels.
                  TOo the intent this thing may bée the more euident, firſt let the definitions of them bée vnderſtood.
                  Angels are ſpiritual ſubſtances created by God after hisWhat Angels bee. own image, and ordeined too ſing glory too God on high, and too bée miniſters vppon earth, of the churche or of the heires of euerlaſting ſaluation.
                  The deſcription of ye ſonne of God, is recited a litle afore.
                  By theſe deſcriptiōs and the teſtimonies cited in the text of the Epiſtle, ſeuen differences may bee gathered.
                  1 Chriſt is verely and by nature the ſonne of God, begotten of the ſubſtance of the eternall father. Pſal. 2. This day haue I begotten thée. 2. Reg. 7. I wil bée a father too him, and he ſhall bée a ſonne too mée.
                  The Angels are not verely and by nature the ſonnes of God, but only by adoption or grace. Ergo Chriſt farre excelleth all the Angels.
                  2 Inuocation is an honor too bée attributed only too God the ſearcher of hartes, according too this ſaying: Thou ſhalt worſhip ye Lord thy God; and in general, whoſoeuer is worſhipped,

is better than he y• worſhippeth: But God cōmaundeth that Chriſt ſhalbée called vpon, yea euen of the Angels: Pſ. 96. Worſhip yée him all yée Angels of God▪ 
                     Ergo Chriſt is both God, and alſo farre more excellent than all the Angels.
                  3 Chriſt is the maker of heauen and earth. Pſa. 101. Thou O Lord haſt founded the earth from the beginning.
                  Angels are ſubſtances created, as Pſal. 103. is ſayd: which makeſt thine Angels ſpirites, and thy miniſters a flame of fire, that is too ſay, cléere ſubſtances, which in ſhéereneſſe, force, nimbleneſſe, and ſwiftneſſe, are like too fire.
                  4 Chriſt is an euerlaſting king, bearing a rightful ſcepter, and iuſtifying all that flée vntoo him. Pſa. 45. Thy throne O God endureth for euer and euer, the ſcepter of rightuouſneſſe is the ſcepter of thy kingdom. But the Angels are but only the ſeruauntes of this king, and impart not their rightuouſneſſe vnto any others.
                  5 Chriſt is verely and naturally the ſonne of God. Pſ. 45. O God (Chriſt,) thy God (the eternall father,) hath anoynted thée with the oyle of gladneſſe for thy felowes ſakes. Now the Angels are not God, but creatures.
                  6 Chriſt is anoynted with fulneſſe of the holy Ghoſt, too the entent he may annoynt his felowes, that is too ſay, the reſt of the members of the church.
                  The Angels are not anoynted with fulneſſe of the holy Ghoſt, neither can they of their owne power anoynt others and garniſh them with the giftes of the holy Ghoſt.
                  7 Chriſt ſitteth at the right hand of the eternall Father, that is too ſay, reigneth in equal maieſtie and glory with the euerlaſting father.
                  The Angels ſit not at the right hand of the Father, nereigne in equall power with the eternall father: but are the miniſters of Chriſt and of the whole churche, pitching their tents round about all thoſe that feare him, according as is ſayd more at large concerning the office and benefites of the holy Angels, vppon S. Michaels day.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The ſecond Epiſtle. Titus. iij.
                  
                     BVT after that the kyndneſſe and loue of our ſauiour God to manward appeared: not of the deedes of righteouſneſſe which we wrought, but of his mercie he ſaued vs, by the fountayn of the newe byrth, and with the renewing of the holy Ghoſt, whiche he ſhed on vs abundantly, thorowe Ieſus Chryſt our ſauiour, that we once iuſtifyed by his grace, ſhould be heyres of eternal lyfe, thorowe hope. This is a true ſaying.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  IT perteyneth too the kynd of caces that inſtruct. For it is a doctrine cōcerning the benefits of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God borne too vs and giuen too vs, comprehending a ſumme of the Goſpel concerning our iuſtification & ſaluation.
                  Now foraſmuch as there is no wiſdom more néedful and profitable for mākynd, neither any other good thing greater & to bée ſought of mē with more earneſt deſyre and endeuer, than the doctrine that concerneth the maner & meane how too atteyne euerlaſting lyfe and ſaluation: Let the doctrine of this epiſtle bée with ſingular héede and diligence faſtened in the innermoſt cloſets of mens harts. For the righter conſideration and weying wherof, I wil reduce the ſame too the accuſtomed places of inſtruction or orderly queſtions.
                  This woord Saluation comprehendeth all the good thingsThe definition of ſaluation. that God beſtoweth vppon his Church for hys ſonnes ſake which was giuen to vs and borne too vs of the virgin Marie: that is too wit, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, attonement with God, deliuerance from Gods wrath, from ſinne, from death, and from the Deuils tyrannye: the gift of the holy ghoſt, regeneration & renewing of our nature, aboliſhment of ſin and death and reſtorement of rightuouſneſſe, lyfe, and endleſſe ioy. All theſe benefits dooth Paule méene in this place,

when he ſayeth: he ſaued vs: And the Angell in the firſt of Mathew: Thou ſhalt call his name Ieſus, for he ſhall ſaue his people from their ſinne.
                  
                     Paule diſtinguiſheth the parts of Chryſtes benefits intoorightuouſneſſe and life are the ſum of Chriſts benefites. twoo members, which cleaue toogither as it wer the cauſe & the effect, namely rightuouſneſſe and lyfe: and theſe things repeteth he in ſundry woords. Wée are iuſtified (that is too ſaye, wée obteyne forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and are accepted for rightuous) through his grace or frée good will: and are made heires of euerlaſting lyfe. The ſame Paule had ſayd a little before, that wée are ſaued by the waſſhing of regeneration, (that is too ſay by Baptim, wherwith wee are dipped in token of remiſſiō) & by renewing of the holy ghoſt, by whom a new lyfe & rightuouſneſſe is kindled in our harts.
                  The chéef efficient cauſe of our ſaluation, is God regeneratingThe efficient cauſe of ſaluation. vs, iuſtifying vs, and receyuing vs too the inheritāce of euerlaſting life, of his excéeding great goodneſſe, and loue towards mankynd, and of his frée mercie and grace.
                  And the woords are piththye & effectual wherwith Paul deſcribeth the efficient cauſe of our ſaluation, in this place. The gréeke woord Chreſtótes, ſignifieth properly goodneſſe,Goodneſſe. coueting too doo good, & too profit all men of a frée good will. It cōmeth of the woord Chraomai, which ſignifieth too vſe: and therupō cōmeth Chreſtós, which ſignifieth ſuch a one as willingly & eaſly yéeldeth himſelf vnto other mē to vſe him: ſuch a one is Chryſt, in déed a good man, yea a cōmon good thing▪ 
                     Philanthropia, louingkindneſſe, betokeneth not only a courteſieLouing kyndneſſe. & gentleneſſe to ſpeak vnto or a méeldneſſe in ordinarie méetings, in coūtenance, in ſpéech, & in outward behauiour: but in eſpecially a burning loue towards mākind, which y• ſonne of God hath vttered by this notable warrantyze, in that he hath by euerlaſting and indiſſoluble bond cuppled too himſelf the maſſe of our nature, and is becomme our Emanuell and brother, fleſh of our fleſh, and bone of our bones, and vndertooke the moſt bitter tormentes of death for vs.

Of this louing kindneſſe is ſpoken. 1. Iohn. 4. Herein is the louing kindneſſe of God towardes vs made manifeſt, that he hath ſent his only begotten ſonne intoo the world, that wée might liue through him. Alſo Chriſt, Iohn. 3. So God loued the world, that he gaue his only begotten ſonne. &c.
                  
                     Eleos. Mercy is too bée touched with the féeling of anotherMercifulneſſe. mannes miſerie, too ſuccor the diſtreſſed, and too aſſwage and take away their miſeries of a fréeharted goodneſſe and pitifulneſſe, which executeth not the ſharp extremity of the law.
                  Therfore albeit that al calamities, death, and euerlaſting torments (too which wée are ſubiecte by reaſon of ſinne) bée moſt rightfull puniſhments: yet notwithſtanding, God of his excéeding goodneſſe pitying vs, is in déede ſory for our loſſe (lyke the louingharted father that is ſtrikē with great gréefe for the miſerie of his ſonne,) and of his woonderfull gentleneſſe and mercy helpeth vs, and by ſending his ſonne (who for vs was borne, crucified, and raiſed from death againe) hath reſtored vntoo vs rightuouſneſſe and euerlaſting ſaluation.
                  Grace ſignifieth the frée good will or fauor, or the mercieGrace. of God receiuing vs for his ſonnes ſake.
                  The forcing cauſe, or the mediator and ſpokeſman thatOur mediator or ſpokeſman. moueth God too beſtow euerlaſting ſaluation vpō vs wretches and vnwoorthy, is the only ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who by his birth hath deliuered vs from the Deuils power, and voutſaued too become the ſonne of man, that he might make vs the ſonnes of God, & hath taken vpō him the ſhape of a ſeruaunt, that he might ſet vs at libertie: And by dying vanquiſhed death, that he might giue too vs mortal wightes, immortalitie, life, and glory euerlaſting.
                  This man alonely dooth truly poſſeſſe the name of Ieſus,
                     Who they bee that diſhonor Chriſt. or of the ſauyoure of mankind: neither imparteth he this his honor too any creature, too any vertues, or too any deſerts of oures. And like as the Arians by taking away the glory of Godhead from Chriſt, or the Heathen by yéelding the

ſame honor too their feyned Gods, doo cōmit horrible reproch ageinſt Chriſt: euen ſo alſo doo they ſin right horribly, which too our owne woorkes (bée they neuer ſo good,) or too the merites of ſainctes, impart the honor of iuſtification and ſaluation which is too bée attributed al whole vntoo Chryſt only, and ſurmiſe theſe things too bée alſo neceſſary vntoo ſaluation. For although wee doo ſome woorkes of ryghtuouſneſſe,Our owne rightuouſneſſe is of no deſert. (like as the ryghtuouſneſſe of Ariſtides, ſurnamed the ryghtuous, of Phocion, of Aecus, and of others is commended to bée more beautiful than the morning & euening ſtarres:) yet are theſe déedes of rightuouſneſſe in no wyſe deſerts of eternal ſaluation, but are ſlight ſhadowes of outward diſcipline defiled with much foule filth of ſinne, which is purged only by Chryſt.
                  The inſtrumentall cauſes, or the meanes by which God offereth, applieth, and performeth vntoo vs euerlaſting ſaluationThe goſpell and baptim are inſtrumēts of ſaluation. and al the benefits of his ſonne, are the goſpel which is the power of God to ſaluation to euery one that beleueth, and the ſacramēt of baptim which is the lauer of regeneration and renuance by the holy ghoſt. For maſmuch as al men by their carnal birth are born defiled with ſinne, and bée the children of wrath and endleſſe damnation, Epheſ. ij. Pſal. lj. it is not poſſible for vs too become the children of God and heires of eternal ſaluation, vntil wée bée borne a new or begottē agein, (that is too ſay obtein forgiueneſſe of ſinnes for Chryſtes ſake) and adopted intoo the place of children and heritage of Gods kingdome.
                  Now, the holy ghoſt begetteth vs agein by two meanes: by the woord or glad tidings concerning Chryſt, and by the ſacrament of baptim, as is ſayd Eph. v. Clēſing it by the waſhing of water in the woord.
                  And the inſtrument in vs wherby we receiue the eternalFaith the inſtrumēt vvhervvith vvee take holde of ſaluation. ſaluation offered vs in the woord and the ſacraments, is only faith which is in any wiſe too be required in the vſe of the ſacraments, as it is cléerely ſayd: whoſoeuer beléeueth and is

baptiſed ſhall bée ſaued. Alſo, yée are ſaued by grace through faith, and not by woorkes. And it is a knowne rule, that not the ſacrament, but the faith of the ſacrament iuſtifieth. And therfore in this place, muſt faith needes be comprehended alſo. He hath ſaued vs, (that is too witte which beléeue,) by the waſhing of the new birth.
                  The effect of iuſtification, is the renewing of nature byRenevvment of nature. the holy Ghoſt poured out richly vpon vs, whoo by little and little aboliſheth and mortifieth the ſinne that remaineth in vs, and our falſe opinions, and our ſinfull inclinations and affections: and kindleth in our mind a new light of the true knowledge of God, and in our will and hart a new rightuouſneſſe or loue of God and our neibor, or a new obedience towards all the commaundements of God. Of this renewment Paule reaſoneth more at large. Eph. iiij. Coloſſ. iij. and ij Cor. iiij. and ſpecially Rom. vj.
                  Another effect is life euerlaſting, or the manifeſt and perfectThe effects of iuſtification. acknowledgment of God and our Lord Ieſu Chriſt, and a ſound and perfect obedience or rightuouſneſſe without any ſinne or blemiſh: and a true and vnſpeakeable ioy in God, vtterly void of all ſorow and gréefe. The beginning and firſt frutes of which life, is the renewment of the holy ghoſt: but the perfection and fulneſſe of it is yet hoped for, & ſhall moſt aſſuredly bée performed. Therfore ſaith Paule, that wée may beecome heires of eternall life according too our hope, it is a ſure ſaying. &c.
                  Then let vs giue thankes with our whole heart too the ſōne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, for that he hath brought vntoo vs theſe ſo great good things by his birthe: and let vs pray vntoo him with earneſt ſute, too kindle the fulneſſe of faith in our hartes, that they may bée quite out of dout, that it is a faithful ſaying, and may embrace it with moſt ſtedfaſt faith, and atteine the inheritance of eternall ſaluation.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The third Epiſtle. Tit. ij.
                  
                     FOr the grace of God that bringeth ſaluatiō vntoo al men, hath appeered, and teacheth vs that we shuld deny vngodlineſſe and worldly luſts, and that we should liue ſober minded, righteouſly and godly in this preſent world, looking for that bliſſed hope and glorious appeering of the mighty God, and of our ſauioure Ieſu Chryſt, which gaue himſelf for vs, too redeeme vs from all vnrightuouſneſſe, and too purge vs a peculier people vntoo himſelf, feruently gyuen vntoo good workes. Theſe things ſpeake and exhort and rebuke with all commaunding. See that no man deſpiſe thee.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  It perteineth too the kind that inſtructeth.
                  For in moſt lerned wiſe and in ſinguler lyghtſomneſſe of woordes, it ſetteth foorth a bréefe doctrine concerning good woorks, which muſt of neceſſitie folow the faith yt receiueth the benefits of Chryſt borne too vs and giuen too vs.
                  
                     The opening of this Epiſtle may be deuided intoo three places.
                     j A definition and the ſpecyall kinds of things that are good woorks in déed and acceptable too God, that is too ſay

                           too renounce vngodlyneſſe and worldly luſtes.
                           too liue.

                                 Soberly.
                                 Vprightly.
                                 Godlily.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     ij The forcing cauſes which ought too ſtirre vp euery man too the ſtudy of vertue and the exerciſe of good woorkes.
                     iij The efficient and finall cauſes, or how good woorks may bée doone, and how they may pleaſe God.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  THe grace of our ſauior Chriſt hath ſhined vnto al mē, not that they ſhuld by abiding in darkneſſe through ignorāceGood vvorkes muſt folovv iuſtification. of God, of ſin & of death, walow in all luſts and wickedneſſe: but that by the aboliſhment of ſinne and death, they ſhould begin a new and a rightuous life agréeable with the will

and woord of God.
                  No dout therefore, but man being iuſtified and ſaued by faith through the frée mercy of God for Chryſtes ſake, ought of neceſſitie from thencefoorth too ſhun ſinne, and too béegin a new lyfe agréeable with the lawe of God.
                  And theſe are true principles. New obediènce is of neceſſitie and of duetie. Good woorkes are néedfull, according as Paul expreſly ſayth. Wée muſt néeds obey: And in this place he ſayth, that the ſonne of God is therfore borne for vs, and giuen for vs, that (ſinne being aboliſhed) wée ſhould folowe good woorkes.
                  And he defineth good woorkes or new obedience, (by theGood workes or new obedience. priuation or taking away of the contrary and by a diſtribution) too bée the renouncing or ſhunning of vngodlineſſe and worldly luſtes, and too liue ſoberly, vprightly, and godlily.
                  The woord vngodlyneſſe, comprehendeth all ſinnes repugnantVngodlyneſſe. too the commaundements of the firſt table: that is too wit, Epicuriſh careleſſeneſſe, and contempt of the wrath, iudgement, and woord of God: Epicuriſh and Academicall doutings, Idolatrie, ſuperſtition, diſtruſt, preſumption, and ſuch other.
                  
                     Worldly luſtes conteyne all the corrupt inclinations andConcupiſcence or luſtfulneſſe. ſinnes of the ſecond table, the welſpring wherof is concupiſcence according as is ſaid in an old verſe: Of all miſdoing and offence, the welſpring is concupiſcence. And it is moſt manifeſt y• the more part of miſeries and miſchéeues do grow of a deſire of excellencie, honor, riches, reuengement, pleaſures & luſtes that are in all mankynd.
                  The kindes of good workes he deuideth intoo ſtayedneſſe, rightuouſneſſe, and godlineſſe.
                  
                     Stayedneſſe (which of the Gréekes is called Sophroſyne, &Stayedneſſe. of the Latines modeſtie, frugalitie or temperaunce,) ſignifieth not only a ſoberneſſe or ſpareneſſe of diet in meate and drinke, but alſo a maiſtering or brideling of all the affectiōs and motions of the mind and body, in behauior, in geſture,

in talke, in apparell, and in all other things.
                  
                     Rightuouſneſſe includeth within his compaſſe, an vniuerſarlRightuouſnes. obedience too the magiſtrates and lawes, & the other vertues of the ſecond table.
                  
                     Godlyneſſe conteyneth the vertues of the firſt table, asGodlyneſſe. the true knowledge of God, louingneſſe, hope, inuocation, thankeſgiuing, patience, and ſuch other. And ſo Paule hath comprehended the dueties of all vertues, or all good works, in thrée woords.
               
               
                  Of the ſecond.
                  THe forcing cauſes that muſt ſtirre vp euery man too theThe cauſes that moue too good workes. Gods commaundement. ſtudie of vertue, and the exerciſe of good woorkes, are in this Epiſtle reckened too bée foure.
                  The firſt is Gods commaundement teaching vs & moſt ſtreightly charging vs too renoūce or ſhun vngodlyneſſe and ſinfull luſtes, and too liue ſoberly, vprightly, and godlily.
                  The ſecond is bliſſed hope of the appeering of the greatHope of glory God and of our ſauior Ieſus Chryſt, who at his glorious cō
                     ming too iudge the quicke and the dead, ſhall giue moſt ample rewardes too the godly Saincts, that haue liued ſoberly, vprightly, and godlily in this preſent world: and ſhall with euerlaſting puniſhment ouer whelm the vngodly, which haue abandoned themſelues too worldly luſtes in this lyfe.
                  The third is the finall cauſe for which Chriſt was ſent, theAboliſhment of ſinne. ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt was therefore born, & roſe ageine, not that wée myght welter in our ſinnes, and from hēcefoorth ſtill defile our ſelues with the foul filthineſſe of our miſdeedes: but that he might redéeme vs and ſet vs frée from al vnrightuouſneſſe, and that ſinne & euerlaſting death myght bée taken from among vs: and that wée being clēſed from ſinne, (not only by imputation of ryghtuouſneſſe, but alſo by beginning too putte away ſinne it ſelfe) ſhoulde from henceforth earneſtly & with a ſingular loue and ardent

zele doo good woorks, and ſerue God in all rightuouſneſſe and holineſſe before him all the dayes of our life. This matter is intreated of at length by Paule. Rom. vj.
                  The fourth cauſe is of the nature of correlatiues, that isThankfulneſſe of things that haue relation one too another. The churche is the people of purchace, or the peculiar and proper people of God, choſen out of the reſt of mankind, and halowed too the one Lord God: Ergo the Church muſt with ſingular zele obey, and doo the things that are acceptable too this hir redéemer and Lord.
                  It is thought that the Gréek woord Periouſion anſwereth too the Hebrew woord Segula, which in Exod. xix. is trāſlated a holy people, and in Pſ. cxxxiiij. poſſeſion, & in Pet. j. Ep. ij. chap. the people of purchaſe, that is too ſay, a people purchaſed and redéemed with the blud of Chriſt, that they ſhould be his propre and peculiar people.
                  iij. How good woorks may be doone, & how they may pleaſe God. Although that ye outward limbes (as the eyes, the tung the hands &c.) may after a maner bée bridled by mannes diligenceHow woorks become good. and by the proper ſtrength of mannes will: ſo as they may doo honeſt & iuſt woorks, & not fall intoo manifeſt offences for bidden by the law of God (according too that which is ſayd in the former Epiſtle. Tit. iij. not by the woorks of rightuouſneſſe which wée our ſelues did): yet notwithſtanding, the inward obedience, & the obedience that pleaſeth God, the true feare of God, the true truſt in gods mercy, the true and earneſt calling vpō God, true pacience & ſtedfaſtneſſe in bearing out aduerſitie & death, cannot bée performed, except the wil (which is a priſoner & bondſlaue too ſin) bée ſet at libertie & ayded by Chriſt: according as Chriſt himſelf ſaith, without mee yée cā doo nothing. And in this place Paul ſayth expreſly, that Chryſt hath redéemed and clenſed vs, too the intent wée ſhould folowe good woorkes.
                  Therfore in the accōpliſhment of good works, there méet thrée cauſes. The firſt and principal is Chriſt, redeming and

clenſing vs from all iniquitie, & by his holy ſpirit kindling inChryſtes working in vs by his ſpirir. our mind the light of true acknowledgement of God, and mindfulneſſe of Gods cōmaundement concerning true obediēce to be performed vntoo him, mouing, enforſing & helping the will, that it may bée able too obey Gods cōmaundement.
                  The ſecond cauſe is Gods word, by which Chriſt is effectual in inſtructing vs too renounce all vngodlineſſe & worldlyBy his woord. luſtes, and too liue ſoberly, vprightly, and godly.
                  The third is the mind and wil of mā, not ſtriuing ageinſt Chriſt when he teacheth vs & ruleth our members, that theyBy mannes willingnes. may yeeld themſelues in rightuouſneſſe to God, vnto ſanctification. Alſo for this Chryſtes ſake, our owne good woorkes pleaſe God, although they doo not as yet fully ſatiſfie Gods law, but bée ioyned with great weakneſſe and vnclēneſſe of nature remaining in vs. For as the perſon of man becōmeth good, rightuous and acceptable too God, only through fayth for Chryſtes ſake, who gaue himſelffor vs &c: ſo the woorkes that are wrought by a perſon that is iuſtified and reconciled too God, doo pleaſe God, not for their owne woorthineſſe, but through the grace of God which woorketh ſaluation too all men, or for Chriſtes only ſake through faith, as is ſaid Heb. xiij. By him doo wée offer the ſacrifiſe of praiſe alwayes vnto God. And j. Pet. ij. Offer yée ſpiritual ſacrifiſes acceptable too God through Ieſus Chriſt.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the day of S. Steuen the first Martyr.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Actes. vj. and .vij. chapters.
                  
                     ANd Steuen ful of faith & power, did great wō
                     ders and miracles amōg the people. Thē there aroſe certein of the ſinagoge: which are called Libertines, & Cyrenites, & of Alexādria, & Cilicia & Aſia, & diſputed with Steuē. And they could not reſiſt the wiſdom, & the ſpirit with which he ſpake.

Then ſent they in men, which ſayd: we haue herd him ſpeake blaſphemous woordes ageinſt Moſes, and ageinſt God. And they moued the people and the elders & the Scribes: and came vppon him, and caught him, and brought him too the counſell, and brought foorth falſe witneſſes which ſayd: This man ceaſeth not too ſpeake blaſphemous woords ageinſt this holy place, and the law, for wee herd him ſay: this Ieſus of Nazareth shall deſtroy this place, and shall change the ordinances which Moſes gaue vs. And all that ſate in the counſell, looked ſtedfaſtly on him, and ſawe his face as it had bin the face of an Angell.
               
               
                  The .vij. Chapter.
                  
                     THen ſayd the cheefe Preſt: is it euen ſo? And he ſayd: yee men, brethren and fathers, herken. The God of glory appeered vntoo our father Abraham, whyle he was in Meſopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, and ſayd vntoo him: come out of thy countrey, and from thy kinred, and come into the land which I shall shew thee. Then came he out of the lād of Chaldey, and dwelt in Charran. And after that his father was dead, he brought him from thence, intoo this lād in which yee now dwell, and he gaue him none inheritaunce in it, no not the bredth of a foote: and promiſed that he would giue it too him too poſſeſſe, and too his ſeed after him, when as yet he had no childe. God verely ſpake on this wiſe, that his ſeede should be a ſoiourner in a ſtraunge land, and that they should keepe them in bondage, and entreat them euell. 400. yeeres. But the nation too whom they shall bee in bondage will I iudge ſayd God. And after that, shall they come foorth and ſerue me in thys place. And he gaue him the couenant of Circūciſion. And hee begatte Iſaac, and cyrcumciſed hym the eigth day, and Iſaac begat Iacob, and Iacob the twelue Patriarkes. And the Patriarkes hauing indignation, ſold Ioſeph intoo Egypt.

And God was with him, and deliuered him out of al his aduerſities, and gaue him fauour and wiſdom in the ſyght of Pharao king of Egypt. And he made him gouernour ouer all his houſhold. Then came there a dearth ouer all the land of Egypt, and Canaan, and great affliction, that our Fathers found no ſuſtenance. But when Iacob herd that there was corne in Egypt, he ſent our Fathers firſt. And at the ſecond time, Ioſeph was knowē of his brethren, and Ioſephs kinred was made knowen vnto Pharao. Then ſent Ioſeph and cauſed his father to bee brought, and all his kin, three ſcore and xv. ſoules. And Iacob deſcended into Egypt, and died, both he and our fathers, and were tranſlated into Sychem, and were put in the ſepulchre that Abraham bought for monye, of the ſonnes of Emor, at Sichem. But when the tyme of the promiſe drewe nye (whiche God had ſworne to Abraham) the people grewe and multiplied in Egypt, till another king aroſe, which knewe not of Ioſeph. The ſame delt ſuttely with our kinred, and euill entreated our fathers, and made them too caſt out their yoong children, that they ſhould not remayne à lyue. The ſame tyme was Moyſes borne, and was acceptable vnto God, which was nourished vp in his fathers houſe three moonethes. When he was caſt out, Pharaoes daughter took him vp, & nourished him vp for hir own ſonne. And Moſes was learned in all maner wyſdome of the Egiptians, and was myghtie in deedes and in woordes. And when he was ful fortie yeere olde, it came intoo his hart too viſit his brethren, the children of Iſraell. And when hee ſawe one of them ſuffer wrong, he defended him and auenged his quarell that had the harme doon to him, and ſmote the Egiptian. For he ſuppoſed his brethren would haue vnderſtand, howe that God by hys hands should gyue ſaluation vnto them. But they vnderſtood not. And the next daye, he shewed him ſelfe vntoo them, as they ſtroue, and would haue ſet them at one ageyn, ſaying: Syrs yee are brethren, why hurt yee one another? But he that did his neighbour wrong thruſt him away ſaying: who made

thee a ruler and a iudge ouer vs? What, wilt thou kyll mee, as thou diddeſt the Egyptian yeſterday? Then fled Moyſes at that ſaying, and was a ſtraunger in the lande of Madian, wher he begat twoo ſonnes. And when fortie yeares were expyred, there appeered too him in the wilderneſſe of mount Syna, an Angell of the Lorde in a flame of fyre in a buſhe. VVhen Moyſes ſaw it, he wondred at the ſyght. And as he drew neer too behold, the voyce of the Lord came vntoo him: I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Iſaac, & the God of Iacob. Moyſes trembled and durſt not beholde. Then ſayd the Lord to him: Put of thy shoes from thy feete, for the place where thou ſtandeſt is holy ground. I haue perfectly ſeen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I haue harde their gronyng, and am come downe too deliuer them. And now come, and I will ſend thee intoo Egypt. This Moſes whom they forſooke ſaying: who made thee a Ruler and a iudge? The ſame GOD ſent bothe a ruler and a deliuerer, by the handes of the Aungel which appeared too him in the bushe. And the ſame brought them out, shewing wonders and ſignes in Egipt, and in the red ſea, and in the wildernes. xl. yeeres. This is that Moſes whiche ſayed vntoo the children of Iſraell: A prophet shall the Lorde our God rayſe vp vnto you of your brethren, lyke vntoo mee, him shall yee heare. This is he that was in the congregation, in the wilderneſſe with the Angell (whiche ſpake to him in the mount Sina) and with our fathers. This man receyued the worde of life to gyue vntoo vs, too whom our fathers would not obey, but caſt it from them, and in their hartes turned backe ageyn intoo Egypt, ſaying vntoo Aaron: make vs Goddes too goo before vs. For this Moyſes that brought vs out of the Lande of Egypt, we wote not what is become of hym. And they made a Calfe in thoſe dayes, and offered ſacrifice vntoo the ymage, and reioyſed in the woorkes of their owne handes. Then GOD turned hym ſelfe, and gaue them vp, that they should worshippe the hoſt of the ſky, as it is written in the

booke of the Prophetes. O yee of the houſe of Iſraell, gaue yee too me ſacrifices and meat offerings by the ſpace of. xl. yeeres in the wilderneſſe? And yee tooke vntoo you the tabernacle of Moloh, and the ſtarre of your God Rempham, figures which ye made to worship them. And I will tranſlate you beyond Babylon. Our fathers had the tabernacle of witneſſe in the wilderneſſe, as he had appoynted them, ſpeaking vnto Moyſes, that he should make it according to the fashion that he had ſeen▪ which tabernacle alſo, our fathers (that came after) brought in with Ioſue into the poſſeſsion of the Gentilles, which God draue out before the face of our fathers, vnto the dayes of Dauid: which found fauour before God, and deſired that he might finde a tabernacle for the God of Iacob. But Salomon built him an houſe. Howbeit, he that is hyeſt of all, dwelleth not in temples made with handes, as ſayeth the Prophet: heauen is my ſeate, and earth is my footeſtole, what houſe will yee buyld for mee, ſayeth the Lord? or what place is it that I ſhould reſte in, hath not my hand made all theſe things? Yee ſtifnecked, and of vncircumciſed harts and eares, yee haue alwayes reſiſted the holy Ghoſt: as your Fathers dyd, ſo doo yee. Which of the Prophets haue not your Fathers perſecuted? and they haue ſlayne them whiche ſhewed before of the comming of that iuſt, whome yee haue nowe betrayed and murthered. And yee alſo haue receyued the Lawe by the ordinance of angels, and haue not kept it. VVhen they herd theſe things, their harts claue a ſunder, & they gnashed on hym with their teeth. But he being full of the holy Ghoſt, loked vp ſtedfaſtly with his eyes intoo heauen, and ſawe the glorie of God, and Ieſus ſtanding on the right hande of God, and ſayde: Beholde, I ſee the heauens open, and the ſonne of man ſtanding on the ryght hande of GOD. Then they gaue a shout with a loude voyce, and ſtopped their eares and ranne vpon him all at once, and caſt him out of the Citie, and ſtoned hym. And the witneſſes layd downe their clothes at a yong mans feete named Saule.

And they ſtoned Steuen calling on, and ſaying: Lord Ieſu, receyue my ſpirit. And he kneeled down, and cryed with a loud voyce: Lord laye not this ſinne to their charge. And when he had thus ſpoken, he fell a ſleepe.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement of the accuſation of Steuen, & of his defence, out of the readings vppon the Actes of the Apoſtles.
                  
                     The ſumme of the accuſation may bee included in this Sylogiſme.
                     
                        IT is a blaſphemie too teache, that the law ofThe points vvherof Steuē is accuſed. Moyſes giuen by God himſelf iuſtifyeth not, but is to bée aboliſhed togither with the temple and the rites of the ſacrifices and all the politicke ordinances of Moyſes.
                     Steuen teacheth that the Law and ſacrifices of Moyſes are not néedfull too the atteynèment of forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and euerlaſting ſaluation, nor the chéef woorſhipping of God: but that they and the whole common weale of Moyſes and the temple ſhall decay togither:
                     
                        Ergo Steuen is giltye of blaſphemie and treaſon, and is too bée ſtoned to death according too the Lawe, Leuit. 14.
                  
                  Ageynſt this ſo heinous accuſation Steuen hauing hys hart and countenaunce cléered with the light of God, maketh a long defence, wherein he anſwered too the Maior or firſt part, denying it too bée blaſphemie to teach, that the law of Moyſes iuſtifieth not, and that the ceremonies and ſacrifices of Moyſes are not the true and chéef woorſhipping of God, and that the rites of Moſes togither with the common weale and temple muſt bée doone away.
                  Therefore, the ſumme of Steuens aunſwer for his defence may bée included in foure Syllogiſmes.
               
               
                  
                  
                     The .j. Of iuſtification.
                     RIghtuouſneſſe and eternall ſaluation is beſtowed after one ſelfſame maner vppon the fathers Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, and all holy men, in all times of the world.
                     The Fathers Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, &c, obteyned forgiueneſſe of ſinne, and euerlaſting ſaluation not for the law and ſacrifices offered in the temple, which at that time were not yet ordeyned: but only by ye promiſe of the bliſſed ſéede which they tooke hold on by fayth:
                     
                        Ergo, wée alſo are made heires of rightuouſneſſe and euerlaſting ſaluation, not by the Lawe and ſacrifices of Moſes, but by that only ſéede of Abraham that was promiſed, euen our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, according alſo as Peter witneſſeth afterward: wée beleue yt wée are ſaued by ye grace of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, like as our fathers were ſaued alſo.
                  
                  Her vppon it is rightly concluded, that the ceremonies of Moyſes, or the lawe and ſacrifices of Moyſes are not néedfull to ſaluation.
               
               
                  
                     The .ij. Of the promiſes.
                     ALl Saints muſt néedes obteyne the principall promiſeAtteynment of gods promiſes made too all the Saincts. For otherwyſe the promiſe were in vayne, and too no purpoſe.
                     Vntoo Abraham and the other Fathers was giuen promis of bliſſing and of the inheritance of the land of Canaā, and yet Abraham obteyned not ſo much as one foote bredth of the land at any tyme in poſſeſſion:
                     
                        Ergo, the bliſſing that was promiſed too Abraham was another thing than this bodyly common weale, and ſacrifices of Moyſes: that is too wit, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and the true and euerlaſting good things.
                  
               
               
                  
                     The .iij. Of the true worſhipping of God.
                     THe principall woorſhipping of God is alwayes one, andWorſhipping of God. cōmon too all the ſaincts, throughout al times of yt world.
                     
                        The fathers Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob and Ioſeph, dyd doutleſſe woorſhip God a right, and yet obſerued not the ceremonies of Moyſes Lawe, which at that time was not yet deliuered, ne offered ſacrifices in the temple which was not yet at that tyme buylded:
                     
                        Ergo the Moſaicall ceremonies and the ſacrifices that are offered in the temple of Hieruſalem, are not the true & chéef woorſhipping of God, according as the Prophete ſayeth: I will haue mercie and not ſacrifice, and the knowledge of God rather than burnt offerings.
                  
               
               
                  
                     The .iiij. Of the abrogating of the law and common weale of Moyſes.
                     MOyſes himſelf ſayeth: The Lorde our God ſhall rayſeThe inſtitutiō of a new law. vp vnto you a Prophet from among our brethrē, Héere yée him: Whoſoeuer ſhall not héere that Prophet, I wilbée reuenged of him.
                     But now is that Prophet come that Moyſes promiſed, which teacheth playnly that the Law and ceremonies of Moyſes are not neceſſary too iuſtification and ſaluation:
                     
                        Ergo, he is too be heard, or it is too bée beléeued for a certeintie, that the law is abrogated.
                  
                  Or let the Argument bée framed in thys wyſe.
                  
                     Chryſt (whom Moyſes himſelf commaunded too bée herd) is the end of the Law, for the ceremoniall & politike lawes and all the common weale of Moyſes was ordeyned too this end, that it might bée the ſeate of the churche, and a place for Chryſt too bée borne in, and that it ſhould ceaſſe aſſoone as Chryſt was exhibited.
                     Chryſt whom Moyſes (in the .xviij. of Deut.) commaundeth too bée herd is now exhibited:
                     
                        Ergo the Lawes of Moyſes toogither with his common weale & temple ſhall bée abrogated: and that too this end, yt the very ſame dooing away of it may bere witneſſe, that the

                        Meſsias which was promiſed too the Fathers, is already exhibited: and that the lawes of Moyſes are not neceſſarie too ſaluation.
                  
                  This is the ſumme of Steuens long oration, which comprehendeth the chéef Articles of the Chriſtian doctrine. Of which things the full expoſition may bée fetched out of my wrytings that conteyn the ſumme of the doctrine, & of my expoſitions vppon Geneſis and Exodus, the notableſt Stories of which bookes Steuen citeth, for the moſt part in this Oration.
               
               
                  Of Steuens martyrdoome.
                  MArtyrdoome ſignifieth witneſ bearing, wherby wée witneſſeWhat martyrdoome is. before other men, not only in voyce▪ but alſo with our blud, and by our death, that the doctrine of the Goſpell concerning the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, is certein and vndeuybable, and neuer ſhrink from our confeſſion of ye true doctrine, for all ye moſt bitter hatreds, terrours, and bodyly tormentes in the world: too this ende, that the true knowledge of God may bee preſerued, and the certeyntie of the true doctrine and the fayth of others that bée of the weaker ſort may bée cōfirmed: And finally, that it may bee a witneſſe of the iudgment to come, and of the endleſſe immortalitie and glorie of the Saincts.
                  The partes of martyrdoome may bée called, the confeſſionThe parts of martyrdoome. of the true doctrine which is made with the mouth: and the ſufferance or torment of the bodye, and loſſe of lyfe, for a mannes ſtedfaſtneſſe in ſtanding too the true and vncorrupt doctrine of Chryſt.
                  Cōmonly they make difference, that thoſe are confeſſors,Confeſſors. which haue endured hatred, terrours, impriſonmentes, and ſome other hurts of the body for confeſſing Chryſte, but yet haue not bin put too death, as the holy men Athanaſius, Paphnutius, Macarius, Iohn Frederick Duke of Sanonie, Luther
                      and ſuch others.
                  
                     And thoſe are Martyrs that haue ſpent their blud, & theirMartyrs. lyfe in their confeſſion, as Saint Steuen: the moſt of the Apoſtles: Ignatius Biſhop of Antioche, who was caſt vntoo beaſts by Traiane, Attalus who was roſted vppon a ſpit at Lyons in the tyme of the Emperour Antonie Vere: Vincent who was moſt cruelly rent a péeces in Spayne by Diocletian: Laurence who was broyled vppon a gréedyron by the Emperour Decius: Boniface Byſhoppe of Mentz, who was put too death by the Fryſelanders the yéere of Chriſt, 775: Iohn Hus: And in our dayes many are ſlayne for y• truthes ſake, and by cruell woounds doo purchace a noble death.
               
               
                  The efficient cauſes are.
                  FIrſt, the holy Ghoſt the conforter, who reléeueth our infirmitieThe holy Ghoſt. and kindleth in our hartes a myndfulneſſe of Gods moſt ſtreight commaundement too prefer our profeſſion before lyfe and all worldly things: and of the promiſes of lyfe and glorie that ſhall enſew. Ageyn, he addeth ſtrength to the will and hart, that they may bée both willing and able to endure bodily puniſhements, reproche, and death for our profeſſions ſake.
                  Secondly, the woord of God, which both enioyneth profeſſion,Gods woord. and threateneth the renouncers with moſt ſore manaces of caſting away for euer, and offereth promiſes of lyfe, glory and crowne euerlaſting, too thoſe that conſtantly profeſſe Chryſts truthe. Math. x. He that denyeth mée before men, him will I alſo denye before my Father whiche is in heauen. ij. Cor. iiij. The lightneſſe of affliction for the twincling of an eye, purchaceth an euerlaſting weyghtyneſſe of glorie. Pſal. Cxv. Precious in the ſight of the Lorde, is the death of his Saincts. ij. Timoth. Now is there a crowne of rightuouſneſſe layd vp for mée.
                  Thirdly, mannes mynd thinking vppon Gods commaū
                     dementMannes mynd and the promiſes of the Crowne of eternall glorie, wherewith the conſtant witneſſes of the true doctrine ſhall

bée adorned: And his will and hart which (through the help and furtherance of the holy Ghoſt) beléeueth the promiſes, and conceyuing an aſſured hope of immortalitie and glorie euerlaſting, endureth death quietly and with a chéerefull mynd, as is ſayd of Steuen, He went reioycing in his brest, and through ſtrong hope his harmes ſupprest.
                  
                  Beſides theſe thrée cauſes of ſtedfaſtneſſe common too all Martyrs, there is another alſo in Steuen the firſt Martyr, namely, the ſingular comfort by beholding the Sonne of God, who ſhewed himſelf viſibly vntoo him. By which ſhewingChryſt is alwayes with his Churche. wée alſo may lerne this, that the ſonne of God ſitting at the right hand of the Father is not vtterly gone away from the Church, but is in deed preſent with it, regarding it, comforting it, defending it, and helping it, like as he is here preſent with Steuen at his death, refreſhing and ſtrengthning him by ſhewing himſelf too him, that he may with a glad & chéerfull mynd ſuffer death for Chryſts quarell, and receyue a crowne of glorie that ſhall neuer wither.
                  The matter wherabout martyrdoome is occupied, is theThe matter that maketh a Martyr. true and vncorrupt doctrine ſet foorth in the Goſpel, concerning the perſone and benefits of Chryſt, and concerning the true woorſhipping of god. For (as ſayeth Apollinaris) wheras Chryſtes truthe is not, there is no true martyrdoome. And the ſaying of Peter is knowen: Sée that none of you ſuffer as a murtherer or an euill dooer, &c. and Auſtins: not what any man ſuffereth, but wherfore he ſuffereth is too bée conſidered. Alſo Ciprians: It is the cauſe that maketh a Martyr and not the martyrdoome. Therefore are not madbraynd felowes too bée honored with the tytle of martyrdoomme, which are iuſtly put too death for their ſedition and manifeſt blaſphemies.
                  The forme of martyrdoome is the confeſſion of y• truth, or the witneſſe which is borne too the truthe, both by the lyuely voyce, and by the bludſhed and death of the partye.
               
               
                  
                  The ends & effects of martyrdome are theſe.
                  Firſt, Gods glorie, which is ſet out and ſpred far abrodeGods glorie. by the witneſſebearings of the Martyrs.
                  Secondly, the preſeruation of the true doctrine concerningMaintenāce of true religion. God. For onleſſe there ſhould from tyme too tyme bée ſtirred vp ſome Martyrs or witneſſes of the true doctrine, who in the perſecutions of Tyrants ſhould preferre the profeſſiō of the truthe before their own lyfe: within a whyle the true knowledge of GOD vppon earth would bée quite quenched with▪ Idolatrie and errours.Strengthening of the weake.
                  
                  Thirdly, that the weaker ſort are ſtrengthened, and the Churche enlarged by the example of the conſtancie of the Martyrs. The church was founded vppon blud, and by blud hath it encreaced.Certeintie of doctrine.
                  
                  Fourthly, that the deathes of the Martyrs may bée witneſſes of the certeintie of the doctrine of the Goſpell: lyke as Steuen by his bludſhed and death ſealeth vp the doctrine concerning the Meſsias promiſed too the Fathers, and now performed.Witneſsing of the immortalitie.
                  
                  Fifthly, that they may bée witneſſe of ye immortalitie, & of the iudgment too come, wherin Tyrants and Hipocrites ſhall bée caſt intoo endleſſe paynes, and the holy Martyrs bée honored with euerlaſting rewards.Reteynement of ſaluation.
                  
                  Sixtly, that the godly may not loſe the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes which they haue receyued, and the inheritance of euerlaſting ſaluation. Math. xxiiij. He that continueth too the end, ſhalbee ſaufe. Rom. x. By the mouth is acknowledgement made too ſaluation.vertues that go with martyrdoome.
                  
                  The Alyances or neybourvertues of martyrdoome, are Stedfaſtneſſe, Stoutneſſe in bearing out aduerſities, Patience, Continaunce, and in eſpecially earneſt fayth, hope and calling vppon God.Vices that fight ageynſt martyrdome.
                  
                  The thing that fyghts ageinſt martyrdoome, is reuolting, or renouncing of the true doctrine: which eyther procéedeth

of an epicuriſh ſkornfulneſſe and malice (as the reuolting of the Emperour Iulian) or ryſeth of fearfulneſſe and infirmitie of mynde, (as the renyall of Peter and of many others:) or elſe is committed in fact, as when thoſe that vnderſtand the true doctrine of the Goſpell, are preſent at the Idolatrous ſeruice of the Maſſe, and diſſemble their méening: or when wée beare about the Goſpell in our mouth, and yet aunſwer not too our profeſſion in lyfe and behauiour.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday next after Christmas day.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Gal. iiij.
                  
                     AND I ſay, that the heire (as long as he is a chyld) differeth not from a ſeruant, though he bee Lord of al, but is vnder tutours and gouernours, vntill the tyme that the father hath appointed. Euen ſo we alſo, when we were children, were in bondage vnder the ordinances of the world: but when the tyme was full come, God ſent his ſonne made of a woman, and made bond vnto the law, to redeeme them which were bond vntoo the law: that we through election might receyue the inheritaunce that belongeth vntoo the naturall ſonnes. Bycauſe yee are ſonnes, GOD hath ſent the ſpirit of his ſonne into our hartes, which crieth Abba Father. VVherfore now, thou art not a ſeruant, but a ſonne: If thou bee a ſonne, thou art alſo an heyre of God through Chriſt.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  It perteyneth too the kynd that inſtructeth. For it reckeneth vp in order the effectes or chéef benefites of the ſonne of God, who is borne too vs, and gyuen too vs: and he ſetteth them playnly out, by a ſimilitude taken of Seruantes and Heires.
                  
                     The chéef benefits which the ſonne of God hath obteyned for the churche by his wonderfull birth, are fower.
                  
                     1 Redemption from the curſe of the Lawe.
                     2 Adoption too bée the ſonnes of God.
                     3 The giuing of ye holy ghoſt, who cryeth Abba father.
                     4 The heritage of eternall lyfe.
                  
                  Of theſe benefites will I ſpeake in order and bréefly. And I exhorte the héerers too conſider diligently and aduiſedly, and too beſtowe in the bottome of their hartes, this notable ſentence which comprehendeth the ſumme of the whole Goſpell. After that the fulneſſe of the tyme was come, or after that the tyme appoynted by the eternall purpoſe of God was fully come: that is too wit▪ the yéere frō the creation of the world. 3962. God ſent his ſonne, borne of a womā, made vnder the lawe, too the intent he should redeeme thoſe that were vnder the Lawe, that wee myght receyue the adoption of ſonnes. And bicauſe wee are ſonnes God hath ſent the ſpirit of his ſonne intoo our hartes, crying Abba father. Therfore thou art no longer a ſeruant, but a ſonne. And if thou be a ſonne, thou art alſo an heire of God through Chryſt.
                  
                  Now let vs firſt conſider the notable record concerningChryſt is very God. the twoo natures in Chryſte. God ſent his ſonne borne of a woman. This Ieſus borne of the virgin Marie, is the onely begottē ſonne of God, & that, not by adoption, but by nature: Ergo he is by nature very God alſo, according as wée haue hard the other day of Chryſtes birth out of the firſt Epiſtle the firſt Chap. too the Hebrewes. And herevntoo let vs adde the like ſayings, Iohn. iij. So God loued the world, that he gaue his only begotten ſonne, &c. and Ioh. j. Wée haue ſeene the glorie of him as of the fathers only begotten. j. Ioh. iiij. Herin appéered the louingneſſe of God, that he hath ſent his onely begotten ſonne intoo the worlde, that wée might liue through him.
                  This ſonne of God was borne of a woman: Ergo, he isChryſt is very man. by nature very man alſo. Paule taketh theſe woordes out of

the firſt promiſe concerning Chryſt, made too Adam & Eue, the womans ſeede shall crush the ſerpents head. And it is woorth the conſidering, that he ſaythe, Of a woman, that he might gyue vs too vnderſtand y• the ſonne of God tooke vpon him mannes nature of the ſubſtance of the virgin Marie: and not that he was ſent downe from heauen through the Uirgin Marie, as through the pype of a conduit.
               
               
                  Here enſueth a beadrol of the benefits which Chriſt hath brought vs by his birth.
                  
                     MAde bond to the Lawe, too redeeme them that were vnder the Lawe. Excéeding great and vnſerchable wiſdom is conteyned in theſe fewe woords. Whiche though wée bée not able too perceyue throughly in this Dimneſſe: yet is it too bée vnfolded bréefly, that the héerers may looke ſomewhat néerer vppon it.
                  Gal. iij. Paule ſayeth: Chryſt hath redéemed vs from theRedemption. curſe of the Lawe, and is become accurſed for vs. For it is written, curſed is euery one that abydeth not in all things that are written in the Lawe.
                  For it is an euerlaſting and vnchaungeable Maximée of Gods iuſtice, that men muſt eyther obey Gods Lawe without any ſinne: or elſe by ſinning become accurſed, and ſo bée caſte intoo eternall peynes. Therefore when as all whole mankynd was become ſubiect too the curſe of the Lawe, too Gods dreadfull wrath, and too euerlaſting damnation thorough ſinne Rom. iij. Too the intent all mouthes myght bée ſtopped, &c, It was decréed by the wonderfull aduice of the Godhead, that the ſonne taking our nature vppon him, ſhold turne vppon himſelf the burthen of the Lawe, of Gods wrath, of ſinne, and of eternall damnation, and pay the full raūſome for vs: like as if one were greatly oppreſſed with det, or hild priſoner in Turkie and ſhould be ſet free by another that would vndertake eyther the burthen of the det,

or of priſonerſhip for him, and pay his raunſome. Therfore vſeth Paule in this place the woord Raunſome, whiche is as much too ſay, as too buy a man out by paying his full woorth for him. Wée could not bée ſet frée by our owne deſeruings, vertues, or weldooings. Not Abel by his death, not the meekneſſe and patience of Socrates or Phocion, not Royaltie, not power, not artillerie, not welth could compaſſe this thing. Oaly wée may thank God who hathe giuen vs victorie by our Lord Ieſus Chryſte, who hath nayled the curſe of the Lawe too his croſſe. Colloſ. ij. And he ſhall ſay too vanquiſhed death, Death, where is thy ſting? Hel, where is thy victorie? The ſting of death is ſinne, and the power of ſinne is the Lawe. j. Corinth. xv. And death did ſpred it ſelfe intoo all men, bycauſe all men haue ſinne. But ſinne is not imputed where there is no Law, &c, Rom. v. All theſe miſchéeues, that is too wit, ſinne, Gods wrath, the curſe of the Lawe, the Deuils Tyrannye, and endleſſe damnation, hath the ſonne of GOD (who is giuen too vs,) turned vppon himſelfe, and redéemed vs from theſe euils, That wee by adoption myght receyue the heritage of ſonnes.
                  
                  The ſecond benefit is Adoption too bée the ſonnes of god.Adoption. The only begotten and naturall ſonne of God, begotten of the ſubſtance of the Father before all worlds, is our Lorde Ieſus Chryſt. Iohn. j. and .iij. j. Jhon. iiij. By and for this only begotten ſonne are wée receyued too bée ſonnes by adoption, whom the eternal father embraceth with fatherly good will for his beloued ſonnes ſake, as brethren of Chryſt, and heires of the heauenly light, wiſdome, rightuouſneſſe, and lyfe euerlaſting. Than which benefite a greater cannot bée deuiſed. j. Iohn. iij. Sée what a louingneſſe the Father hathe voutſaued vppon vs, to name vs the ſonnes of God. Ryght déerbeloued, Now are wée the ſonnes of God, and yet hathe it not appéered as yet what wée ſhall bée hereafter. But wée knowe that aſſoone as that ſhall appéere, wée ſhal bée like vnto him, bycauſe wée ſhall ſée him as he is. Iohn. j. He

gaue them power too become the ſonnes of God, as manye as beléeue in his name. Math. vj. Our father whiche art in heauen.
                  
                     And bycauſe yee are ſonnes, GOD hath ſent the ſpirit of his ſonne intoo our harts, crying Abba father.
                  
                  The third benefite is the giuing of the holy Ghoſt, whoThe gift of the holy ghoſt. kindleth in our hartes the true calling vppon GOD. Héere muſt the whole doctrine concerning the holy ghoſt bée repeted: what the holy ghoſt is: how great a benefite of God it is, that by this breth of his own breſt he imparteth himſelf vnto vs: what are the benefites or effects of the holy ghoſt: too whom he is giuen: and how he is forgone. Wée will reherſe the ſummes of this doctrine ageine in the opening of the Epiſtle vppon Whitſonſunday. One of the chéef effects or benefites of the holy ghoſt, is true calling vppon GOD. Therefore in Zachar. xij. He is called the ſpirit of thankfulneſſe and prayer, that is to ſay, a witneſſebearer in our hartes, that wée are accepted into fauour, and a kindler of true inuocation in our hartes, and of aſſuredneſſe reſting vppon God, and wayting at Gods hand as at the hand of a moſt kyndharted father, for helpe and deliuerance in all our ſorowes and miſeries.
                  
                     Therfore art thou no longer a ſeruant, but a ſonne. And if thou bee a ſonne, then art thou alſo an heire of God through Chryſt.
                  
                  The fourth benefite is the inheritance of eternall lyfe,Inheritance of endleſſe lyfe. which ſhall bée the beholding of GOD, where through the Church (when it is rayſed from death) ſhall ſée God face too face, and ſhall enioy Gods wiſdome, lyght, ryghtuouſneſſe, gladneſſe and lyfe for all euer. To this hauen let vs haue an eye in the ſhort race of this mortall lyfe, and let vs direct all the deuyſes, deſyres, and dooings of this lyfe, too the atteynement of the ſame.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Ʋppon Newyeeres day.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Gal. iiij.
                  
                     BVT before that fayth came, we were kept & ſhut vp vnder the lawe, vnto the fayth which ſhould afterwarde be declared. Wherfore, the Law was our ſcoolemaiſter vnto the tyme of Chryſt, that we myght be made ryghteous by fayth. But after that fayth is come, now are we no lenger vnder a ſcoolmaiſter. For yee are all the ſonnes of GOD, by the fayth which is in Chryſt Ieſus. For all yee that are baptiſed, haue put on Chryſt. Now is there no Iewe, neyther Gentyll: there is neyther bond nor free: there is neyther man nor woman: but yee are all one thyng in Ieſu Chryſte. Yf yee bee Chryſtes, then are ye Abrahams ſeede, and heyres by promiſe▪
                  
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  IT perteyneth too the kynd that inſtructeth. For it ſetteth foorth a doctrine of thrée places.
                  
                     1 Of Gods Law, and of the propre vſes or effects of the Lawe.
                     2 Of the benefites of the ſonne of God our Lorde Ieſus Chryſt who was giuen too vs and borne too vs, which are the deliuerance of vs from the priſon and maiſterſhip of the Law, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, adoption too bée the ſonnes of God, and the inheritance of euerlaſting lyfe.
                     3 Of the Applying of the ſonnes benefits: that is to ſay, of fayth, wherby wée put on Chriſt or are clothed with Chryſts rightuouſneſſe, and are all made rightuous and heires of eternall lyfe as many of vs as beléeue, without any difference of Nation, of degrée, or of kynd.
                  
               
               
                  Firſt, Of Gods Lawe.
                  
                     BEfore that fayth came, wee were kept shut vp vnder the Lawe, &c.
                  
                  
                     Firſt it behoueth the hearers too bear in mind, that PaulA warning for Pauls mening. in this place dooth not put a difference betwéene the times y• were before Chryſtes comming, & after Chriſtes comming: as though the Iewes before Chryſtes comming had had no more but the knowledge of the law, & had not known aught at all concerning Chryſt or the faith in Chryſt. For Paule ſpeaketh of the church of al times, in which both y• doctrines (as well of the law as of the goſpell) are alwayes preached. And alwayes in all the godly, before that faith cōmeth (that is too ſay, before the light of the true knowledge of Chryſt or of faith is kindled in the hart) the priſon of the law is felt, in which all men are ſhut vp as priſoners of ſinne, of Gods wrath, and of eternall damnation, that they may atteyne rightuouſneſſe and ſaluation euerlaſting, for Chryſtes ſake only reueled in his goſpel. This is the naturall expoſition of the firſt ſentence, before faith came, they were kept cloſe priſoners vntoo that faith which was too bée reueled. Now too the intent the doctrine of this place may bée the eaſlyer conſidered, it muſt a little bée vnfolded by putting it intoo an order, and it is too bée declared.
                  
                     1 What the lawe is.
                     2 Which be the partes of the lawe.
                     3 What are the cauſes, and chéefly what bée the endes or the vſes, and what are the dueties of Gods lawe.
                     4 Of the abrogating of the law, or of the ſetting of the beléeuers frée from the lawe.
                  
                  
                     PAule in this place nameth twoo vſes or effects of the law.The workyng of the lavve. The firſt is that the lawe ſheweth all men too bée priſoners of ſinne, of Gods wrath, and of endleſſe damnation for ſinne. Therefore doothe the lawe iuſtifie or ſaue no man, as is ſayd Rom. iij. Too the intent all mouthes ſhould bée ſtopped and all the world bée made ſubiecte vntoo God, bicauſe that by the déedes of the law no fleſh ſhall bée iuſtified in his

ſight: For by the lawe commeth the knowledge of ſinne. Rom. v. and vij. By the lawe ſinne aboundeth: by the lawe ſinne is made out of meaſure ſinfull. &c. In this priſon of the lawe are all men hild priſoners, before ſuch time as comfort is kindled in the heart through fayth. This priſon did our firſt fathers féele when they were accuſed by the voyce of the lawe, vntill fayth came, or vntil there was giuen a promiſſe of the ſéed that ſhould tread downe ſinne and death, & breake vp the priſon of ſinne. This priſon felt Dauid when Nathan accuſed him too his face: Ionas when he was ſhut vp in the whales belly, Ezechias in his ſickneſſe: Daniell in captiuitie. And finally all the godly ſuſtaine in their hartes the like dreadfulneſſe ryſing of the féeling of Gods wrathe ſhewed by the lawe, and of the conſideration of the puniſhmentes that enſue, vntill ſuch tyme as fayth bée vnhealed and kindled, wherby mennes harts are ſuſteyned and refreſhed with healthfull comfort.
                  
               
               
                  Secondly. The law is our ſchoolemaſter vnto Chriſt.
                  THe dueties of a Schoolemaſter are thrée. The firſt is tooThe dueties of the lawe too teach vs too knowe God and our ſelues. teach: the ſecond too frame manners: and the third too chaſtice or puniſh the offenders. So the lawe of God firſt teacheth vs concerning God, that there is a God and what maner a one he is, and what maner a one mannes nature is by creation, & what was that image of God or original rightuouſneſſe in man, namely an agréeableneſſe too the lawe of God. It teacheth alſo of ſinne and of the penaltie of ſinne, of the laſt iudgemēt, of the reſurrection of the dead and the lyfe euerlaſting, of outward diſcipline or honeſt gouernment of manners, and ſuch other things.
                  Secondly it frameth our manners in this outwarde andTo frame our maners aright ciuill conuerſation of lyfe. And it is as a rule of lyfe or good woorkes, in which thoſe that are borne ageine muſt ſhewe

their obedience too God. That thing may bée ſhewed according too all the heſtes of the ten commaundements.
                  Thirdly it chaſtiſeth vs with the threats of Gods wrathToo correct offenders. and endleſſe damnation, & it puniſheth vs with death, ſickneſſe and other miſeries, all which are ſermons of the lawe concerning Gods dreadfull wrath ageinſt ſinne.
                  And the lawe is called our ſchoolemaſter vntoo Chriſt, forThe law dryueth vs too Chryſt. thrée cauſes.
                  Firſt bycauſe the lawe by ſhewing vs the hugeneſſe and horribleneſſe of ſinne, and by pronoūcing vs ſubiect too Gods wrath and euerlaſting damnation, driueth vs too ſéeke oure Phiſitian and helper the ſonne of God, who alonely hath by his owne death taken away ſinne and death, and deliuered vs out of the priſon of the lawe.
                  Secondly bycauſe Chryſte orderly is effectuall onely inIn whom Chryſt is effectuall. thoſe that eſchue the outward offences forbidden by the law of God, and frame their manners according to Gods lawe: He is not effectuall in thoſe that wittingly & willingly perſeuer in outward offences contrary too Gods lawe.
                  Thirdly, bicauſe the Ceremonies of Moyſes were preachingsThe law a ſhadow of things doo come. or figures inſtructing the church concerning Chriſtes benefites, as the Lambe that was ſlaine for Paſſeouer betokened Chryſt the Lambe of God which taketh away the ſinnes of the world. All the Leuiticall ſacrifices were ſermons of Chryſtes ſacrifice.
                  Let yoongmen beare in mynd this expoſition of Paules ſaying, The lawe is our ſchoolemaiſter vntoo Chryſte, and ſo muche the more let them looke that they frame their manners according too honeſt diſcipline, too the intent they ſhake not off the grace of Chryſte, but continue the Temples and dwelling places of God, that Chryſt may dwell in them and bée woorkfull in them.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday next enſuing the Circumciſion of our Lord.
               In this church of Rostocke, before noone is expounded the ſtorie of Chryſtes Baptim out of the third Chapter of Mathew: and after noone the Epiſtle Tit. iij. concerning the lauer of regeneration and renewment by the holy ghoſt. The diſpoſement of which Epiſtle is recited heretoofore on the feaſt of Chryſtes birth.
            
            
               Vppon twelfth day.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Eſay. lx.
                  
                     GEt thee vp betimes and be enlyghtened O Hieruſalem, for thy lyght commeth, and the glory of the Lord is riſen vppon thee. For lo while the darkneſſe and cloud couereth the earth & the people, the Lord shall shew thee lyght, and his glory shalbee ſeene vppon thee. The Gentyles shall walke in thy lyght, and kings in the brightneſſe that ſpringeth forth of thee. Lift vp thyne eyes and loke round about thee, al theſe gather themſelues and come vntoo thee. Thy ſonnes shall come too thee from a farre, and thy daughters shall gather about thee on euery ſide. Then thou shalt ſee and bee a flote, & thy hart shall wonder and bee enlarged, when the abundance of the ſea shall bee turned vntoo thee, when the power of the gentiles shall come vntoo thee. The multitude of Camels shal couer thee, the dromedaries of Madian and Epha: All they of Saba shall come bringing golde and incenſe, and vttering the praiſe of the Lord.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis feaſtful day which commonly is called the day of theThings to bee noted concerning the Epiphanie or twelfth day. thrée kings, was in ancient time named Epiphanie, that is too ſay the feaſt of Chriſtes appéering or ſhewing himſelfe openly too the world. For they wryte y• as on this day, being the .vj. of Ianuarie, (how bée it in ſundry yéeres) both y• ſtarre

appéered too the wiſe men or diuines of Perſia: and Chryſt was baptiſed in Iordan, where the whole Godhed did ſhew it ſelfe openly by euident witneſſe, ſo as the thrée ſeuerall perſones were ſéene and beheld by Iohn Baptiſt: and alſo Chryſt vttered his own glory by his firſt miracle at the mariage in Cana of Galilie, And therefore in the hymne of Sedulius which beginneth O Herod wycked fo. &c. they are ioyned all toogither.
                  And although it bée a more likelyhod, that the mariage in Cana was kept ſome other day: yet notwithſtanding dyuers old fathers are of opinion, that the ſelfſame day twoo yéere after Chryſt was borne, the wyſemen came vntoo him, and that the ſame day in the thirtyth yéere after his birth, was Chriſt baptyzed alſo, according as Nazianzene of ſet purpoſe taketh vppon him the ſtory of Chryſtes baptim too expound vppon the day of Epiphanie, which they name alſo the holyday of lyghtes. And Epiphanius in his diſproofe of fond tales, the hundred foure ſcore and ſeuenth page, hath noted many pleaſant things woorth the knowing, concerning the time of the comming of the wiſe men and other ſtoryes which bring ſingular lyght too the things that are declared by the Euangeliſtes.
                  And this ſermon of Eſay is red vppon this day, bicauſe it ſéemeth too agrée with the ſtory of the wyſemen, which commingOf the wyſe men that came vntoo Chryſt. too Hieruſalem by the lyght of a ſtarre that went before them, offered golde and frankincenſe too Chryſt our Lord. Héeruppon alſo peraduenture it myght ryſe, that they were called kings, wheras they were not kings, but Magies, that is too ſay, préeſts and diuines of the Perſians. Neyther is it certeinly knowne whither they were but only thrée, or mo that came vntoo Chryſt. And that they came not immediatly the .xiij. day after Chryſtes birth, bothe the length of theirThe tyme of their cōming. forney ſheweth, (for the néereſt borders of Perſia vntoo Iewry are twoo hundred and twenty Germane miles off from Iewry: And Saba the head Citie of happy Arabie, is about twoo hundred

and foure ſcore miles from Hieruſalem:) and alſo Luke the Euangeliſt manifeſtly proueth, who writeth that Chriſt the .xxx. day after, was offered in the temple and born in Simeons armes. Wherupon it foloweth he was not the ſame time a baniſhed perſon in Egipt.
                  
                  Moreouer the names of the wiſemen are pleaſantly andThe names of the wiſe men. lernedly deuiſed. Melchior, that is too ſay, a king of light or a lightſome king. Balthazar, that is too ſay, a captaine or generall of the warres. Caſpar, a ſecretarie or Chauncelor. For theſe names betoken that the king wyth his Capteines and officers of courts, or that the whole ſtate of gouernmēt both of peace and warre, ought too ſerue Chryſt.
                  But I will leaue theſe vymatters, and go in hand with Eſays ſermon which is woont too bee ſet foorth this day in the church, which is altogither a propheſie of Chriſtes kingdom. The chéefe places are thrée.
                  
                     j Of the perſon and benefites of Chryſt the king.
                     ij Of the multitude or Churche gathered toogither of Iewes and Gentiles which is ſubiect too this king.
                     iij Of the tributes, or dueties and ſeruices which the Church on hir behalfe dooth yéeld and perform agein too hir king Chryſt.
                  
                  
                     THe Prophet beginneth with an exhortation, wherwith he prouoketh the whole churche and all men too receiue Chryſt the king and light of the world reuerently, and too embrace his doctrine.
                     
                        Get thee vp betimes: neglect not, deſpiſe not thy Lord andEarneſtneſſe in receyuing and keeping the truthe. king Ieſus Chriſt, bée not luſkiſh or cold in héering and learning his doctrine: but get thée vp betimes, that is too ſay, vſe watchfulneſſe, diligence, and earneſtneſſe in hearing and mainteining the doctrine of the goſpel: embrace thou Chriſt the lyght of the world reuerently and hartely, and endeuer too holde him faſt. As is ſayd Rom. xiij. It is time for vs too

riſe frō ſléepe, bicauſe ſaluatiō is néerer thā whē we beléeued.
                     
                        Bee enlightened. Heare, receiue, and embrace Chryſt the true lyght which lyghteneth euery man that commeth intoo this world, by which light the true knowledge of God, true rightuouſneſſe, and eternall life is kindled in our hartes.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place is of the perſon and benefites of Chryſt.
                  THrée notable names are giuen vntoo Chryſt in this propheſie,The ſondry names and glory of Chryſt. Iehouah or Lord. which lernedly deſcribe and beautifully ſet out his perſon and benefites.
                  For firſt he is named Lord or Iehoua, that is too ſay, in very déed and by nature God. Like as alſo in Ieremy the .xxiij. and .xxxiij. he is called the Lord our rightuouſneſſe.
                  Secondly, he is called the glory of the Lord: firſt for hisThe glory of the Lord. being, bicauſe he is the full and expreſſe image of the euerlaſting father, repreſenting and ſhewing the whole father: as in the Epiſtle too the Hebrewes, he is called the bryghtueſſe of his glory, and the very image of the fathers ſubſtance. Alſo Exod. xxxiij. Shew mée thy glory. And ſecōdly bicauſe that by his goſpel he procureth true and due glory too his eternal father, according as the angels ſung when Chriſt was born. Glory bée too God on hie.
                  The foundation of Gods glory are the being & the powerWhat it is too giue glory to God. of God. The bound therof is our acknowledgement and ſetting of it foorth. Therfore, wee thē yéeld true glory vnto God when wee acknowledge and confeſſe, that God is: that God hath care of mankind: that God hath truly opened his wil to mankind in his woord vttered by his ſōne: that God is wiſe, rightuous, ſoothfaſt, frée, chaſt, pitifull: y• he releaſeth vs our ſinnes & receiueth vs when wée flée too his ſonne, of his owne frée grace and not for our worthineſſe or deſerts: that he harkeneth too thoſe that call vpon him: and that he ſaueth them for his ſonnes ſake who was borne too vs and giuen too vs.
                  
                     This doctrine concerning the true acknowlegement of Gods being and wil, and concerning the true ſeruices too bée performed too God, dooth the ſonne of God ſpred abrode among mankynd by his miniſters, and boweth mennes myndes and hartes too the acknowledging of this doctrine and too true obedience, that God may be magnifyed at many mennes hands with true glory, which cannot otherwyſe bée yéelded vntoo God, but by acknowledging of Chryſt y• lyght of the world. For although the heathen Philoſophers & the hipocrytes doo after a ſort graunt that there is a God, & that the wicked are puniſhed: yet yéeld they not too God his true and full glory, bicauſe they are ignorant of Gods wil diſcloſed in his Goſpell.
                  Thirdly Chryſt is called our lyght, bycauſe y• in the hartsWhy Chryſt is called our light. of men who erſt were ouerwhelmed with the miſt of ignorance of God, of ſinne, and of death, he by his Goſpel kindleth the lyght of the true knowledge of God, true comfort, ryghtuouſneſſe and eternall lyfe, by which lyght they are defended ageinſt death, ſinne, the Diuels tyrannye, and endleſſe damnation. Iohn. j. The ſonne of God is the true lyght which lighteneth euery mā that commeth into this world. Ioh. viij. I am the light of the world. Eſay. xlix. I haue giuen thée too bée a light too the Gentiles, that thou maiſt bée my ſaluation too the endes of the world. Alſo Eſay. ix. The people that walked in darkneſſe hath ſéene a great light. Al whole mankind, Kings, Princes, Philoſophers, wiſemen, & lerned men euerychone of them walke in moſt thicke darkneſſe, ouerwhelmed with ſinne and death, ſo long as they are without Gods woord: vntill the ſtarre that appered too the wiſe men, (that is too wit the woord of God) doo riſe in their hartes and woorke euerlaſting life and rightuouſneſſe in them.
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond place, cōcerning the church of Chryſt gathered of the Iewes & Gentils: or concerning the calling of the Gentils.
                  THe true Church or people of God are all thoſe that withWho are the true Churche. ſtedfaſt fayth embrace the lyght of the world our Lorde Ieſus Chryſt, or which beléeue in Chryſte: not only Iewes borne of the offpring of Abraham, dwelling at Hieruſalem, which had the Lawe giuen by GOD himſelf with notable ſignes and wonders, and the ſtate of gouernement ordeyned by the voyce of God, and the kéeping of the promiſes concerning the Meſsias, which were from tyme too tyme renewed and alwayes preſerued in this people: But alſo the Gentyles that walke in the lyght Chryſt, that is too ſay, whiche are lightened with the true knowledge of Chryſte, and by fayth receyue forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, ryghtuouſneſſe, and lyfe euerlaſting, offered too all Nations in the promiſe of grace made vntoo Abraham. Héere may the whole doctrine co
                        •
                     cerning the churche and the calling of the Gentyles, bée repeted out of Rom. ix. x. xj. xv. Ephe. ij. Act. x. xv. &c. Eſay. ij. xj. xlij. xlix. lj. liiij. lv. lvij. &c.
                  For vppon ſingular forecaſt did God put a difference betwéeneWhy God dyd put a difference betweene the lewes and the Gentils. the Iewiſh people and the Gentyles, by circumciſion and other ceremonies deliuered in the Lawe of Moyſes, for this cauſe chéefly, that the true church of God the piller and ſeate of the true doctrine concerning God and his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, myght bée knowen and ſéene with mennes eyes. For inaſmuch as it is his wil that euery man which is too bée ſaued, ſhould bée graffed intoo the Churche, and ioyned too Chryſte by the miniſterie of his Goſpell: he choſe a certein people in which ye promiſes cōcerning Chriſt ſhould bée preſerued, and Chryſt the redéemer bée exhibited, and teache, and woork miracles, and bée made a ſacrifice, and bée ſéene ryſen agein from death.
                  
                     Excéeding great therefore were the priuiledges of theThe prerogatiues of the lewes. Iewiſh people, whom God hath choſen too himſelfe from among all Nations, too bée his peculiar poſſeſſion, a Royall préeſthod, and a holy Nation: with whome he made a couenant with his owne mouth and by circumciſion, whom God had garniſhed with his owne woord, with his promiſes, with his Teſtamentes, with Fathers, Lawes, woorſhippings, euerlaſting préeſthod, and with the birth of Chryſte as touching the fleſh.
                  On the contrarie part, the Gentyls wanted all theſe goodThe wretched ſtate of the Heathen. things: they were without Chryſte, ſtraungers from the ſtate of Iſraell, forreners from the Teſtamentes and promiſes, without hope and without GOD in the world. And therfore did ye Iewes very farre prefer thēſelues before the godleſſe and Idolaters Gentyls, and déemed that Chryſt togither with his kingdome and benefites perteyned only too themſelues. It is then an excéeding great benefite of God, that he hath called too the lyght of his Goſpell, not onely the Iewes, but now alſo the. Gentyles, Greekes, Arabians, Madianits, Nabathyes, and others according as they are diuided by diſtribution in this propheſie of Eſay.
                  But in the doctrine of the calling of the Gentyles theſeGods vnchaū
                        geable rule in calling men to ſaluation. thrée articles are alwayes too bée conſidered. Firſt, that the promiſe of the Goſpell is vniuerſall, and that God is not an accepter of perſones, but is indifferent too all men according too that one rule expreſſed in the Goſpell. This is the wil of God, that euery one which beléeueth in the ſonne of GOD, ſhould haue euerlaſting life, and that he which beléeueth not in the ſonne, ſhold bée damned. This rule dooth God obſerue without chaunge, in men that are to bée receyued to eternal ſaluation, or too bée caſt away: neyther reſpecteth he any perſone, that is to ſay, he conſidereth not other byfals in men perteyning nothing to this Rule, as riches, pouertie, lerning, ignorance, power, circumciſion, vncircumciſion and ſuch lyke. Secondly, the calling of the Gentyles putteth vsSaluation is of free gift and not of deſert.
                     
in mynd, that forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and eternall lyfe, are beſtowed vppon the beléeuers, of frée gifte, and not for the woorthyneſſe of their owne vertues or woorkes. For ſith the Gentyles (which were defyled with Idolgaddings, luſtes, and other ſinnes,) for ſaking their purpoſe of ſinning, and fléeing vntoo Chryſt the ſonne of God, are receyued as well as the Iewes, who had alwayes framed their conuerſation honeſtly, according to the rule of Gods lawe: it is an euident proofe that the Gentyles (who are ſignifyed vnder the ſhew of the vncleane beaſts in the viſion of Peter) are clenſed from their ſinnes, not by their owne power or woorkes which are wicked and damnable, but by fayth through the frée mercie of God for Chryſtes ſake only, as is ſayd Actes .x. That which God hath clenſed, call not thou common or vncleane. But God hath clenſed our harts with the blud of his ſonne through fayth, as is ſayd, clēzing their hartes by fayth. And. 
                        •
                     . Iohn .j. The blud of the ſonne of god clenzeth vs from all ſinne. Thirdly, it giueth vs too vnderſtand, that circumciſion and the other ceremonies of Moyſes Lawe are not neceſſarie to ſaluation.
               
               
                  The third place, They ſhall all come from Saba, bringing gold and frankincenſe, and ſinging prayſe vnto the Lord.
                  THe true and chéef ſeruice of God, are not the ceremoniesThe true ſeruice or woorſhipping of God. of Moyſes, or the offerings & ſacrifices of beaſts: but the ſpiritual hoſts or ſacrifices of prayſe, that is to ſay, too preach the true doctrine concerning God, too call vppon god aright, too giue him thanks, too acknowledge him, to diſproue falſe opinions, to imploy a mannes goods about the maintenance of the miniſterie and of the ſtudies of learning, and to direct all the purpoſes, practyſes & déeds of our lyfe to the prayſe of god, as it is cō
                     
                        •
                     aunded Doo ye al things to the glorie of god.
                  
                     Theſe chéef and hygheſt ſeruices of God are ſhadowed inWhat is repreſented by gold. the very preſents of the Arabians. For golde is a repreſentation of true doctrine and pure fayth: as it is ſayd in the Pſalme: The commaundements of the Lord are more to be deſyred than Gold and much precious ſtone.
                  Frankincenſe is an ymage of true prayer and thankſgiuing,What is repreſented by Frā
                        kincenſe. whiche mount vp too heauen, and refreſh God with a moſt ſwéete and acceptable ſent, as is ſayd in Apocalip. v. They had vyols full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saincts.
                  The Altar of attonement is Chryſte our Mediator, byThe Altar of attonement is Chryſt. whom only GOD is pacified, and acceptable ſacrifyces are offered too God. For there is no Altar accepted of God, but only his ſonne Chriſt. Vppon this Altar let the Gentyles offer, not rammes, or other dead beaſtes, but ſpirituall ſacrifices, quicke, holy, and acceptable to God, whiche is their reaſonable ſeruice. Rom. xij. and let them glorifye & prayſe God for his mercy performed vntoo them.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the firſt Sunday after Epiphanie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. xij.
                  
                     IBeſeche you therefore brethren, by the mercyfulneſſe of God, that yee make your bodyes a quicke ſacrifice, holy and acceptable vnto god, which is your reaſonable ſeruing of God, and fashion not your ſelues lyke vnto this world: but be ye chaūged in your ſhape by the renuing of your mynd, that ye may proue what thing that good & acceptable and perfect will of God is. For I ſay (through the grace that vnto me geuen is) to euery mā among you, that no man ſtande hyghe in his own conceyte, more than it becommeth him too eſteeme of himſelfe: but ſo iudge of himſelf,

that he bee gentle and ſobre, according as God hath dealt too euery man the meaſure of fayth: for as wee haue many members in one bodye, and all members haue not one office, ſo wee being many, are one bodye in Chryſte, and euery man among our ſelues one anothers members.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THe more part of the Epiſtles whoſe diſpoſemeutes wée haue ſet out hithertoo, haue ſetfoorth the peculiar doctrine of the Goſpell concerning the perſone and benefites of Chryſt, and concerning Iuſtification. Now thoſe that followe, perteyne more too the doctrine of the Lawe, and comprehend preceptes of good maners, which muſt enſue the benefites of Chryſt receyued by fayth. And theſe thrée Sundayes folowing, thè whole twelfth Chapter of the Epiſtle too the Romanes is woont too bée expounded orderly in the churche. All the whiche is an exhortation conteyning precepts of all good morall woorkes, or of all vertues whiche God exacteth in his Lawe. But foraſmuch as the orderly expoſitions of the vertues, diſtributed intoo the preceptes of the tenne commaundements, are ioyntly recited in a peculiar booke of Rules of lyfe: I will make no declaration at all of the vertues in this place, but only expound the woords and the phraſes.
                  The firſt part of the Chapter which they reade on this day in the church, conteyneth chéefly twoo places,
                  
                     1 A generall exhortation too new obedience, or too a lyfe conformable too the will and woord of God.
                     2 Of méeldneſſe and lowlyneſſe, and of the ſhunning of curioſitie and ſtatelyneſſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of the firſt.
                  
                     I Beſeeche you brethren, that you make your bodyes, &c, It is a generall precept of new obedience conteyning the whole tenne commaundementes, taken of an Antitheſis of the Leuiticall ſeruices or ſacrifices.
                  
                     Make your bodyes, that is too ſay, dedicate yée too God, not the bodyes of beaſtes as the Leuiticall Prieſtes did, but your owne ſelues: Offer yée too GOD, your myndes, your wils, your deuyſes, your ſtudyes, your affections, and your dooings all your lyfe long: and ſo rule them, that they may pleaſe God.
                  
                     A ſacrifice, that is too wit, ſet a part too holy vſes, appoyntedSacrifyce. too the honour of God, as if he ſhould ſay, the Leuiticall Prieſtes offered beaſtes vntoo God, but offer you too God your own mynds, thoughts, ſtudyes, & al your doings: doo all things too his glorie: kill yée the remnants of ūnne, lewd inclinations, and the affections yet ſticking in you: bée yée patient in tribulation and tormentes, as Paule, Laurence and Attalus were, who gaue their bodyes too bée offerings or ſacrifices.
                  Quicke, not deade beaſts, but all your whole lyfe, and your ſelues, who ſhall liue for euermore.Quicke or liuing.
                  
                  
                     Holy, Halowed by the holy Ghoſt, pure, and cleane, that is too wit, by imputation of Chryſtes holyneſſe, and by beginningHoly. too bée holy.
                  
                     Your reaſonable ſeruice. Let not your ſeruice be brutiſhReaſonable ſeruice. or vnreaſonable, ſuch as is the ſeruice of the Heathen that know not God, or of the ſuperſtitions, or of the Hipocrites which haue no true reaſon lyghtened by the holy Ghoſt, nor true knowledge of God, nor true feare and fayth. But let your ſeruice bée reaſonable wherein your mynd may rightly acknowledge the being and will of God, and vnderſtand what ſeruices pleaſe God, and what woorkes pleaſe not. Let it haue the true feare of GOD, and true fayth. Let it

not perſuade it ſelfe, that it pleaſeth God by the woorke wrought.
                  
                     And fashion not your ſelues like vntoo this world. BéeWorldlyneſſe. not like vntoo this world: acquaynt not your ſelues with vngodlyneſſe, fleſhly careleſneſſe, wanhope, nor with any of the leawd luſtes, affections, and wickedneſſes of the vngodly in this world.
                  
                     But bee yee chaunged in your ſhape by the renewing ofRenevvment of mynd. your mynd. Get yée new knowledge and new affections, as the feare of God, fayth, louingnèſſe, hope, patience, and ſuch others, in your hartes, agréeable too the good and perfect will of GOD which is vttered in the Lawe and the Goſpell.
               
               
                  The ſecond part: Of myldneſſe which brydleth ſtatelyneſſe, curioſitie, ouerweening of a mannes ſelf, truſt in a mannes own cunning or policie, whiche maketh a man too take many thyngs vppon him without calling.
                  HEre would bée recited the whole doctrine of myldeneſſe and lowlyneſſe, and of the contrarie vyces, out of the expoſition of the vertues of the fourth and firſte commaundements.
                  
                     For I ſay, that is, I warne you, yea and I hartely beſéeche all and euery of you in diſcharge of myne office and dutie which God hath committed vnto mée.
                  
                     That no man be wyſer in his owne concceit, than needeth.
                     Myldneſſe. Ouervveening, miſvveening, & forvveening. That no man haue a ſtately opinion of himſelf, nor raſhly & proudly miſdéem other mē, nor deuyſe new interpretations & opinions of his own brayne, as Arius, ye 
                     Anabaptistes & all other Heretikes, are wyſer in their own conceits than they ought to be, & kéepe not thēſelues within ye meaſure of faith,

that is too ſay, within the bounds of God woord. But béeing puffed vp with an ouerwéening of their own wiſdome, they coyne new opinions and ſuttletyes. Ageyn, they are proud and attribute more to themſelues in opinion, concerning themſelues and their owne ſayings, than is due too their infirmitie. And afterward in their dooings they vaunt them ſelues aboue their power, they thruſt themſelues into other mennes vocations, they reforme and rule other mēnes matters, and they neglect their owne.
                  
                     Let him bee wyſe according too meeldneſſe. The true andChriſten wiſdome. Chriſtian wiſdome is too hold a mans ſelf mildly with the bounds of the woord, that is left vs by Chriſt, and to acknowledge GOD, and to obey him according to the woord by him deliuered.
                  All mans wiſdome without Gods woord, is (as Socrates
                     Worldly wiſdome. ſayeth in Plato) a doutfull dreame. And the ſame Socrates ſayeth, that therefore Apollo had iudged him wyſe, bycauſe he knew he was not wyſe at all.
                  But the beginning or the ſumme of true wiſdome is the feare of the Lord. That is too ſay, the true acknowledgemēt, inuocation, and prayſing of the euerlaſting God, and of his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chryſte, according too Gods woord or the goſpell taught by Chryſt.
                  
                     According as God hath delt to euery man the meaſure ofMannes boūds fayth. Let euery man abyde within the bounds of fayth or of Gods woord, or of the whole doctrine of the Goſpell. And out of theſe let them not raunge vppon truſt of their owne wiſdome.
                  Ageyn, let euery man eſtéeme of himſelf according to the meaſure of his own gifts which he hath receyued, & let himThe right vſe of gods giftes. imploy the ſame too the comon welfare of the whole body of the church as in mannes body the giftes and offices of the dyuers members are directed too the cōmon preſeruation of the whole body. This ſimilitude is handled more largely by Paule .j. Cor xij. and Ephe. iiij.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Ʋppon the ſecond Sunday after the Epiphanie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. xij.
                  
                     SEeing that wee haue diuers gifts, according too the grace that is geuen vntoo vs: if a man haue the gift of propheſie, let him haue it, that it bee agreeing too the fayth. Let him that hath an office, wait on his office. Let him that teacheth, take heede too his doctrine. Let him that exhorteth, geue attendance too his exhortation. If any man geue, let him doo it with ſingleneſſe. Let him that ruleth, doo it with diligence. If any man shew mercy, let him doo it with cherefulneſſe. Let loue bee without diſsimulation. Hate that which is euill, and cleaue too that which is good. Bee kinde one too another with brotherly loue. In giuing honor, go one before another. Be not ſlouthfull in the buſineſſe which you haue in hand. Bee feruent in ſpirite. Applie your ſelues too the time. Reioyce in hope. Bee patient in tribulation. Continue in prayer. Diſtribute vntoo the neceſsitie of the Sainctes. Bee ready to harbor. Bleſſe them which perſecute you: bleſſe I ſay, and curſſe not. Bee mery with them that are mery, weepe with them that weepe: bee of like affection one towardes another. Bee not hie minded, but make your ſelues equall too them of the lower ſorte.
                  
                     THis Epiſtle cleaueth too the laſt that went before. And firſt it reckeneth vp the ſundry gifts, and diuers kinds of charges, which God hath ordeyned in his churche, that they ſhould bée employed too Gods glory and the common profite of the whole church, and not too the augmenting of pride and buſie medling with many things.
                     
                        Whither it bee propheſie, according too the agreableneſſePropheſie. of faith. Propheſie (as it appereth by▪ j. Cor. xiiij.) is in the new Teſtament, the gift of the interpreting the Propheſies of the ſcripture. Therfore he counſelleth them, that their expounding

of the ſcripture ſhould be y• agréeableneſſe of faith, that is too ſay, that it ſhould agrée wyth the whole doctrine of the goſpell, or with all the Articles of the faith.
                     Let this precept bée made manifeſt by examples. The interpretationsHeretical propheſying. which the Anabaptiſtes teache vppon the ſayings in the v. of Mathew, concerning othes, and not reuenging, doo fight with the reſt of the Articles of Gods woorde, which expreſly aloweth lawful othes, and the reuengement that is doone by Magiſtrates.
                     The popiſh interpretation of this principle, we are iuſtifiedPapiſtical propheſying. by fayth, that is by faith countenaunced with loue, or by faith and the reſt of the vertues ioyntly to
                           •
                        gither, agréeth not with the whole doctrin of the goſpel, which manifeſtly auoucheth y• wée are fréely iuſtified by faith only, for Ieſus Chryſt ſake, and not for any woorkes of our owne.
                     
                        Or miniſtership, in miniſtring. Theſe ſpéeches are clipt.Miniſters. The méening of this is: he that is a miniſter of the church, or a deacon gathering & diſtributing the almeſſes of the church, let him miniſter in ſuche wiſe as he ought too doo. This ſentence therefore enioyneth faithfulneſſe and diligence in all partes of the miniſterie.
                     
                        Or hee that teacheth in doctrine. Let the teacher of theTeachers. goſpel in church or in ſchoole, teache aright, and let him faithfully ſpred abrode true doctrine concerning God .j. Tim. iiij. Take héede too thy doctrine. This precept may bée amplified by diſtribution, and may bée bréefly ſpoken of all the articles of Chriſten doctrine.
                     
                        Or he that exhroteth in exhortation. Exhortatiō to repentanceExhortation. and al good woorks is one of the kinds of Eccleſiaſtical ſermons .j. Tim. iiij. Giue diligence too reading & exhortatiō. Tit. j. Let him bée able too exhort by ſound doctrine.
                     
                        He that giueth, let him doo it with ſingleneſſe. That is tooHow to giue. ſay, he that beſtoweth vppon his héerers either doctrine, coū
                        ſel, or mony, let him doo it with ſingleneſſe, and with ryght hart in déed. Let him marre nothing, let him loke for nothing

in reward or recompence.
                     
                        Let him that ruleth, doo it with diligence. Whither he béeHow too rule. a temporall or ſpirituall gouernor, let him in his office bée héedfull, diligent and faithfull, like Ioſaphat .ij. Paralip. xix. who was diligent in all partes of gouernment. He ordered Churches, ciuill iudgementes and conſiſtories, and made warres. &c. Paule is a diligent teacher.
                     Our princes neglect ye chéefeſt parts of their office, namelyGod graunt there bee none ſuch in England. the care of Churches, of iudgemēts, of diſcipline, of ſtudies and of doctrine, the defence of innocentes, and the puniſhmēt of offenders. And either they are ſlouthfull, or buſie about mooneſhine in the water, or elſe they doo hurtful things, they build, they hauke and hunt, they make great ſhewes & feaſts and they moue vnneceſſary warres.
                     
                        He that sheweth mercy, let him doo it with cheerefulneſſe.
                        How to ſhew mercie. This precept is of mercy & benefiting, which muſt procéede frō a chéerful & welwilled mind▪ God loueth a chéerful giuer.
                     
                        Let loue bee vnfeined. Héere followeth a regiſter of preceptesLoue towards ones neibor, or true frendſhip. concerning the dueties of loue, or concerning all vertues, the declaration of which may bée fetched out of my litle boke of the rules of life.
                     The loue of a mannes neibor comprehendeth all the vertues of the .v. vj. and vij. commaundemēts. But in eſpecially vntoo frendſhip is the firſt ſentence too bée applied, let loue be vnfeined. That is too ſay: let your good will towarde your frends and generally toward your neibor be true, vncorrupted, & vncounterfetted: let it not riſe of an euill cauſe, but let your wils bée coupled or knit togither in ye loue of goodneſſe.
                     
                        Bee kind one too another with brotherly loue. Let there beBrotherly loue▪
                         among Chriſtians as among brethren, true goodwill & kindneſſe▪ that is too ſay, naturall and earneſt loue, ſuch as parēts are woont too beare toward their children. For God hath put a natural louing kindneſſe or charineſſe intoo the harts of fathers & mothers, to the intēt to put vs in mind of his loue toward his own ſōne Ieſus Chryſt, & towards vs his ſōnes by

adoption, and too the intent they ſhould bée as bondes of alyance and mutuall good will betwéene man and man.
                     
                        In giuing honor goe one before an other. Reuerence is aReuerence. vertue of the fourth commaundemēt, acknowledging Gods giftes in other men, and yéelding too them their place and honor, and by the example of it ſelfe alluring others too méeldneſſe and reuerence. The two vices that beſet it, are flattery or ſoothing, and pride, or diſdeinfulneſſe.
                     
                        Bee not ſlouthfull in that yee take in hand. Diligence is aDiligence. vertue of the fourth commaundement executing the labors agreable too a mannes vocation, faithfully, diligently, & conſtātly. The vices that beſet it, are ſlouthfulneſſe or reſtineſſe and ouerearneſtneſſe or too much medling.
                     
                        Be feruent in ſpirit. A zele burning in the loue of God andZele. of ryghtuouſneſſe, and béeing angry with all thoſe that deface Gods glory, perteineth too the firſt commaūdement and the fifth. The vices that beſet it are fumiſhneſſe or rigorouſneſſe, and coldneſſe or pliableneſſe.
                     
                        Apply your ſelues too the time. It is a kind of wiſdomeTaking of time. which neglecteth not occaſions offered to diſpatch a mannes matters wel, & conſidereth what thing, with what perſons, what time, and in what place it may bée earneſtly purſued and obteined: howbéeit ſauing alwayes our duety too God, the ſtedfaſtneſſe of our profeſſion, and honeſt diſcipline.
                     
                        Reioyce in hope. Hope of eternall life certeinly promiſedHope. for Chryſtes ſake, and the looking for aſſwagement of the miſeries in this lyfe according too Gods will, dooth ſingularly ſuſteine, chéere, and ſtrengthen mennes harts. Rom. v. and viij. And Nazianzene: nothing is wōt too chéer vs ſo much as a good conſcience and a good hope. The vices that beſet it, are deſpaire, preſumption, and the foliſh and vain hopes of men.
                     
                        Bee patient in tribulation. Patience ageine, perteineth tooPatience. the firſt precept. The vices that beſet it are impatiencie and wilfull ſtubbornneſſe. As for example, the ſtubbornneſſe of Seruetus and of the Anabaptiſts.
                     
                        
                        Continue in prayer. The true calling vppon God belongethPrayer. too the firſt and ſecond commaundemēt. The vices that encounter it, are omitting too cal vppon God, or nonpraying and heatheniſh babling without faith, and al falſe Inuocations or miſprayings.
                     
                        Diſtribute too the neceſsitie of the Saincts. Dooing of goodLiberalitie. turnes perteineth too the ſeuenth commaundement. The vices that encounter it, are harmefulneſſe, grippleneſſe, and waſtfulneſſe.
                     
                        Bee redy too harbour. Hoſpitalitie perteineth too the .vij.Hoſpitalitie or houſe keping. commaundement. The vices that encounter it are harborleſneſſe, nigardſhip, and lauiſhneſſe.
                     
                        Bliſſe them that perſecute you. Méekneſſe is a vertue ofMeekneſſe. the fifth commaundement repreſſing wrathfulneſſe and deſire of reuenge, and laying aſide hatred and grudge, for God and the common quietneſſe ſake. The vices that encounter it are hatred, deſire of reuenge, ſpitefulneſſe, reioycement at other folkes harmes, and ſhéepiſhneſſe.
                     
                        Bee mery with them that bee mery. Fréendlineſſe is a vertueFrindlineſſe or gladſomneſſe▪
                         that wiſheth well too the good, and reioyceth in their good ſucceſſe. The vices that encounter it, are enuiouſneſſe, ſpitefulneſſe, and lightneſſe of beléefe.
                     
                        Weepe with them that weepe. Pitifulneſſe is a vertue ofPitie. the fifth commaundement, which is touched with the féeling of good mennes miſfortunes, and helpeth thoſe that are in diſtreſſe. The vices that encounter it, are crueltie, reioycement in other folkes harmes, and fond pitie.
                     
                        Bee of like affection one too an other. Deſire of concord orConcorde. peaceableneſſe is a vertue of the fifth commaundemēt. The vices that beſet it, are quarelouſneſſe, debatefulneſſe, and lazyneſſe.
                     
                        Bee not high minded. But make your ſelues equall too theLowlineſſe & mildneſſe. lower ſort. Lowlineſſe and mildneſſe are vertues of the firſt and fourth commaundement. The vices that encounter thē, are pride and feyned holineſſe.
                     
                        Concerning theſe vertues and the vyces that encounter them, there are meaſurable expoſitiōs ſet out wyth good ſentences and examples in my litle booke of rules of life, which I would wiſhe too bée added to the diſpoſements of the Epiſtles, in the end of this booke.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the third Sunday after the Epiphanie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. xij.
                  
                     BE not wiſe in your owne opinions. Recōpence too no man euill for euill. Prouide aforehand things honeſt, not only before God, but alſo in the ſight of all men. If it bee poſſible (as much as is in you) liue peaceably with al men. Dearly beloued, auenge not your ſelues, but rather giue place vnto wrath. For it is writtē, vengeaunce is mine, & I wil reward ſayth the Lord. Therfore, if thine enemy hunger, feede him: if he thirſt, giue him drink. For in ſo dooing, thou shalt heape coles of fire on his head. Bee not ouercome of euill, but ouercome euill with goodneſſe.
                  
                     HE procedeth in the regiſter of precepts of vertues or good woorkes, by the exerciſe wherof Chriſtenfolk muſt ſhew their obedience too Godward.
                     
                        1 Bee not wiſe in your owne opinions. Mildneſſe and willingneſſeMildeneſſe. too bée taught, not chalenging greater wiſdome too it ſelfe than is agréeable too ones infirmitie, nor truſting in ones own gifts, but héering others and giuing place too ſuch as giue good aduice, is a vertue that perteineth to the iiij. and viij. precept of the ten commaundements. The vices that encounter it are pride, ſtiffeneſſe of opinion or wilfulneſſe, and Academical douting.
                        2 Render to no man euil for euil. Méekeneſſe repreſſing deſireMeekeneſſe. of reuenge. The ful doctrine of this vertue is woont to be

recited in the opening of the fifth commaundement.
                        3 Prouide things honeſt in the ſight of al mē, WareneſſeShunning of ſtumbling blockes. of eſchuing ſtumbling blocks which withdraw the minds of the weake from the true doctrine. Now an offence or ſtumbling block is a falſe doctrine, or a miſbehauior in life, which impeacheth Gods glory and other mennes ſaluation, either bicauſe it ſeduceth, or bicauſe it giueth occaſion of ſlaūdering the goſpell and the Church, or elſe bicauſe it prouoketh other too doo like wiſe. Too this poynt may al the whole doctrine bée referred which is ſet forth in the place that concerneth offences. With the méening of this Epiſtle agréeth the ſaying of Chriſt. Mat. 5. Let your light ſo ſhine before men yt they ſeing your good works, may glorifie your father which is in heauē.
                        4 If it be poſsible, as much as in you is, haue peace wyth all men. The deſire of peace perteineth too the .v. cōmaundemēt.
                        5 Auenge not your ſelues, but giue place to the wrath, thatReuengment. is to wit of God. Vntoo the fifth commaundement of the ten, perteineth méekneſſe which repreſſeth anger & deſire of reuengemēt, giuing place too the wrath of God, who either by himſelfe without meane, or by the Magiſtrate puniſheth wrongs. For in the chapter folowing, Paul eſtabliſheth the vengeance that is doone by the magiſtrate.
                     
                     
                        Thou shalt heape coles of fire vppon his head. That is too ſay thou ſhalt heape puniſhment. For the more vnthankfull he is towards thée for thy weldooing, ſo muche the ſorer ſhall he be puniſhed. Or thou ſhalt ſet him on fire with loue of thée when it ſhal greeue him too bée ouercome with thy kindneſſe and curteſie.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the fourth Sunday after the Epiphanie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. xiij.
                  OWe nothing to any man but that you loue one an other. For he that loueth another hath fulfilled the law. For theſe other commaundements. Thou shalt not commit aduoutrie.

Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt not ſteale. Thou shalt not beare falſe witneſſe. Thou shalt not luſt: and ſo foorth: (if ther bee any other commaundement) they are all comprehended in this ſaying, loue thy neighbour as thy ſelf: loue hurteth not his neybor. Therfore is loue the fulfilling of the lawe.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THe ſtate of this Epiſtle is a general exhortation too loue or too good works enioyned in the .x. commaundementes.
                  The chéefe places of Doctrine, are thrée.
                  
                     1 Of this ſaying. Owe nothing too any man, but that yée loue one another.
                     2 Of louing a mannes neybor, which comprehendeth all the vertues and good woorks of the ſecond table of the ten commaundements.
                     3 Of the fulfilling of the lawe.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  
                     PAy all men their dues, and oweno mā any thing ſaue mutuallRightuouſnes comprehendeth all vertues. loue.
                  
                  It is an old and vſuall definition, that rightuouſneſſe is a vertue which yéeldeth too euery body that which is his own, or which yéeldeth too euery body that which is due. And it cō
                     prehendeth all the other vertues, & a mannes full obedience towards the whole law of God or the .x. commaundements, which are the rule that ſheweth what dueties wée owe too God, what too other men, and what too our ſelues. All the dueties that are to be performed immediatly vnto God himſelf, are compriſed in the vertues and commaundements of the firſt table: namely, true knowledge and calling vppon God, fear of God aboue all things, faith, loue, glorifying, acknowledgment &c. Vntoo magiſtrates is due, honor, obedience, loue, reuerence, toll of things growing vpon the ground, cuſtome of things brought in from forren landes, and ſeruice

bothe in matters of peace and warre. Ageine, too parentes, ſchoolemaiſters, maiſters of houſholds, and gardens, there is too be yeelded reuerence, honor, obedience, and thankfulneſſe. And vntoo the reſt of men, and cheefly too fréendes, huſbandes, wiues, chyldren, kinſefolke & ſtraungers, or fremfolke, there muſt bée yeelded all the dues of good will, of faithfulneſſe, and of wel dooing. In bargaines, in borowings, in buying, in hyring and letting, and other things, the mony and wares and all other things that are due, are too bée performed too euery man. For theſe things are due euen by bond of ciuill order, and euen the Magiſtrate puniſheth thoſe that pay them not. Therfore Paule in this place commaundeth theſe things to bée performed in ſuche wyſe, that afterward wée may bée vtterly frée from the bond of ciuill gouernment.
                  But the bond of nature and of God, is of another ſort: bindingThe lawe of God and of nature. all men too performe too their neybors mutuall loue in hart and alſo outward dueties, which the ciuil magiſtrate cō
                     pelleth no man too doo. As for example, the Samaritane doth good too the wounded wayfarer and the préeſt and the Leuite ouerpaſſing him are not puniſhed by ye magiſtrate, although they wickedly neglect mercy due by the bond of nature. Euen ſo by the bond of God and nature wée bée bound too ayde ſuch as ſtand in néede of our helpe, with counſel, doctrine, defence, trauell, mony, and other almeſſe deedes, although the ciuill magiſtrate puniſheth not ſuch as let ſlip theſe dueties. This is the meening of the words. Owe nothing too any man, ſaue mutuall loue.
               
               
                  Of the ſecond.
                  TO loue a mannes neybor, is, vpon the true knowledge ofWhat it is too loue our neybor. Chriſt foreſhining in our harts, and vppon faith aſſuring vs y• God of his meere goodneſſe loueth vs for his ſōnes ſake, too ſubmit our ſelues on the other ſide vnto God and too obey him, & for his ſake to embrace other mē with harty good will: and to impeche no mans life, body, name or goods, but (too the vttermoſt of our power) to do thē good by al y• meanes we cā.
                  
                     The ſpeciall kindes or dueties of loue towards a mannesThe ſeuerall ſorts or degrees of loue towardes ones neybor. neybor, are al vertues or good woorks enioyned in the ſecond table of the .x. commaundements, which are cōprehended all toogither in this ſaying: loue thy neibor as thy ſelf. Mat. xxij.
                  In the fourth commaundement we are willed to loue our parēts, children, brethren, maiſters, magiſtrates, ſubiects. &c.
                  Vntoo the fifth, which is thou shalt not kill, perteine theſe dueties of louing, too woorke none euill too our neybor, or too impaire no mannes body, good name, or goodes, but too defend and mayntein them too our power. Which vertue is named ryghtfulneſſe and manlineſſe. Alſo too this commaundement perteineth frindſhip, which is a cheriſher of mutual good wil: a faithfulneſſe: a ſéeking of cōcord: a méekneſſe which yéeldeth not to anger and deſire of reuengement: a gentleneſſe which beareth with the blemiſhes or defaults of other men. &c.
                  Vntoo the ſixth commaundement, thou shalt not commit aduoutry, perteineth the mutual loue of maried couples, earneſt, pure, & not luſting after other men or other womē. Alſo chaſtitie which appaireth not ye clēneſſe of it ſelf or of others. And ſtayedneſſe which yéeldeth honor to ye parties own body.
                  Vntoo the ſ
                        •
                     uenth, thou shalt not ſteale, belongeth ryghtfulneſſe, abſteining from other mennes goods: and weldoing or liberalitie towards whoſoeuer is in néede.
                  Vntoo the eight, thou shalt not bear falſe witneſſe, is referred, not to hurt a mannes neibor by falſe witneſſe, ſlaūders, back bitings, raylings or other vntruths: but in al a mannes dooings & ſayings to be ſoothfaſt, frēdly, curteous, faithfull. &c.
                  In the nynth commaundement thou shalt not couet, is required a perfect ſoundneſſe of all the powers and deſires of mannes nature agréeable with the rule of Gods law, & burning with the pure and chaſt fire of the loue of God and our neybor, and voyde of all luſt or concupiſcence, or of all ſinfull inclinations, affections, or deſires of corrupted nature, wherwith men being now ſtirred vp, do ſet more by mony or glory than by God himſelf: like as that fooliſh loouer in Plautus
                     
crieth out, I had leuer this woman loued mee, than all the Gods that 
                           •
                        n the world bee.
                  
                  So Paule in this place referreth almoſt al the vertues ofGods commaundement is the rule of vertues. good woorks to this one poynt of louing, and maketh the precepts of the. x commaundements too bee the ground and rule of loue or of all good woorks. For God wil haue al the whole life of chriſten folke, al their thoughts, deuiſes, endeuers and dooings too bée ruled by the ſquire of the woord which he hath left among vs, as he ſayth in Deut. xij. What I commaund thée, that doo thou vnto the Lord: neither put thou too, neither take thou away. Ezech. xx. Walk not in the cōmaundemēts of your Fathers, for I am the Lord your God, walke in my commaundements, and keepe my iudgements and doo them.
                  Then are not the .x. cōmaundemēts to bée hiſſed out of the church, & out of the life of chriſtiās, as the Antinomians cauilAntimonians. which baniſh the law into the court of ye ciuil magiſtrate, or elſe bear folk in hād yt the law ſerueth to none other purpoſe but too accuſe, & condemn. For wée ſee that Paul in this place vrgeth the .x. commaundements vpon chriſtiās, as the ſquire and rule of good woorks and of all their lyfe.
               
               
                  Of the third.
                  
                     LOue is the fulfilling of the lawe, that is to ſay, ſound, perfect,The loue of God. and continuall obedience towards al the commaundements of Gods law without any ſinne or blemiſh, ſuch as is required in the law of God. Deut. vj. Math. xxij. Loue the Lord thy God with all thy hart, with all thy ſoule, & thy neybor as thy ſelf .j. Iohn▪ v. This is the louing of God, that wée kéepe al his cōmaundements. Such a louing of God and our neybor, burning & perfect with the whole hart, without any luſts or ſinful inclinatiōs, & without any ſin, befalleth to no man, Chriſt only excepted. For in al men, (yēa euen in thoſe ye be regenerated) the law of the members (or y• ſinfull inclinations & affectiōs (keepe war like enimies ageinſt ye law of God. Gal. v. Ro
                        •
                      vij. and they ſtriue againſt the ſpirit of God. And in al mē (yea euē in the holieſt) there remaines lothſom

filthineſſe of ſin, which hindereth our loue & obedience, that it cannot fully & perfectly ſatiſfie y• law of God, nor of it own woorthyneſſe pleaſe God .j. Ioh. ij. If wee ſay wee haue no ſin, wée deceiue our ſelues and the truthe is not in vs.
                  Then ſéeing no mannes loue (bée he neuer ſo holy) is theWee can do no vvoorks to iuſtify our ſelues perfect fulfilling of Gods lawe: it is plaine too bee ſéene that no man is iuſtified before God by his owne loue, or his own good woorks: but that wée are freely for Chriſtes only ſake deliuered by faith from the curſſe of the law, from ſin, & death, and reſtored too rightuouſneſſe and lyfe Gal. iij. Rom. iij.
                  Now when wee through the frée mercy of God for ChryſtesHovv loue engendreth in vs ſake, are receiued and iuſtified by faith, and endued with the holy ghoſt: then alſo is the law ſtabliſhed by faith, not only bicauſe that through faith the full & perfect rightuouſneſſe which Gods lawe claimeth, is imputed too vs as though wée our ſelues had throughly ſatiſfied Gods law: but alſo bicauſe that through faith & the true knowledgment of Chryſt foreſhining in our harts, & through the help of the holy ghoſt mouing our harts, ther is kindled in our mind a new & brighter light, & a ſtedier aſſent, & a confidence & gladneſſe ſettling it ſelfe in God, & a childly awe & a pure and more burning loue of God, & a ſtedier purpoſe of obeying God, according too all the commaundements of his holy law. Which newbegonne obedience liketh God, not for the owne worthineſſe thereof, but through faith in Chriſt, that is too wit, bicauſe the perſon of him that obeyeth is accepted by faith for Chryſtes ſake, as in .j. Pet. ij. is ſayd: Offer ſpirituall ſacrifices acceptable too God by Ieſus Chryſt.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋpon the Sunday called Septuageſima.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle .j. Cor. ix. and .x.
                  PErceiue ye not, how that they which run in a race, run all, yet but one receiueth the reward. So run, that yee may obteine. Euery man that proueth maſteryes abſteyneth from all thinges. And they doo it too obteine a corruptible crowne:

but wee too obteine an vncorruptible crowne. I therefore ſo run, not as at an vncertaine thing. So fight I, not as one that beateth the ayre, but I tame my body, and bring it vntoo subiection, leſt by any meanes after that I haue preached to other, I my ſelfe should bee a caſtaway.
               
               
                  The .x. Chapter.
                  
                     BRethren I would not that yee should be ignoraunt of this, how that our fathers were all vnder a cloude, and all paſſed thorowe the ſea, and were al baptiſed vnder Moſes in the cloud and in the ſea, and did all eate of one ſpirituall meat, and did all drinke of one maner of ſpirituall drinke. For they dranke of the ſpiritual rock that folowed them, and that rocke was Chryſt.
               
               
                  The cheefe places are three.
                  
                     1 Of diligence and buſying our ſelues in the woorks of our owne vocation, and in the folowing of the actions of all our whole lyfe, in ſuche wyſe, as they may ſerue too Gods glory, and atteine reward in euerlaſting life.
                     2 A generall exhortation too new obedience, or a lyfe agréeing with Gods will, and too ſhunne the offences which as God puniſhed in the fathers wādering in the wilderneſſe, ſo will he alſo puniſh horribly in vs, if wée commit the like faultes.
                     3 That the church of the fathers and of the Chriſtians is all one, which is gathered by the woorde and the ſacraments, and is fed and mainteined all with one ſpirituall meat and drinke.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The firſt place.
                  THe rule which Paul in this place putteth forth garniſhed with the twoo ſimilitudes taken of running & wreſtling, is a moſt profitable & neceſſary rule, not only of the duety of teachers or miniſters of the church: but alſo of our ſtudies & of all the deuiſes and dooings of our whole life. In all vocations,What is to bee done in all intents, drifts and purpoſes of this lyfe. and in ordering all the deuiſes, endeuers and deedes of our life aright, wee muſt needes haue a certeine end and bound ſet before vs, to which as it were to a marke wee may leuel all our buſineſſe that we take in hand. Agein it behoueth vs ſkilfully to choſe the meanes that lead directly to the ſame ende: and to vſe neceſſary heedfulneſſe, exerciſe, earneſtneſſe, and ſtedfaſtneſſe in neceſſary heedfulneſſe, exerciſe, earneſtneſſe, & ſtedfaſtneſſe in getting and keping thoſe meanes. Like as the rū
                     ners in a race haue their eye alwais vppon the marke ſet vp before them, & with all earneſtneſſe and pains taking doo enforce & endeuer themſelues the ſtreighteſt way too it. And as the wreſtlers bend thēſelues wholy ageinſt their copemates that they may giue the foile & obtaine the wiſhed rewarde of victorie. For as Plato ſayth: A man muſt not wanderingly gaze at many things, but ſtedfaſtly ame one thing, & at the ſame leuell all his doings as it were at a marke.
                  This is the common and vttermoſt end of all vocations,The common ende and drift of al a mannes dooings. & of the whole lyfe of man, which Paul himſelf hath a whyle after appoynted, doo yee all things too the glory of God, and bee not a ſtumbling blocke too Gods church. That is too ſay: let the end of al your dooings bée of God, or the true acknowledgment, inuocatiō, and glorifying of God, and the welfare and quietneſſe of Gods church.
                  Beſides this, euery ſeueral vocation hath peculiar boūdsThe endes of authoritie or ciuil gouernement. and endes by it ſelf, as the ciuill magiſtrates boundes and ends are too bridle the miſbehauiors of his countrymen with honeſt lawes, too decide controuerſies by rightfull iuſtice, too mainteine peace, too defend the good, and too puniſhe the vnthriftes and offenders.
                  
                     The ends of the miniſterie of the goſpell, are too teach theThe ends of the miniſterie. true doctrine of the goſpel aright, too miniſter the ſacramēts, and too performe the other partes of their office faithfully, for the glory of God, and that many men may bée ſaued.
                  The ends of ſcholers life or of our ſtudies are wiſdom, powerThe endes of learning. of vtterāce, or wyſe & eloquēt godlineſſe, or too haue good ſkil & to iudge aright of things, that is: too ſay wel & liue wel.
                  Too the entent wée may attein and retein theſe ends, wéeSettledneſſe. muſt chuſe the meanes that lead the right way too them, like the runner which taketh his next way too the marke, & ſtragleth not with vncertein mouing and blind ſtarting this way & that way in his race. For he that mindeth too attein too the place that he ameth at, muſt folow but one way & not wander many wayes. For (that I may vſe the woords of Seneca) that wer not too go but too gad. So the champion Eutellus ſettles himſelf ageinſt his aduerſary only. He beateth not ye aire in vaine, but ſtandeth ſtiffe & ſtout in ſight, with eyther hand he thumpes a maine on Dare as thicke as he can ſmite.
                  Therefore like as the runners looke euer too their marke, and the champions employ all their ſhiftes and practiſes too ſmite their aduerſarie: and ſtart not aſide with blind braids, ne beat the air with raſh ſtrokes: ſo let euery man in his vocation, (and ſpecially the teachers & miniſters of the church) chuſe out wiſely the meanes that lead ſtreight too the ryght end: and in exerciſing the ſame, let them vſe diligence & cōtinuance, yt they may in the eternal life attein the promiſed reward of their diligence. Let thē teach the pure doctrin of the goſpel faithfully. Let them continually beat vpon the placesThe deſcriptiō of a good and ſkilfull miniſter. of doctrine yt are neceſſary and moſt auailable too the noriſhment of true godlineſſe, as the places of repentance, of faith, of the perſon, office and benefites of Chryſt, of true inuocation, of the croſſe, of good woorkes. &c. Let them attemper them ſelues too the capacitie of their hearers. Let them examine, inſtruct, and ſtrengthen the rawer ſort. Let them ſtedfaſtly and ſtoutlye ſtand wyth the truthe againſt Heretikes. Let them fight againſt their owne nature, and their ſinfull

luſts. Let them beare with ſome infirmities and offences for common quietneſſe ſake. Let them allure their héerers with examples of all vertues. Let them brydle ambition, wrathe, deſire of reuengement, couetouſneſſe, and other affections, that they deface not the doctrine of the goſpel with ſtūbling blockes, and themſelues become caſtawayes, or loſe the inheritance of eternall life: Like as Paule ſaith, that he looked narowly too himſelfe, or chaſtiſed his body, ſubdewing it, taming it & bringing it in ſubiection: that is too ſay, with great héede and ſtreightneſſe he reſtreyned and kept vnder foote the ſinfull inclinations and luſts of his hart, and compelled both the inward powers of his ſoule, & the outward members of his body, as his tung, his eyes, his handes and his féete too bée ſeruiceable and obedient too the iudgement of his mind, or to Gods will.
                  Moſt men in the world are in bondage to their affections,Vnneceſſary dealings. and are ruled by thē, ſo as they béeing enflamed with loues, hatreds, couetings, fond hopes. &c. doo take in hand vnrightuous and vnneceſſary dooings, in which they periſh: as for example, Paris was brought in bōdage too his own loue. Pompey gaue himſelf ouer to ambition, malice, and ſpitefulneſſe. Xerxes being pricked with pryde & deſirouſneſſe of reuengement, made warre ageinſt the Gréekes. Many heritikes being ſet a gog with vaine glory, ſprede abrode and mainteine falſe opinions. Otherſome doo brable about néedleſſe queſtions, rather curious than profitable. Other teachers giue thē
                     ſelues too ſluggiſhneſſe, other too medling with many matters, and otherſome too other affections.
                  Paule therefore euen by his owne example exhorteth all miniſters and doctors of the church, with ſingular care, héedfulneſſe, and diligence, too hold in and too bridle their mindes, willes, harts, & outward members, that they ſerue not their owne ſinfull inclinations, or the Diuell ſpurring them foreward, but the will and woord of God.
                  But the text of this preſēt Epiſtle ſhal become more cléer

to the eye, if the auncient maner of the Gréekiſh gamings be conſidered and the termes of them well vnderſtood,
                  Among the Greekes, in their gaming places there wereThe fiue naked Games, or exercyſes of Actiuitie. fyue kynds of exerciſes moſt auncient. Running, Buffeting, Leaping, Coyting, and Wreſtling. And theſe were called the naked Games, bycauſe the Gamers exerciſed thēſelues naked in thoſe games.
                  The Runners that ran a furlong through (that is to wit,Running. ſixhundred foote or half a quarter of a myle) were called Stadiodromoi, that is too ſay, Furlongers. And they that ran the race duble, or which (when they came at the marke) ran backe agein to the baryers, were called Dubblefurlongers.
                  The Buffeters encountred eyther with fiſtes or with ſandbagges, as Entellus and Dares doo in Virgill.
                     Buffeting.
                  
                  The Leapers contended eyther in the ſwiftneſſe, or in theLeaping. hyghneſſe, or in the farneſſe of the leape.
                  The Coyters were thoſe that exerciſed themſelues inCoyting, it vvas like our throvving of the hammer. throwing a coyt of ſtone or yron vp in heyghth, or out at length, with which kynd of exercyſe Apollo is reported too haue ſlayne Hyacinthus, and Peleus his brother Phocus by miſchance.
                  The Wreſtlers being naked, and anoynted with oyle, &Wreſtling. beſprent with duſt, and gryping one another, ſtryued to caſt eyther other to the ground.
                  Theſe exerciſes were vſed both in the common ſcooles ofThe dyet & demean or of thoſe that contended in the ſayd Games, & their revvards. euery ſeuerall Citie, as in Lycey and Academie at Athens: and ſpecially in their holy Gamings (as they termed them) that is to wit, the Olympians, Nemeans, Pythians, and Iſthmians: In whiche the Gamers abſteyned from meates and pleaſures, that weaken mennes bodyes, & kept themſelues to a certeyn dyet neceſſarie to make the powers of their bodye ſtrong and ſtedye. And they that wan the mayſtrie hauing deliuered to them a braunche of Palme by the ouerſéeer or iudge of the games, were woont to bée proclaymed victors in the holy Games, and to bée crowned with a garlond,

at Olympus, of Olif: and at Nemea of Apium. And the Gamings of Olympus were had in ſo great eſtimation in Greeke, that it was in maner a greater and more honorable thing too haue obteyned the reward or garlond in thoſe holy Gamings, than too haue triumphed at Rome. Therefore Plato in his fifth booke of Lawes, ſayeth that he is the beſt Citizen of all others, that counteth it a greater beautie and honor too him, too obey reuerently the lawes of his countrye, than too win the mayſterie in the Gaming of Olympus or in any other Gaming.
                  Out of this auncient cuſtome of the Gréekiſh Games,An excellent ſimilitude. Paule taketh in this place many notable woordes. Euery man (ſayeth he) that tryeth mayſteries, whither it bée in running, wreſtling or buffeting, dooth with great wareneſſe and diligence forbeare the meats, pleaſures and all other things that weaken the powers of the bodye or whiche may abate their nimbleneſſe, & eyther hinder or diſappoynt them of the victorie. Euen ſo Chryſts ſouldiours ſuſteyning a continuall encounter and wreſtling with the Deuill, and their own ſinfull luſts and outward entycements, muſt throughout the whole race of their lyfe abſteyne from al things that offend eyther God or godly and weake perſones: and ſpecially from Idolatrous meats, of which Paule doth chéefly entreate this whole diſputation of the .viij. ix. and .x. Chapters.
                  
                     They that run in a race. Hercules is reported to haue runA furlong. ful. 120. paces with one breth at ye gaming of Olympus. That ſpace is properly called a fur long. Alſo the liſts wherin they contend in running is termed by the ſame name.
                  
                     But one receyueth the rewarde. The Gréeke woord isThe revvarde of victorie. 
                     Brauion, whiche ſignifieth the reward or the palmbraunch yt was giuen too the victor by the ouerſéer and iudge of ye game, who bare in his hand Rabdon, that is to ſay an officers warder, and gaue too the victor a braunch of Palme. And therevppon the ſayd woord Brabion is thought too come by tranſpoſing of letters.
                  
                     
                     They do it to obteyn a corruptible crown, namely in the gamings at Olympus, of wyld Olif: at Isthmo, of Pynetrée: at Nemea, of Apium, in the Pythians, of Appletrée, &c.
                  And the victors were woont too take the garlonds foort wt from their heads, and ſet them vppon the Altars of the Gods immortall, méening thereby that victorie is the gift of God, yt they acknowledge their receiuing of victorie at gods hand.
                  
                     Hontos pycténo, that is too ſay, So play I the championInterpretation of the Greeke vvoords. or ſo contend I with many ſtroks, as did Entellus and Dares in the fifth booke of Virgils Aeneas.
                  
                  
                     Hupopyazo mou to ſoma. Suidas interpreteth theſe woords thus: I looke diligently or narowly too my bodye, that is too ſay, I vſe a ſingular wareneſſe & circūſpectneſſe to rule all ye motions both of my body & my mynd, in ſuch wiſe as I may obteyne the wiſhed reward that I contend for.
                  Alſo this woord Hupopia ſignifieth the blewneſſe about ye eyes, and generally the ſwellings that ryſe of labor, properly called knubbes, or y• come of ſtrypes called wales, whiche ryſe vp blewiſh or blackiſh where the body hath bin ſmittē, by reaſon that the blud being forced out of his propre place and gathering about the place that is ſtriken, dooth there feſter, and cauſe the ſkin too looke black and blew. Paule therfore ment by this terme a hard chaſtiſement of his body, and ſuch a repreſſing of his luſts as was annexed wt great payn.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  A Generall exhortation too new obedience or too endeuer and diligence too doo goods déeds.
               
               
                  The arguments are three.
                  FIrſt, of ye profit or rewards wherwith diligence in goingOf the behoue fulneſſe of doing vvell. through faithfully with the labours of a mannes voratiō, & in framing y• intents & dooings of a mannes lyfe, according to ye rule of gods wil, ſhal without fayle bée recōpēſed in the euerlaſting lyfe. For like as they y• run in a race, or they y•
                     
ouercome in Buffeting are crowned with a garlond: So in the warfare of a Chriſten mannes lyfe (and ſpecially in the miniſterie) they that feight faithfully ſhal receyue an vncorrupt crowne of glorie in the euerlaſting lyfe .j. Pet. v. ij. Tim. iiij.
                  Secondly, of the diſcommoditie or penalties. Leaſt itOf the diſcom moditie of doing yll. may by any meanes come to paſſe, that when I haue preached vntoo others, I my ſelf may become a caſtaway, that is too ſay, loſe the heritage of eternall lyfe.
                  Thirdly, by examples of the fathers or of the IſraelitesExamples. in the wilderneſſe, who falling away and defyling thēſelues with Idolatrie, whordome, and impaciencye, loſt the grace of God, and were piteouſly ouerthrowen and deſtroyed in the deſert.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  THe Church of the Fathers or Iſraelites and of the ChriſtiansOne church of God in al ages gathered by one meane & fed vvith one foode. is all one, which is gathered togither by the woord of the Goſpell and by the Sacramentes, and is fed and preſerued by all one ſpirituall meate and drink. For there is but one ſelfſame Chryſt, for whoſe ſake all the holy men of all tymes haue obteyned remiſſion of ſinnes. And there is but one ſelfſame Goſpell, by whiche all Chryſtes benefites are offered and applyed too men.
                  But the outward faſhions of the Sacramentes differ.Figures of Baptim. And the clowd that couered the people, Exod. xiij. and the water of the red ſea, through whiche the Iſraelites paſſed, Exod. xiiij. were repreſentations of Baptim. For euen as God couered and defended his people with the clowd, and led them ſafe through the waues of the ſea by the ſeruice of Moyſes, and by theſe tokens ſhewed that he had a fauour to that people: Euen ſo dooth God impart his benefites too vs by the water of Baptim, waſhing vs from our ſinnes, and hyding and couering vs as it were with the ſhadowe thereof from the heate of his wrath.
                  
                     Concerning the ſpirituall foode (whereof the Manna gyuenFigure of the Lords ſupper. from heauen in the wilderneſſe (Exo. xvi.) was a figure) with whiche the ſoules of the beleeuers are fed, and euerlaſting lyfe is begonne in them, like as this bodily lyfe of men is ſuſteyned with wheaten bread: more plentifull expoſition may bée taken out of the ſixth Chapter of Iohn.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday called Sexageſima or Shroueſunday.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle .ij. Cor. xj. &. xij.
                  
                     FOR yee ſuffer fooles gladly, bycauſe that yee your ſelues are wyſe. For ye ſuffer euen if a mā bryng you intoo bondage: yf a man deuoure: if a man take: if a man exalt himſelfe: if a man ſmyte you on the face. I ſpeake as concerning rebuke, as though we had bin weake. Howbeit, wherein ſoeuer any man dare be bolde (I ſpeake fooliſhly) I dare bee bold alſo. They are Ebrewes, euen ſo am I. They are Iſraelites, euen ſo am I. They are the ſeed of Abraham, euen ſo am I. They are the miniſters of Chryſt (I ſpeake as a foole) I am more: In laboures more aboundaunt: In ſtrypes aboue meaſure: In pryſon more plenteouſly: In death oft. Of the Iewes fyue tymes receyued I euery tyme .xl. ſtrypes ſaue one. Thryſe was I beaten with roddes I was once ſtoned. I ſuffered thryſe ſhipwracke. Night and day haue I bin in the deepe of the ſea▪ In iorneying often, in parelles of waters, in parels of robbers, in ieopardies of myne owne nation, in ieopardies among the Heathen, in parels in the citie, in parels in wilderneſſe, in parels in the ſea, in parels among falſe brethren, in labour and trauayle, in watching often, in hunger and in thirſt, in faſtings often, in cold and in nakedneſſe. And beſyde the things, which outwardly happen vntoo mee, I am combred dayly, and doo care for all congregations. Who is weake, and I

am not weake? Who is offended, and I burne not? If I muſt needes reioyce, I will reioyce of myne infirmities.
               
               
                  The .xij. Chapter.
                  
                     THE God and father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, which is bliſſed for euermore, knoweth that I lye not. In the Citie of Damaſcon, the gouernour of the people vnder king Aretas, layde watch in the Citie of Damaſcens, and would haue caught mee, and at a windowe was I let down in a basket through the wall, & ſo ſcaped his hands. It is not expedient for mee no doubt too reioyce: Neuertheleſſe, I will come too viſions and reuelations of the Lord. I knowe a man in Chryſt aboue .xiiij. yeares agone, whither he were in the body, I can not tell, or whither he were out of the body I can not tel (God knoweth) which was taken vp into the third heauen. And I knowe the ſame man (whither in the body or out of the body, I can not tell, God knoweth) howe that he was taken vp intoo Paradiſe, and herd woordes not too bee ſpoken, which no man can vtter. Of this man will I reioyce, of my ſelfe will I not reioyce, except it bee of myne infirmities. And yet though I would reioyce, I ſhould not be a foole: for I would ſay the truthe. Neuertheleſſe, I ſpare, leaſt any mā should thinke of mee aboue that he ſeeth mee too bee, or heareth of mee. And leaſt I should bee exalted out of meaſure, thorow the abundance of reuelations, there was giuen vntoo mee vnquietneſſe of the flesh, the meſſanger of Sathan, too buffet me: bycauſe I should not bee exalted out of meaſure. For this thing beſought I the Lorde thryce, that it might depart from mee. And he ſayd vntoo mee: my grace is ſufficient for thee. For my ſtrength is made perfect thorow weakeneſſe. Very gladly therefore will I reioyce of my weakneſſe, that the ſtrength of Chryſte may dwell in mee.
                  
                     WElnéere all the whole latter Epiſtle to the Corinthians is an Apologie of Paule defēding himſelf ageinſt the

y• ſlaūdersof the falſe Apoſtles who deſpyſed his doctrine, authoritie, & miniſtration, & preferred thēſelues before him, & vpheld yt the Iewiſh ceremonies were to bée layd vpon ye Gē
                        tyls, as of neceſſitie too ſaluatiō. And truly they alledged the examples of Peter & the other Apoſtles, who in Iewrye & the countryes bordering thereabouts hild ſtill ye ceremonies of their own countrey. And this defence of Paules is neceſſarie, too the intent the truthe & certeintie of the doctrine of the Goſpell which Paule had taught, & the authoritie of Apoſtleſhip & the fayth might bée preſerued in the churche. It perteyneth too the kynd of caſes yt are Iudiciall: The groūd of the Epiſtle before red, is: I Paule am a farre more excellent miniſter of Chryſt, than are the reſt.
                  
               
               
                  The cheef Arguments or reaſons are twoo.
                  FIrſt, he that with greater faythfulneſſe & cōſtancie ſpreddeth abrode the goſpel of Chryſt, & endureth more trauel, perſecution, & trouble for profeſſion of the goſpel and for the fayth, is woorthely alſo too bée déemed greater and excellenter than the reſt.
                  I Paule haue endured greater peynes & mo in number, mo perils, impriſonments, puniſhments & ſuch other miſeries in ſpredding of the goſpel, thā any of the falſe Apoſtles: Ergo, I am farre too bée preferred before them.
                  Secōdly, too whō more manifeſt viſiōs of greateſt things are ſhewed frō heauē by god himſelf: he (as more familiar & déerer to God) ought of right to bee preferred before others.
                  Paule was caught vp intoo the third heauen, & there had ſhewed vntoo him a notable reuelatiō from God: Ergo, &c.
                  This is the effect of this dayes Epiſtle which our auncetersThe cauſes of the Lentō faſt. haue in this reſpect appoynted too this tyme of the yéere, for that it maketh mention of faſting, labours, watching, & other exerc
                        •
                     ſes that ſerue to kéepe vnder & mortifie y•
                     
fleſh: whiche things their méening was, that men ſhould take vppon them ſpecially theſe fortye dayes going before Eaſter, too the intent that the bodye béeing chaſtized and brought in ſubiection, mēnes mynds bée more fit, more bent, and more deſyrous too conſider the wonderfull paſſion and death of the ſonne of god, and too repent themſelues earneſtly of their miſdéeds.
                  Out of this Epiſtle may bée picked foure places of doctrine.
                  Firſt, of the duties or true ornamentes of an Apoſtle or any miniſter of the goſpel, which are, faythfulneſſe in ſpreading abrode the doctrine of the Goſpel, and ſtedfaſtneſſe and patience in bearing out the labours, trubles & tormentes, whiche accompanie the profeſſion and miniſterie of the Goſpell.
                  Secondly, the doctrine of the croſſe: and of the twelue cauſes for which God dooth cheefly lode his Churche and the godly ſorte with ſo huge a heape of aduerſities: whiche are too bée fetched out of the place that concerneth the croſſe and aduerſities.
                  Thirdly, of the viſions and reuelatiō made vntoo Paule.
                  Fourthly, the moſt ſweete comfort ſet foorth in this ſaying: My grace ſuffyſeth thée, for my power is made perfect by infirmitie.
                  Now foraſmuch as ye text of ye Epiſtle is ſome what lōg, and in diuerſe places ſomewhat dark: I will orderly and bréefly expound the phraſes and woords of the Epiſtle.
                  
                     Bycauſe many boſte according too the flesh, I will boſteTrue glorie or boaſting. alſo: True glorie is the allowable conſent of God and of a mannes owne conſcience iudging a ryght and of other men iudging a ryght of vertue or weldooings. Or it is a notable and renowmed fame ſpred abrode euery where, for many and great deſertes eyther towardes ones countreymen, or his country, or all mankynd. The vyces that encounter it, are brauery or vaūting, wherthrough wée ſet out ourſelues

beyond meaſure euen without cauſe: And blockiſhneſſe or lyghtneſſe, caring no whit at al what other men déeme or report of vs. And foraſmuch as the groundworke of glory is excellentFalſe Apoſtles. vertue, and too deſerue well at other mennes hands: The directeſt pathway too glory, is too haunt vertue, and not too couet too ſéeme beſt, but too bée beſt, as Aeſchylus ſayth. Agein it is the greateſt foly that can bée, & a plain token of dotage, too couet the bare gloryouſneſſe or opinion of excellencie and the brute of the people, without the foūdation which is true vertue: Or too boaſt according too the flesh: that is too ſay, of fleſhly, outward, and vaine things, as of the nobilitie of a mannes country or houſe, of a mannes owne wiſdome and vertue, or of ceremonies, and in eſpecially too vaunt and preferre him ſelf before other like a Thraſo. For ſo doo fooles in déede, whome vayneglorie ſetteth in a gog. And Plutarch ſayeth moſt fynely, it is a ryght pleaſaunt thinge too vs too héere oure owne prayſes blazed by others: but too héere another man prayſing himſelfe, it is the irkeſomeſt thing that can bée. Paule minding too eſchue that fault, telleth the Corinthians before hād, that foraſmuch as he was compelled by the falſe Apoſtles, he would take vppon him too play the foole a while, to the entent they might vnderſtand the doltiſhneſſe and fond bragging of the falſe Apoſtles, ageinſt which (if it were lawful too boſt of himſelf) he was able too ſet true prayſes beſéeming the Apoſtle of Chryſte, which all godly men myght acknowledge in him. And he addeth ieſtingly, ye willingly bear with fooles, bicauſe your ſelues are wiſe. And he ouerth wartly girdeth the falſe Apoſtles, which (vnder pretēceReprofe of vaynglorie. of the miniſterie) vſurped Lordſhip and tyrannye too themſelues ouer the church, and tooke meat & drinke (which Paul earned with his own hands) and wages, and rewards of the Corinthians: And vaunting themſelues wyth Thraſolike bragging, vexed the Corinthyans with Tyrannicall reproches.
                  I ſpeake as concerning rebuke, as though wée had bene

weake. That is to ſay, I am compelled to obiect this tiranny and couetouſneſſe of the falſ Apoſtles to you, to the intent yée may perceiue how reprochefull and vnbeſeeming things yee bear with, and that yee may bée aſhamed, that wheras we as weake and féeble haue vſurped vntoo our ſelues no tyranny ouer you, (no nor ſo much as taken due meat and drinke of you) you notwithſtanding haue more willingly obeyed the falſe Apoſtles than vs.
                  
                     Howbeit wherin ſoeuer any man dare bee bold, that is tooExample of chriſten boſting. ſay. Of what thing ſo euer any man dare boaſt, or wher of ſoeuer the falſ Apoſtles dare vaūt and brag themſelues, I alſo dare brag as well as they.
                  
                     I ſpeake through foolishneſſe, that is too ſay, through the fond bragging of the falſe Apoſtles, I am alſo conſtreyned too play a fooles part, and too ſet out mine owne commendation.
                  
                     They are Hebrewes, that is too ſay, the offſpring of Heber the great graundchilde of Sem the ſonne of Noe. Gen. xj. the which Heber was borne the yéere of the world. 1723. the yéere after the flud. 67. and he liued vnto the yéer of the world. 2187. which is the. 79. yéere of the age of Iacob or Iſrael the father of the twelue Patriarkes, of whom all his poſteritie were called Iſraelites, that is too ſay, vanquiſhers or Princes of God, or fréemen, of Shara and El, like as of Heber they were called Hebrewes, that is too ſay wayfarers, of the woord Yauar hath paſſed ouer, whereof commeth Bethabara, that is too ſay, the houſe of paſſage.
                  
                     The ſeede of Abraham, that is too ſay the offſpring of Abraham,Who are the children of Abraham. and heirs of the moſt ample promiſes which are deliuered to Abraham in Gen. xij. xv. xviij. xxij. That is to wit, not only the Iewes, borne of the ſéede of Abraham as touching the fleſh, but alſo all nations, that with the faith of Abraham, embrace the promiſſe concerning Chryſte made vnto Abraham, that is to ſay, the father of a great multitude. Vnto this place may bée laid the Sermon of Paule made at Hieruſalem. Act. xxij. and the beginning of the third chapter to the Philippians.
                  
                     
                     In labours more aboundant, that is to ſay, I haue enduredLabours. more paines in ſpreading abrode the Goſpell, as he ſayeth .j. Cor. xv. I haue labored more than they all.
                  
                     In ſtripes aboue meaſure, that is to ſay, I haue oftentimesStrypes. receiued ſtripes for profeſſion of the goſpell.
                  
                     In death often. I haue oftentimes bin in danger of death,Death. I haue oftentimes had Death before mine eyes, when all things manaced preſent death.
                  
                     Fortie ſtrypes ſaue one haue I receyued, vnder colour of theStrypes. law of Moyſes. Deut. xxv.
                  
                     Thrice haue I bin beaten with roddes, that is to wit by theWhippings. ſergeants of the heathen. Act. xvj. and elſewhere.
                  
                     Once I was ſtoned. Act. xiiij.
                     Stoning.
                  
                  
                     Thrice haue I ſuffered shipwrecke. And within two yéeresShipwrecke. after, Paule ſuffered ſhipwrecke the fourth time at the Ile of Malta. Act. xxvij. For he wrote this Epiſtle at Philippos, the yéere of Chryſte. 56. and ſailed to Rome in the Winter time, 57. or. 58.
                  
                     In iournying often, that is too ſay, I haue traueled much.Trauell. Let the windlaſſe of Paules trauels bée ſéene in the Table gathered out of the Acts of the Apoſtles, and out of his owne Epiſtles.
                  
                     In ieoperdie of mine owne nation, that is too wit, for theIeoperdy. traines that were laid for mée by mine owne kinſmen the Iewes. With ſingular diligence and cunning was all thisLoke for theſe names in the table in thend of this booke. ſermon layd toogither by Paule, and diſtinguiſhed with Comaze, Colons, and Periods, and flouriſhed with Antitheſes, Iſcolies, Homoioptots, and Interrogations, that nothing could lightly haue bin more trimly compacted. Which thing alſo. S. Auſtin in his fourth Booke of Chriſtian Doctrine:Auſtin. Chap. 7. marketh & vnfoldeth at large the cunning handling of this preſent place.
                  
                     God knoweth. A warrantize aſſured by taking the true God too witneſſe.
                  
                     The Lieuetenaunt of Aretas king of Arabie, by the prouocationAretas.
                     
of the Iewes, layd wait for Paule. Act. ix. thé third yéere after Paules conuerſion. Herodes Antipas had taken the ſiſter of this Aretas too his wyfe, and put hir away vppon his rauiſhment of Herodias: and for that cauſe there aroſe warre betwixt them.
                  
                     Surely it is not expedient for mee too boaſt, namely leaſt I may ſéeme too faine theſe things of mine owne braine for a certeine deſire of vainglory. Or elſe, for that it auaileth nothing ageinſt the falſe Apoſtles, too glory of my labors and infirmities. I will therfore come too the viſions and reuelations of the Lord.
                  There are chéefly foure ſortes of viſions or ReuelationsHow manye ſortes of viſions of reuelations there be. from God. For eyther by his owne ſonne clad with image of mannes nature: Or by the Prophets and Apoſtles inſpired with his ſpirit: or by notable dreames: or elſe by viſions or ſhewes made too mē awake, hath he diſcouered too his church what his will is.
               
               
                  Of viſions alſo there bee cheefly three kindes.
                  FOr eyther it is ſo, that Images and pictures of things tooViſions of three ſortes. come are ſhewed too the eyes of mē awake, as in the Apocalips of Iohn: or that Angels appéering in viſible ſhape forſhew things too come, as Daniel .vij. viij. x. or that God offereth himſelfe too men too bée ſéene, as it is written of Moyſes that he ſawe God face too face. And in this place the whole Godhead ſéemeth too haue ſhewed it ſelfe too Paul too bée diſcerned in the open lyght.
                  
                     I haue knowne a man in Chryſt, that is too ſay, a Chriſten man, A fourtene yeeres ago. This Epiſtle was written too ye Corinthians the .xxij. yéere after Paules conuerſion, which was the .lxv. yéere after Chriſtes birth. Then was this viſion ſhewed vntoo Paule, not in his way too Damaſco, but about the .viij. or .ix. yéere after his conuerſion.
                  
                     That ſuch a one was taken vp into the third heauen. Some

interprete this of the heauē of heauens, in which God ſheweth himſelf too bée ſéene of the bliſſed ſoules and Angels. For the Hebrewes make a difference of thrée heauens. The firſtDifference of heauens. or loweſt heauen is this compaſſe or element of the air wher in the cloudes glide, of which it is ſayd: looke vppon the birds of the heauen: and alſo, the way of an Egle in the heauen.
                  The ſecond heauē is the ſkie, in which the Mathematicals reckē vp .ix. ſeueral compaſſes, namely of the Moone, of Mercurie, of Venus, of the Sunne, of Mars, of Iupiter, of Saturne, of the ſtedy ſtarres, and of the firſt mouer.
                  The third or higheſt heauen is ſuppoſed too bée the heauenHeauen or Paradyſe. of heauens, or the dwelling place of God & the bliſſed Angels which alwayes behold the face of the father: and of the bliſſed ſoules, which enioy the ſight of God. Alſo they name ye ſame place Paradiſe, as Chriſt ſayeth too the théefe. This day ſhalt thou bée with mée in Paradiſe, that is too ſay in heauē, which is ſpoken by a Metaphor taken of the pleaſantneſſe and goodlineſſe of the gardine intoo which our firſt parents were put. For the Gréeke woord Paradiſe dooth ſignifie properly a gardine or a field cunningly planted and wel encloſed.
                  
                     Leaſt any man should eſteeme of mee aboue that he ſeeth mee too bee or heareth of mee. As the mē of Listra did. Act. 14 who tooke Paule too bée a God, clothed in the ſhape of man.
                  
                     There was giuen vntoo mee vnquietneſſe of the flesh, the meſſenger of Sathan to buffet me, leaſt I shuld be exalted out of meſure. The Gréek woord Scolops ſignifieth a ſharp ſtake: wherupon cōmeth the verb Anaſcolopizein which ſignifieth to gore with a ſtake. And héerupō 
                     Lucian termeth Chryſt in mockage, the viſard of Paleſtine yt was prickt on a poſt. But in this place of S. Paul, it ſéemeth too ſignifie Metaphorically al ſingular tormēts or ſharp greefs both of body & mind, or all kind of aduerſities, ſlāders, backbitings, reproche, neceſſities, perſecutiōs, & ſuch wreſtlings or encounters of fayth as are deſcribed in Pſalm. 69. 38. and elſwhere, and ſuche other like tormentes, which among other things put vs in mind

of the humilitie and obedience due vntoo God, and of Gods power woorking ſaluacion too euery one that beléeueth, by weake and miſerable inſtruments, and accompliſhing his praiſe out of the mouthes of babes and ſucklings.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋpon the Sunday called Quinquageſima. Sometime called Eſto mihi, and of vs commonly called Shroue ſunday.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle .j. Cor. xiij.
                  
                     THoughe I ſpeake with tungs of men, and of Angels, and haue no loue, I am euen as a ſoundyng braſſe, or as a tinkling Cimball. And though I could prophecie, and vnderſtand all ſecretes, and all knowledge: yea, if I haue all faith, ſo that I could moue Mountaines out of their places, and yet haue no loue, I am nothing. And though I beſtow all my goodes too feede the poore, and though I gaue my body euen that I burned, and yet haue no loue, it profiteth mee nothing. Loue ſuffereth long, and is courteous, loue enuieth not, loue dooth not frowardly, ſwelleth not, dealeth not dishoneſtly, ſeketh not her owne, is not prouoked too anger, thinketh none euill, reioyſeth not in iniquity. But reioyſeth in the truthe, & ſuffereth al things. Though that propheſying faile, either tongues ceaſe, or knovvledge vanishe avvay, yet loue falleth neuer avvay. For our knovvledge is vnperfect, and our propheſying is vnperfect: But vvhen that vvhich is perfect is come, then that vvhich is vnperfect shal bee done avvay. When I was a chyld, I ſpake as a child, I vnderſtode as a child, I imagined as child. But aſſoone as I was a man, I put away childishneſſe. Now wee ſee in a glaſſe, euen in a darke ſpeaking: but then shall wee ſee face too face. Now I know vnperfectly, but then shall I know euen as I am knowne. Nowabydeth faith, hope, and loue, euen theſe three: but the cheefe of theſe is loue.
               
               
                  
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THe Sunday of Eſto mihi, tooke that name of the Introit which is taken out of the .xxx. Pſalme, which beginneth thus. Bée thou too mée my God of defence, and my place of refuge, too ſaue mée. For thou art my ſtrong hold & my refuge, and thou for thy names ſake ſhalt guide mée and noriſh mee. In thée O Lord haue I truſted, and I ſhal not bée confounded for euer. Deliuer mée in thy rightuouſneſſe.
                  So alſo the Sunday folowing is called Inuocauit, of the firſt woord of the Introit taken out of the xc. Pſalm. He hath called vppon mée and I will heare him, I will deliuer him, and I will glorifie him.
                  And it is called the Sunday of Quinquageſima, (that is too ſay of fiftie) bicauſe it is the fiftith day before Eaſter, like as Pentecoſt or Whitſunday is the fiftith day after Eaſter.
               
               
                  The partes of this dayes Epiſtle are three.
                  
                     1 The loue of God and a mannes neibor, is too bée preferred before all the giftes of tungs, eloquence, miracles, lerning. &c.
                     2 A regiſtre of the woorkes of loue conteyning .xv. ſpecial vertues or dueties of loue.
                     3 The difference betwéene the knowledge of God in this life and in the life too come.
                  
                  
                     PRincipally in all deuiſes & dooings, thoſe things only are too bée looked too and ſought for, which God moſt ſtraightly enioyneth too al men. But God enioyneth too all godly mē the dueties of charitie towardes theyr neybor. Deut. vj. Mat. xxij. The chéefeſt commaundement is, loue God aboue all things, and thy neibor as thy ſelf .j. Tim. j. The ſumme of the commaundement is loue from a pure hart .j. Ioh. iij. He that loueth not abideth in death. Héeruppon Paul reaſoneth, that the loue of a mannes neybor is too bée preferred beforethe

gifts of tungs, eloquence, miracles, learning, &c, whiche are not needfull for all Chriſtians.
                     Straunge and vnknowē languages are no more too theLanguages. profit of the héerers, than ſounding braſſe or a tingling cimball, that lulleth the eares with a vayne ſound. Ageine, the giftes of Tungs without charitie, is not true godlyneſſe, nePropheſying and fayth. maketh a man a right Chriſtian nor acceptable to God. So like wiſe Propheſying which is able too opē euen the darkeſt places of al ye ſcripture, & faith or y• gift of working miracles, & al vnderſtanding or the knowledge of all Arts, without louingneſſe, is not the chéef and moſt excellent ſeruice of God.
                     Much wrangling is there in ye diſputations of theſe dayesMark wel this diſcourſe and beare it away. about this ſaying: If I haue all fayth, and yet haue not loue, I am nothing: and it ſéemeth that there is not any more notable ſaying y• can bée ſet ageinſt this propoſition, Onely fayth iuſtifyeth. But I anſwer, Firſt by the rule of Logicke, The trueneſſe of propoſitions Hypothetical (that is to ſay of ſentences grounded vppon if) is not too bée meaſured by the vntwyning of the propoſition intoo his partes, but by the knitting togither of his members matching rightly or otherwiſe among themſelues. As for examples ſake: If an Aſſe flye, he hath fethers. This propoſition or ground is true, but the members of it being vnknit, are moſt falſe, An Aſſe flyeth, An Aſſe hath fethers. Alſo .j. Cor. xv. If Chryſt bée not riſen, in vayne is our preaching & vayne is your fayth. This propoſition in the partes knit togyther is true, but the partes being vnknit are moſt vntrue. So alſo this propoſition, I
                              •
                            I haue fayth and yet haue no loue, I am nothing, is very true. But if yée take aſunder the propoſition intoo his partes, and ſay y• fayth is nothing, or he y• is endued we true faith is nothing, or is not a godly mā in déed, & that loue may bée pulled away from fayth: all men perceyue that this diſſolution or diſmembering is falſe and too bée found fault with.
                     Other ſome anſwere that Paule in this place ſpeaketh not of the iuſtifying Faith, but of the gift of woorking miracles,

which may bée euen in the vngodly. Mathew. vij. But were it ſo that Paule ſpake of the iuſtifying Fayth: yet can it not bée concluded thereby, that wée are not iuſtified by fayth only, or for Chryſtes ſake only. For certeine it is that the loueTrue faith and true loue are vnſeparable. of God and a mannes neybor doo of neceſſitie go ioyntly toogither with fayth. Like as with the riſing of the ſunne, there goeth ioyntly of neceſſitie the ſpreading foorth of his beames or lyght: Euen ſo of neceſſitie loue foloweth Fayth in thoſe that are iuſtified, in ſo much as he that loueth not, abydeth in death. Like as that body wherein there remayneth no féeling or mouing, liueth not: and yet it foloweth not therupon that feeling and mouing are the cauſe of lyfe, but lyfe is the cauſe of mouing: Euen ſo the efficient cauſe of our iuſtification is God for the obedience, paſſion and death of Chryſt only. And fayth is the inſtrument wherby wée take hold of Chryſt our ryghtuouſneſſe. Now muſt the loue of God and a mannes neybor of neceſſitie folow Fayth in him that is iuſtified, like as mouing and féeling doo of neceſſitie folow lyfe. But loue can not procéede, but of fayth, like as there can grow no good frutes, but of a good trée.
                  
               
               
                  Of the ſecond. A regiſter of the woorkes of charitie, or of the vertues that flow out of the true loue of God and a mannes neybor, as out of a fountaine.
                  LEt them bée conueyed intoo preceptes agréeing too the ten commaundements, & let them bée ſet out by adding their definitions, and laying the vices too them.
                  
                     Loue is long ſuffering.
                     
                        j Long ſufferance or patience, is a vertue that repreſſethPatience. wrathfulneſſe & deſire of reuenge: And though it haue cauſe too hurt others, yet for Gods ſake & the common peace, it remitteth offences & beareth with him that did the diſpleaſure,

                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
as Ariſtides bare with Themiſtocles, Scipio with the Tribunes, and Dauid with Saule. It perteyneth too the fifth of the tenne commaundements. The vyces that encounter it are deſyre of reuenge, as in Marius and Sylla: alſo crueltie, as in Tyberius & Nero: And ouermuch forbearing or ſilineſſe.
                  
                  
                     Courteous, or Gentle.
                     
                        ij Courteouſneſſe or Gentleneſſe, not only letteth offencesGentleneſſe. ſlip and forgiueth them, but alſo (by all meanes it cā deuiſe, as by counſell, trauell, and ayde) dooth good to others as well fréends as foes. For the Gréeke woord Chreſtos (which commeth of Chraomai, to vſe) dooth properly ſignifie ſuch a one as eaſly and willingly yéeldeth him ſelf to other folk too vſe, as Ariſtides by his counſell and trauell benefiteth the common weale of Athens, which had banniſhed him. It perteyneth to the fifth and ſeuenth commaundements. The vyces that encounter it are diſcourteſie or vngentleneſſe, frowardneſſe or chorliſhneſſe, alſo fond lauiſhneſſe or waſtfulneſſe, and counterfet courteſie or feyned gentleneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Loue enuieth not.
                     
                        iij Freendlyneſſe, modeſtie, or myldneſſe, which acknowledgethFreendlyneſſe, Modeſtie or myldneſſe. and loueth Gods gifts in other men, willing good too the good, and reioycing in their proſperitie. Ageinſt this vertue fyghteth Enuyouſneſſe, which is gréeued that an other man ſhould excell vs or bée preferred afore vs, and longeth too remoue him or take him away, to the intent wée loſe no part of our eſtimation: as Saul enuyed the glorie of Dauid. Pompey enuyed the power of Ceſar. Marius repyneth for ſpyght ageinſt Sylla.
                     
                  
                  
                     Loue dealeth not frowardly, or is not giuen to lewdneſſe or is not malapert and vngraciouſe.
                     
                        iiij Good meening, modeſtie or myldneſſe which lyeth notGood meening in wayte for other folks, like the brothers called Perperanes, who of a ſingular vngraciouſneſſe & lewdneſſe laying wayt for other mennes lyues, were at length taken by Hercules: and he hung them vp at his backe vppon his club. It perteyneth

to the fifth commaundement Thou shalt not kyll.
                     
                  
                  
                     Loue ſwelleth not.
                     
                        v Lowlyneſſe, repreſſing pryde, acknowledging a mānesLowlyneſſe. infirmitie, ſubmitting himſelf vnto others, and employing his gifts to the behoof of others without diſdeyne. It perteyneth to the firſt and .iiij. cōmaundements. The vyces yt beſet it are pride puffed vp with ouer wéening of itſelf, truſting in his own vertue, wiſdom, welth, & other gifts, and deſpyſing othermen. Euery mā may behold an example of pryde in his own hart.
                  
                  
                     Loue is not diſdeynfull, neyther is ſhee vncomly.
                     
                        vj Grauitie, whiche is too doo rightful & neceſſarie thingsGrauitie. conſtantly, & ſo to rule al the outward geſtures & dooings, yt they may agrée with the order of nature, of perſones, and of places. The vyces that encounter it, are lyghtneſſe: & ſkornfulneſſe, which proudly diſdeyning others, doth with vncomlygeſtures expreſſe the pryde or the hatred, or the comtempt, or the ribaudrie of them.
                  
                  
                     Seeketh not her own.
                     
                        vij Iuſt dealing and Equalitie, which eſche weth gréedy encroching,Iuſtdealing, & Equitie. hath not an eye too ones owne cōmoditie, but preferreth the cōmon profit & welfare of other men before his own auayles, like as Paule ſéeketh not his own eaſe or aduauntage, but the ſoulehealth of his héerers.
                  
                  
                     Loue is not prouoked too anger.
                     
                        viij Meekneſſe or Softneſſe, repreſſing wrathfulneſſe &Meekneſſe. deſyre of reuenge, and not ſuffering itſelf to bée put out of patience with reprocheful or reuyling woords. It perteyneth too the fift cōmmaundemēt. The vyces that encounter it are wrathfulneſſe and ſimpleneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Thinketh none euill.
                     
                        ix Freendlyneſſe, not nouriſhing miſtruſtfulneſſe & malice,Freendlyneſſe. nor miſdéeming othermē without a reaſonable proof. As for exāple, Alexander thought none euil of his Phiſiciō 
                        Philip, who was reported to haue gone about too poyſon him.
                     
                        It perteyneth to the fifth and eyght commaundements.
                  
                  
                     Reioyceth not in iniquitie.
                     
                        x Ryghtfulneſſe and mercyfulneſſe, not ioying in theRyghtfulneſſe and mercy. miſfortunes of good men, not delyghtning in diſhoneſtie and wickedneſſe, as the Deuill reioyceth at vnryghtuouſneſſe, & is glad of otherfolks harmes. It perteyneth to the fifth commaundement.
                  
                  
                     But reioyceth in the truthe.
                     
                        xj Ryghtuouſneſſe and truthe, allowing the things thatRightuouſneſſe & truthe. are ryghtfull and true, and diſaſlowing the things that are wrongfull and falſe. It perteyneth too the fifth and eight cō
                        maundements.
                  
                  
                     Beareth with all things.
                     
                        xij Patience, bearing with other mennes infirmities &Patience. blemiſhes: as with their waywardneſſe, much medling, ouerearneſtneſſe in matters, yrefulneſſe, &c, for Gods ſake & cōmon quietneſſe. It perteyneth to the .v. commaundement.
                  
                  
                     Beleeueth all things, that is to wit, which are too bee beleeued.
                     
                        xiij Freendlyneſſe, which is not ſuſpicious, ne conceiuethFreendlyneſſe. any euill opinion without a weightie cauſe, nor beléeueth y• another man lyeth in wayt for him: before he haue aſſured proofe of it. It perteyneth too the fifth and eight commanndements. The vyces that encounter it are ſuſpiciouſneſſe or miſtruſtfulneſſe, and lyght beléef.
                  
                  
                     It hopeth all things, that is too wit, which are too bee hoped.
                     
                        xiiij Hope, of deliuerance or aſſuagement of miſeries accordingHope. too the promiſes of God: or ſoftneſſe, which beareth with certeyn eſcapes of other mē, in hope of amēdment, for like as God beareth with our ſinnes, graūting vs a ſpace of repētance: ſo muſt Princes or priuate men hope wel of the amendement of other men, till aſſured tokens of obſtinate malice appéere.
                  
                  
                     
                     It endureth all things. This is the propertie of patience.
                     Patience.
                     
                        xv Loue neuer fayleth, it will endure for euer, it will continue in the ſaints for euermore, it will neuer ceaſe, as will the gifts of healing, of lerning of tungs, the office of interpreting Scriptures, and of miniſtering the Sacraments.
                     
                        Whither propheſying fayle, the outward miniſterie ofPropheſy. interpreting Scriptures and the foretellings concerning the falling out of things too come, ſhall bée aboliſhed.
                     
                        Tungs ſhall ceaſe, there ſhal bée no ſundry and vnknowenTungs. languages.
                     
                        Or knowledge vanish away. Fayth is in this lyfe aKnowledge. knowledge or a ſerching of things that are not too bée ſéene▪ but in the eternall lyfe, wée ſhall preſently behold the béeing of God and his will, and the natures of Angels, and our own ſoules, &c, of whiche wée haue had an vnperfect knowledge in this lyfe.
                  
               
               
                  The third.
                  
                     FOr wee knowe after a ſorte. He ſhewed thrée differencesDifferences of knowing God betwéene our preſent knowledge of God, and our knowledge that is to come.
                  Firſt, our knowledge of God in this lyfe is mayned or imperfect, dark, mixt with dimneſſe and douting But in the eternal lyfe it ſhal bée perfect, lyghtſome, cléere, voyd of al miſtyneſſe and imperfection.
                  Secondly, Of Lykelyneſſe. In this lyfe wée are like children that begin to prattle and lerne the Abcée of the heauenly wiſdome. But in the lyfe to come wée ſhalbée mengrowen, wée ſhal ſpeake perfectly, and ſhal commence Maſters and Doctors of Diuinitie, in the heauenly vniuerſitie.
                  Thirdly, In this lyfe wée ſée Gods being and wil in a riddle, that is to ſay, wrapped in his woord: through a glaſſe, that is too ſay, by the lyght kyndled in vs by the holy Ghoſt.
                  But then wée ſhal ſée him face to face. That is too ſay, wée ſhal preſently behold God without anymiſt.
                  
                     Then I ſhall knowe euen as I am knowen. That is too ſay, There ſhalbée then in mée a cléere & bryghtſome knowledge of God, euen ſuch as is in God knowing mée.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday called Inuocauit, or the firſt Sunday in Lent.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle .ij. Cor. vj.
                  
                     WEe as helpers exhorte you, that ye receyue not the grace of God in vayne. For he ſayeth: I haue heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of ſaluation haue I ſuccoured thee. Behold, now is that accepted tyme: behold, now is that day of ſaluation. Let vs geue none occaſion of euill, that in our office be found no faute: but in all things let vs behaue our ſelues as the Miniſters of GOD: In much patience, in afflictions, in neceſsities, in anguiſhes, in ſtrypes, in priſonments, in ſtrifes, in labours, in watchings, in faſtings, in pureneſſe, in knowledge, in long ſuffring, in kindneſſe, in the holy Ghoſte, in loue vnfayned, in the woorde of truthe, in the power of God: by the armour of rightuouſnes of the right hand and of the lefte: by honour and dishonour: by euill report and good report: as deceyuers, and yet true: as vnknowen, and yet knowen: as dying, and beholde wee liue: as chaſtened, and not killed: as ſorowyng, and yet alway mery: as poore, and yet make many riche: as hauing nothing, and yet poſſeſsing all things.
                  
                     THis Epiſtle perteyneth too the kynd of caſes that perſuade. The ſtate or ſumme of the Epiſtle is this: I exhort you that you héere not in vayne, the Goſpell wherein Gods frée fauour and euer laſting ſaluation are offered vnto you: but that you embrace it and kéepe it with true fayth, and that yée garniſh it with godlyneſſe and innocencie, and

with examples of all vertues, but ſpecially of patience and conſtancie, all your lyfe long.
                  
               
               
                  The partes of this Epiſtle or the cheef places are foure.
                  FIrſt, a generall exhortation too vs too embrace with earneſt faith the glad tydings of gods grace (the ſūme wherof Paule hath ſet foorth in cléere and lyghtſome woordes in the ende of the foreſayd firſt chapter. This exhortation he amplifyeth by the circumſtance of the tyme, and by the teſtimonie of Eſay. xlix. bycauſe nowe is the tyme of well lyking, and the daye of ſaluation, namely when the Goſpell of Chryſte, or woord of reconcilement is openly preached by the Apoſtles.
                  The ſecond concerneth the duties of the Miniſters ofDuties or poynts of a true preacher. the Goſpell, out of which Paule in this place reckeneth vp foure things. Firſt, they are Gods fellow woorkmen, by whoſe preaching and miniſterie God offereth and imparteth his grace and al his benefites vnto vs, as he ſayd in the ende of the laſt Chapter before: wée come of Ambaſſade for Chryſte, as though God exhorted you by vs. Wée beſéeche yée therfore on Chryſtes behalfe, that you bée reconcyled to God, Secondly, they muſt exhorte by ſound doctrine, and allure and incenſe their héerers to the earneſt embracing and practizing the rightuouſneſſe of fayth and of a good conſcience, according as Paule exhorfeth and beſeecheth the Corynthians in this place. Thirdly, they muſt beware that they eſtraunge not mennes myndes from the Goſpell of grace & from the miniſterie, by giuing them cauſe of offence in their doctrine or conuerſation, as is ſayd héere, Gyuing no cauſe of offence in any thing, leaſt the miniſterie bée miſreported. And fourthly, that they beautifie the doctrine & miniſterie of the goſpel, with examples of al vertues,

and ſpecially of patience vnder the croſſe, and of ſtedyneſſe in their profeſſion: According as Paule ſayeth in this place: ſetting foorth your ſelues in all things as Gods miniſters by patience. And it is a moſt weightie ſaying of Nazianzene: They that teache well & liue amiſſe, ſnatch away that thing with the one hand, which they reache foorth with the other. It is better not too teache at all, than too teache for a faſhion. Thou muſt not pull too thée with the one hand, and thruſt away from thée with the other hand. Thou ſhalt néed too talke the leſſe, if thou doo as thou oughteſt too doo.
               
               
                  The third part of the Epiſtle, is.
                  
                     ABundell or beadroll of the vertues, with which the miniſtersVertues that ought too bee in miniſters. of the Goſpell and all the godly, muſt ſerue God, and beautifie the Goſpell, and mortifie and hold in the fleſh, not only theſe fortie dayes, but alſo all the whole tyme of their lyfe. Paule reckeneth vp in order .x. vertues: the which (too the entent they may the eaſlier bée diſcerned and applied to the preceptes of the ten commaundements agréeable too them,) I will ſet them downe by tale.
                  
                     i Patience, that is too ſay, ſtedfaſtneſſe in daungers &Patience. aduerſities that accompanie the miniſterie of the Goſpell. Of this vertue there bée ſix obiectes or ſix kyndes of miſeries, in which patience is too bée performed, whiche Paule gathereth toogither ſo as they may bée diſcerned.
                     ij Labour or peynfulneſſe, performing continuall diligencePainfulneſſe. and earneſtneſſe in executing faythfully the duties of ones vocation. For honeſt labours are brydles of luſtes. But ydleneſſe bréedeth vyces: and men by dooing nothing, doo lerne too doo euill.
                     iij Watchfulneſſe.
                     iiij Faſting or ſoberneſſe, and meaſure or abſtinence from meate and drink.
                     v Chaſtitie.
                     
                        vj Skilfulneſſe or true knowledge of Gods being & will, diſcloſed in the Lawe and the Goſpell, & wiſdome able too iudge what is too bée earneſtly followed, in what place, & afore whom.
                     vij Long ſufferance.
                     viij Gentleneſſe and Courteſie.
                     ix Zeale of the ſpirit.
                     x Loue vncounterfetted.
                  
                  
                     VNtoo theſe vertues he addeth in the ende the toucheſtoneThe touchſtone of Religion. and rule of religion and chriſten cōuerſation The woord of truthe, whiche wée muſt embrace, hold faſt, & ſpred abrode by firme faith. And all theſe things may bée brought to paſſe and performed of vs, not by our owne power, but by the myght of God, who helpeth thoſe that ſéeke ayd at his hand.
                  
               
               
                  The fourth place.
                  PAule entreateth in this Epiſtle chéefly of Patience, whichWhat patiēce is is too obey God in ſuffering miſeries, plages, ſtrypes, impriſonment, pouertie, reuylings, ſlaunder, puniſhments of body, death and other daungers, which accompanie the godly profeſſion of the Goſpell: and not too bée ſo diſcouraged for theſe euils, that a man ſhould caſt away the Goſpell, but too brydle ſorowe, and too abyde ſtedfaſtly in the acknowledged truthe, and (by grounded fayth and hope) too wayt for deliuerance and euerlaſting lyfe. And this latter part of the Epiſtle is pulliſhed and garniſhed by Paule with ſhyning lyghts of figures, that is to wit, with tenne Antitheſies, andLook for theſe in the table at the end of this Booke. as many Iſcolies, and moreouer with Homoeoptots, and Homaeoteleuts, and Anaphoraze. Alſo a little afore, with a long heaping vp, or gathering toogither and a repetition, wherby one ſelfſame woord is repeted in the beginnings of eyghtéen Cōmaze. This is the bréef diſpoſemēt of this Epiſtle, which being wel weyed there may bée ſet foorth too the héere recerteyne notable places, as ſome Exhortation too fayth, embracing

the frée fauor of God offered in his goſpell, or ſome Doctrine of patience and conſtancie in tribulation and aduerſitie, which accompanie fayth, or ſome other of the vertues out of the regiſter which wée haue reckened vp.
               
               
                  I at this tyme will ſay ſome what of Faſting.
                  FOr too this entent haue our aunceters apoynted this EpiſtleWhy lent was ordeined. in the beginning of Lent, bicauſe in it there is mention made of the faſting, watching, paineſtaking and other afflictions in which the godly ſhew foorth the true and earneſt repentance of a ſorowfull hart, and tame and ſubdue their fleſh. And although the olde primitiue Churche preſcribed no formes or lawes of meats and faſtings: yet would it that during theſe .xl. dayes men ſhould haue more ſtay of themſelues too liue ſoberly, and to forbeare euen their lawful pleaſures, that their mindes myght bée more fit fit▪ and ardent in bending themſelues too the conſideration of Gods wonderful purpoſe concerning the paſſion and death of his ſōne our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, and alſo too true repentance and earneſt Prayer. Afterward alſo ſuche as were defiled with outward offences & excommunicated, were woont this Lent tyme (before they were aſſoyled) too bée chaſtyzed and tryed with certeine ceremonies, whither they repented in good earneſt and amended from their hart or no. A deſcription of theſe Ceremonies of open penance woorth the reading, taken out of the ninetenth Chapiter of the Agathine Counſell, is recited by Gracian in his fiftith diſtinction, in the Chapiter of Lent, & 33. q. 2. c. beginning with theſe woordes. Laborem praeſentium &c. admonere.
                  
                  The Catechumeni alſo (whom it appéereth by the ſtories too haue bin baptyzed, only vppon Eaſter day and Whitſunday, vntoo the tyme of Charles the great) were woont after that they had giuen their names, too bée tryed all the Lent

ſeaſon, and too bée inſtructed and appoſed in the true Doctryne of Chryſte, and too bee as it were purged with the Ceremonies of Faſting and other things, that they might come the more woorthely and reuerently too the Sacrament of Baptim at Eaſter.
                  And they wryte that Teleſphorus was he that firſt enioynedThe firſt author of the Lenton faſt. the fortie dayes Faſt before Eaſter: who was Biſhop of the Romane Church about the hundred and thirtith yéer after Chryſt. But it appéereth plainly by Irenaeus, (who floriſhed about the twoo hundredth yéer after Chryſtes birth) that as yet in thoſe dayes men were vtterly at theyr owne choyce for their Faſtings. This mannes woordes, which are woorthy too bée marked, are recited by Euſebius in the .xxiiij. chapter of his fifth booke. Some are of opinion that the FaſtDiuerſitie in keeping the Lent. ought too bée kept but onely one day, ſome twoo dayes, ſome thrée, ſome mo, and many alſo the whole fortie dayes. And yet all theſe, notwithſtāding that they diſagrée among them ſelues in keeping the faſt, haue alwayes bin and are at peace with vs, and the diſagréeableneſſe of the Faſt hathe not broken the agréement of the Church. A like place is too bée found in the Tripartite ſtorie, in the .xxxviij. chapter of the nynthe Booke. But in proceſſe of tyme cuſtome tooke ſuch ſtrength, that this Faſt was thought too bée vtterly of neceſſitie, and that it could not bée broken without deadly ſinne. And thereAuſtin a mainteyner of the Lenton faſt. is mention made euery where of it in Auſtin, who pleaſantly playeth the Philoſopher euen about the number of the fortie dayes employed vntoo Faſting by Moyſes, Helias, and Chryſt, in his ſecond boke of the conſent of the Euangeliſtes the fourth chapter, and in his hundred and nyneteenthe Epiſtle too Ianuarie, and in his Sermons of the tyme. In the Gréeke Churche the Wedenſdayes and Frydayes were appointed too bée Faſted as it appéereth by Epiphanius and others.
                  Among the Romanes, Biſhop Innocent (who ruled about the yéer of Chryſt. 420) is reported too bée he y• commaunded

firſt the Saturdayes faſt, when as before him, Calixtus (whoSaturdays and Emberdayes. was Biſhop the. 220. yéer of Chryſt) had ordeyned the ember dayes in the foure ſeaſons of the yéere.
                  But too the intent the ſumme of the true méening of FaſtingsDiuerſitie of allegoricall faſtes. may bée diſcuſſed, wée will firſt diſtinguiſh the ſeueral kindes of it. For our diſputation is not concerning the faſt that is of neceſſitie as ſome terme it: nor of the Allegoricall faſt, which is too abſteine from all offēces and ſinnes, (wherof mention is made in Eſay. lviij. and oftentymes is ſpoken among the Fathers as Baſill ſayeth: The true Faſt is the ſhunning of wickedneſſe, the brydeling of the tung, the reſtreyning of anger, the baniſhing of concupiſcences, (as falſ backbyting, lying, & ſwearing.) The cleane riddāce of which things is the true faſt: nor of the continuall faſt or ſobrietie and ſtayedneſſe in the meaſurable vſe of meate and drinke too bée performed all the tyme of a mannes lyfe, (of which Hierom ſayeth: Let thy faſtings bée pure, continual and moderate, and a repaſte ſhunning fulneſſe: For it auayleth thée nothing too cary thy bellie emptie twoo or thrée dayes toogither, if afterwarde thou ſtuffe it as full as it can holde:) nor of all kynde of abſtinence from the outwarde commodities of the bodye, and from all affliction and outward geſture or countenance of mourning which procéedeth from the ſorowe of a broken hart, and of one that in very déede and earneſtly repenteth, Of which is ſpoken in Ioel. ij. Turne vntoo mée with all your hart in faſting and wéeping, and wayling, and rend your harts & not your garments: & which in diuers places elſewhere of the Prophetes, ſignifyeth true and earneſt ſorineſſe of hart or repentāce ſhewed by outward mourning. As in Dan. ix. x. Leu. xxiij. Ioh. iij. With which ſignification agreeth the originall of the Hebrue woord: for ye woord Ianah wherof they fetch their faſting, ſignifieth too afflict or puniſh.
                  But properly in this diſputacion wée entreate and argue of the dayes faſt (if I may ſo terme it) namely when as it falleth out y• men abſtein frō al meat & drink ſomtimes one day

or mo, or a whole day (that is too wit. 24. houres,) or but till the euentide. This manner of Faſting was vſed euen in the new Teſtament, how bée it in ſuch wyſe, that neither the day nor any certeine meates from which a man ſhould abſteine, were appoynted, but the whole thing was left frée too euery good mānes conſcience, and the opportunitie of the time. But afterward came in ſuperſtitious and tyrannicall lawes concerning certeine meates and dayes, and vngodly opinions, which it behoueth too bée reproued by the woord of GOD. There are therefore twoo diſtinct queſtions concerning faſting. One of the difference and choyce of meates and dayes: and the other of the abſtinence of meates, or of other for bearing. For the Papiſtes doo not only commaund men too vſe aPapiſticall faſt reproued. more ſpare dyet, or vtterly too abſteine all the whole Lent tyme, and euery wéeke vppon Fridayes and Saturdayes, too the entent the mind may bée more meete too thinke vpon heauenly things: but alſo forbid the eating of certeine meates, as of fleſh, butter, chéeſe, egges. &c. And bear men in hand that it is deadly ſinne if any man in the tyme of faſting doo eate fleſh, imagining this forbearing of certeine meates too bée Gods ſeruice, and a woorke of neceſſitie, euen though it tend too the offence of others. Alſo they taught in tymes paſt that ſinnes were purged by faſting, or at leaſt wyſe that the merit of Chryſtes Paſſion is applyed too vs for them. It was hygh tyme that theſe vngodly and Idolatrous opiniōs woorking reproche too the merit of Chryſte, ſhould bée found fault with. For all men doo ryght well know the texts of the Goſpell,The iudgemēt of gods woord concerning faſt. which expreſſely forbid men too obſerue differences and choyce of meates in the Churche, with opinion of Gods ſeruice or of neceſſitie. Coloſſ. ij. Let no man iudge you in meat and drinke. Alſo, if you bée dead in Chriſt from the elements of this world, that is too ſay, from the worldly ordinaunces, why (as though yée liued too the world) are yée led with the traditions (of them that ſay,) touche not, taſte not, handle not. &c. Alſo .j. Timothie .iiij. Paule termeth it the Doctrine

of Diuels, which commaundeth men too abſteine from the meates that God hath created too bée receyued with thankes giuing. Mathew .xv. Not that which entreth in at the mouth defyleth a man, but that which procéedeth out of the mouth. Romaines xiiij. The kingdome of god is not meate and drinke, but true godlyneſſe, ryghtuouſneſſe, peace, and ioy .j. Corinthians .viij. Meate commendeth vs not vntoo God: For neyther are wée the godlyer if we eate, nor the vngodlyer if wee eate not. And it appéereth not by the whole Doctrine of the Goſpell, that eyther by Faſting our ſinnes are purged, or remiſſion of ſinnes obteyned, or the merits of Chryſte applyed too vs: but cleane contrarywyſe it teacheth that the ſacrifice & death of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt the ſonne of God only purgeth and taketh away ſinne: And that this benefite is applyed too vs by fayth alone without any woorks of the lawe, and much leſſe by woorkes of mennes ſetting vp without Gods woord and ageinſt Gods woord.
                  Concerning the other queſtion, that is too wit, abſtinenceHow too obſerue the outward faſt aryght. from foode, forpyning a mannes ſelfe, and ſuch like exercyſes of diſciplyne, wée alſo teache that it is frée for euery godly man too chooſe ſuch exercyſes of temperance agréeable to his yéeres and power, too this end, that his mynd being ſober, may bée more fit and bent too thinke vppon God, too call daily vppon him, too ſtudie, and too go through with all the affaires of his vocation more rightly. But a man muſt not ſurmyſe theſe exerciſes too bée of themſelues the ſeruice of God, neyther are ſuperſtitious lawes too bée made too bynde men too certeine dayes. The true and moſt weighty cauſes for which theſe exercyſes of ſoberneſſe are too bée taken in hand and practyzed, may bée fetched out of my expoſition of the .vj. commaundement in my Rules of lyfe, and applyed too this place.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday called Reminiſcere, or the ſecond Sunday in Lent.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. 
                        •
                     . Theſſ. iiij.
                  
                     VVE beeſeeche you brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Ieſus, that yee encreaſe more and more, euen as yee haue receyued of vs, howe ye ought too walke, and too pleaſe God. For ye know what commaundementes wee gaue you by our Lord Ieſus Chryſte. For this is the wyll of God, euen your holyneſſe: that yee should abſteine from fornication, and that euery one of you shuld know how too keepe his veſſell in holyneſſe and honoure, and not in the luſt of concupiſcence, as doo the Heathen which knowe not God: that no man oppreſſe and defraud his brother in bargaining, bicauſe that the Lord is the auenger of all ſuche things, as wee tolde you beefore, and teſtified. For God hath not called vs vntoo vnclenneſſe, but vntoo holyneſſe. He therefore that deſpiſeth, deſpiſeth not man, but God which hath ſent his holy ſpirit among you.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  IT pertayneth too that kynd which is perſwaſiue. For it is an exhortation too new obedience or too good woorkes.
                  
                     The cheefe places are three.
                     1 A generall precept that wée ſhould directe our intents and dooings according too the rule of the doctrine receiued of the falſe Apoſtles, yea and too abound (that is too ſay) too profit in true godlyneſſe, and too endeuer too ſurmount ourſelues, or too bée euery day better than other.
                     2 Of chaſtitie.
                     3 Of vpright dealing which kéepeth an euen hande in all bargaines.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of the firſt.
                  IExhort you by our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, y• yée encreaſe more and more euen as yee haue receyued of vs, how yee ought too wakle and too pleaſe God.
                  The rule of faith and Chriſten lyfe is the doctrine deliueredScripture the rule of chriſtianitie. by Chryſt and his Apoſtles, which only God wil haue vs folowe bothe in the true knowledge of his beeing and will, and in the ordering of our behauyour and lyfe. He will not haue vs too wander and folowe our owne opinions, as the Heathen men, which deuyſed ſundry Gods and ſundry woorſhippings: neyther will he haue our deuyſes and dooings too bée gouerned by oure owne policie, as the Heathen mennes were, who in whoredome and other luſtes, in deceytfulneſſe of bargayning, in ydleneſſe, and in medling with many matters, gaue themſelues ſcope too runne at randon without cō
                     trolment.
                  Therfore Paule by expreſſe woordes in this place ſayeth:Chriſtians muſt proceede continually & not ſtay. wée exhort you that according as yée haue receiued of vs: ſo yée walke as yée ought too walke, and encreace more and more: As if he ſhould ſay, let the Doctrine which yée haue receiued of vs Apoſtles, and not mennes Traditions or wil woorſhippings bée the vnmoueable rule and kéeplyne of the true knowledge and ſeruice of God: as is ſayd in Ezechiel the .xx. Chapter. Walke not in the commaundementes of your fathers. I am the Lord God. Walke in my commaundements, and kéepe my iudgements and doo them. Alſo, looke what I commaund thée, that only doo thou vntoo the Lord. Neyther ad nor diminiſh any thing.
                  And Paul commaundeth vs not only too walke, that is too ſay, too liue or too frame all the deuyſes & dooings of our lyfe, according too the doctrine of the Apoſtles: but alſo too profit more and more, and too ſurmount and ouercome our ſelues in true godlyneſſe, which is in déede a victorie of all others moſt goodly and moſt beſéeming a man: according as is ſayd.

                     Too ouercome a mannes ſelfe, is of al victories the cheefe and the beſt. For a chriſten man can neuer long continue & abide in one ſelfe ſame ſtate of godlyneſſe. But eyther fayth, inuocation, hope and the reſt of vertues encreaſe and augment in him: or elſ by ſlaking of their earneſtneſſe, they become more faint, and by little and little wex cold: ſpecially in proſperitie when the hart is open and not for cloſed with any ſorow, thē ye diuell créepeth in and caſteth occaſiōs of falling from without, too the entēt he may ſhake of fayth, as he ouerthrew Dauid. Wherefore let euery of vs with ſingular care, earneſtneſſe, héede, and diligence endeuer to profit: let vs with harty requeſt pray dayly vntoo God, to rule vs with his holy ſpirit: let vs ſhun the dangers and occaſions of back ſlydings: let vs flée leud company: let vs loue ſtayedneſſe: let vs take vppon vs certein & profitable labors & exerciſes of godly diſcipline: and let vs beare in mynd this ſaying: In the way of ye Lord, not too go foreward is too go backeward.
               
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     THis is the wil of God, euen your holyneſſe, that yee should abſteyne from fornication.
                  
                  Among the teſtimonies that are the markes of the trueChaſtitie a mark of Gods church, church of God, and that put a difference betwéene it and Heatheniſh and vngodly routes, a notable and manifeſt ſigne is the true doctrine concerning chaſtitie and the vndefiled bond of wedlocke, which is reteyned only in the church of God. All nations elſe haue openly ſet looce not only whoredom or fornication, but all other more horrible and vnſpeakable luſts. In Aſia and Affrike euen at this day the ſect of Mahomet practyſeth inceſtuous confuſions without puniſhment. In Europe the Popiſhe faction vnder the falſe pretence of Religion, hathe forbidden a great number of men too marrye, whereas Paule notwithſtanding hath ſayde before in expreſſe woordes, that it is the Doctrine of Diuels too forbid mariage.
                  
                     Foraſmuch then as in our Churches the lawes of Chaſtitie and wedlocke are by the benefite of God reteyned and maynteyned truely and ſoundly, wée may aſſure our ſelues euen by this ſigne, that wée may the more certeinly warrant our ſelues to bée the Citizens of the true Churche of God.
                  The cauſe alſo why Paule in this place vrgeth ſo ſore this commaundement concerning Chaſtitie and eſchewing the luſtes and vices encountering it, is for that at Theſſalonica (like as at Epheſus and Corinth and other Heathen cities and famous mart townes to which great multitudes of men were woont to flocke togither from all Nations) there was chéefly great confuſion of luſtes, and vnbrydled libertie of all vyces which ryotouſneſſe and welth bréedeth. Paule therfore both in this place and .j. Cor. vj. & Epheſ. v. teacheth, that wandering luſtes are not things indifferent, neyther that there is any libertie graunted in the Goſpell, eyther of luſtfull likings, or of craftyneſſe in bargeyning: but that they are prohibited moſt ſtraightly by the commaundemēt of God, and are moſt ſharply puniſhed by God the iuſt iudge and reuenger. For this is the euerlaſting & vnchaungeable will of God, ſayeth Paule: euen your holyneſſe, which is in the true acknowledgemēt of God, that yée ſhould kéepe your ſelues cleane both in body and ſoule according to Gods wil, and abſteyne from al fornication and all concupiſcences forbidden by god: and whither it bée in ſingle lyfe or in the lawfull bond of wedlocke, euery man to poſſeſſe his veſſell (that is too ſay his bodye (which is the dwelling place of the chaſte and holy ſpirit of God,) in holyneſſe and honour, that is, too maynteyne it chaſte and holye, and not to defyle it with luſtes of concupiſcence, as the Heathen haue giuen themſelues leaue without controllement. In this place is to bée repeted the whole doctrine concerning chaſtitie & wedlocke, and in eſpecially ye eyght cauſes for which al the godly muſt with ſingular héede and diligence defend the honour of chaſt

ſhamefaſtneſſe. Which cauſes are recited in the declaration of the vertues of the ſixth commaundement in my rules ofTertullians ſaying lyfe. Now will I adde but only one ſaying of Tertulliā
                      moſt woorthye to bée borne away. Inaſmuch as wée all are the temple of God, by putting into vs the holy Ghoſte, who haloweth vs: the Churchwarden and chéef Chaplein of that temple is chaſtitie, which may ſuffer no vncleane or vnholy thing too bée brought in thither, leaſt GOD who dwelleth there, taking diſpleaſure too ſée his abode defyled, ſhould vtterly forſake it.
               
               
                  The third part concerning interchaungeable ryghtfulneſſe, which ſhunneth deceyt in bargayning.
                  
                     THis is the will of God, that no man deceyue and beguyleBuying and ſelling. his brother in chapmanship, bycauſe the Lord is the punisher of all ſuch things.
                  
                  The propoſition or ground is, Let no man deceyue his brother in bargeyning, or bée yée iuſt in your bargaynings.
               
               
                  The reaſons are twoo.
                  THe firſt reaſon is for that it is honeſt. This is the will ofHoneſt.
                  
                  God, that no man miſuſe or deceyue his brother.
                  The ſecond is for that it is profitable. Bycauſe God is theProfitable. puniſher of all ſuch things. Althoughe the ſent of lukre by any meanes, ſéeme ſwéete for a whyle, and that they think it hygh pollicie that their craftineſſe is not eſpyed: yet will god fynd out the offender: yet hath God a reuenging eye: God the reuenger ſéeth all things. And experience proueth the méening of Heſiodus verſe too bée true: By euill meanes ſeek
                     Good counſell. 
                     not too gain, ſuch gain as rendreth loſſe and pain. God hath by wonderfull forecaſt ordeyned and eſtabliſhed lawfull bargayning among men: and he hath ſo diuerſly diſtributed

among them the goods that perteyne too the mayntenanceBargaining & merchandyſe appoynted by God for ſingular good purpoſes. of this mortall lyfe, that eche hath néede of others help, too the intent, that in exchaunging of things, and in bargeyning they ſhould put in vre ryghtfulneſſe, loue towardes their neyghbour, and other vertues: and that many being knit & bound togither with theſe bondes, ſhould liue in companie and conuerſation toogither, and ſhewe the doctrine concerning God one too another and the examples of vertues one to another. Therfore God alloweth lawfull bargenings, & will haue indifferencie and vpryghtneſſe kept and vſed in them. And in this place by expreſſe woords he forbiddeth defrauding, which keepeth not equalitie in bargeynes, but catcheth too himſelf a greater part than he ought of ryght too haue. For the woord that Paule vſeth, ſignifyeth the ſame thing that it dooth in the fifth booke of Ariſtotles Ethicks, that is too wit, Pleonectein of pleon echein, whiche is as much too ſay, as too haue more thā ryght, or too take of another mānes goods without recompenſing as much for it, or too encreaſe a mannes owne ſtock too another mannes loſſe. The vertue that encounters it is interchaungeable vpryghtneſſe which in marchandyze or bargening beguyleth not other men, but maynteyneth proportionable indifferencie according too the Lawes of Nature. Thou ſhalt not ſteale. Loue thy neyghbour as thy ſelfe. Doo not too another which thou wouldeſt not haue doone too thyſelf.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday called Oculi, or the third Sunday in Lent.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. Epheſ. v.
                  
                     BEe you the followers of God as deere chyldren, and walke in loue euen as Chryſte loued vs, and gaue himſelf for vs an offeryng and a ſacrifice of a ſweet ſauour too GOD. As for fornication, and all vnclenneſſe,

or couetouſneſſe, let it not bee once mamed among you, as it becommeth Sainctes: or fylthyneſſe, or fooliſh talkyng, or ieſting, which are not comely, but rather giuyng of thankes. For this yee know, that no whoremonger, eyther vncleane perſone, or couetous perſone (which is a worſhipper of ymages) hath any inheritaunce in the kyngdome of Chryſte and of God. Let no man deceyue you with vayne wordes: For bycauſe of ſuch thyngs, cōmeth the wrath of God vppon the chyldren of diſobedience. Be not yee therfore companions of them. Yee were ſometymes darkneſſe, but nowe are yee lyght in the Lord: walke as chyldren of lyght, for the fruite of the ſpirite conſiſteth in all goodneſſe, and ryghtuouſneſſe, and truthe. Accept that whiche is pleaſing vntoo the Lorde, and haue no fellowſhip with the vnfruiteful workes of darkneſſe, but rather rebuke them. For it is a ſhame euen too name thoſe things, which are done of them in ſecrete: but all things when they are brought foorth by the lyght, are manifeſt▪ For whatſoeuer is manifeſt, the ſame is light, wherfore he ſayeth: awake thou that ſleepeſt, and ſtand vp from death, and Chryſte shall gyue thee lyght.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THe ſtate of this Epiſtle, is an Exhortation too newe obedience or too good woorkes, & by name it giueth preceptes of theſe thrée vertues.
                  
                     1 Of the loue of God and a mannes neyghbour.
                     2 Of chaſtitie which ſhunneth whordome, filthyneſſe and all vnclenneſſe.
                     3 Of frankhartedneſſe or liberalitie eſche wing couetouſneſſe which is the ſeruice of Idols.
                  
                  And in this exhortation▪ Paule vſeth ſix Argumentes of which the firſt is gathered.
                  
                     1 Of the example of God.
                     2 Of the dutie of children.
                     
                        3 Of the exāple of Chryſte, who hath loued vs in ſuch wyſe that he hath giuen himſelfe too bée an offring and ſacrifice for vs.
                     4 Of the comlyneſſe as it beſéemeth the Saints.
                     5 Of ye puniſhements of wickedneſſe. For theſe things commeth the wrath of God vppon all that bée diſobedient.
                     6 Of the finall cauſe. Therefore are yée deliuered out of the darkneſſe of ſinne, and endued with a newe lyght and with the holy Ghoſt, that yée ſhould exerciſe gentleneſſe, vpryghtneſſe, and truthe.
                  
                  This diſpoſement of the principall members of this Epiſtle being conſidered, there may a twoo or thrée of the notabler places bée the eaſlyer picked out and entreated of.
               
               
                  An exhortation too newneſſe of lyfe, or too good woorkes in generall.
                  MAny when they héere that a man deſerueth not forgyueneſſe of ſinnes by his good woorkes, what néede wéeConfutation of Meritmōgers. (ſay they) to employ any ſtudie or care to doo well? Therefore let vs giue our ſelues ouer to all entycements of pleaſure and ſinne. The wicked and horrible talke of theſe men is playnly confuted by Paule in this Epiſtle. Wée are not able by our vertues to deſerue forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and eternall lyfe, but the only ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſte hathe obteyned theſe moſte hygh benefites for vs by his obedience and death. Neuertheleſſe, there are other foure ryght weightye cauſes, for whiche wée ought too ſtryue ageynſt the entycementes of ſinne, and to exercyſe ryghtuouſneſſe, truthe, liberalitie, chaſtitie and other vertues.
                  Firſt neceſſitie of the commaundement and the det. For

this purpoſe were men created by God, and afterward redeemedNeceſsitie of cōmaundemēt. by the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that they ſhould obey God and ſet foorth his glorie by liuing vertuouſly. Ephe. ij. Wée are his woorke, created to doo good woorkes. And an eyghtdayes ago, wee haue herd: this is y• wil of God, euen that you ſhould bée holy. Iohn .v. This is my cōmaundement that you loue one another. And in this Epiſtle: Bée yée the folowers of God, walke in louingneſſe, as the ſonnes of lyght walke yée. Therfore are yee deliuered from the darkneſſe of not knowing God, and from the darkneſſe of ſinne, and by the Goſpell lyghtened with the lyght of knowyng God aryght, and endued with the holy Ghoſte, that yee ſhould liue in new knowledge of God, in rightuouſneſſe, in pureneſſe, in dooing of good turnes, in truthe, and in all other vertues agréeing with the wil of God. Nither may al precepts concerning good woorks bee referred.
                  Secondly, neceſſitie of eſchewing peynes preſent & eternall,Neceſsitie of eſchewing paynes. which vnchaungeably accompanye ſuch as are defiled with ſinnes ageinſt conſcience: as in this Epiſtle there bée moſte gréeuous threates: Knowe ye this, that no whoremonger and vncleane perſone, or couetous perſone whiche is an Idolater, haue inheritaūce in the kingdome of Chriſt and of God. Let no man deceyue yée with vayne talke (that is too wit, that ſimple fornication, couetouſneſſe, and vſurie are no ſinnes) for theſe things commeth Gods wrath (that is too ſay, horrible plages) vppon the diſobedient. The horribleneſſe of this threatning may bée amplified by expounding the weightyneſſe of the woords, and putting too of like ſayings and examples gathered out of the Hiſtorie of the whole world.
                  Thirdly, the neceſſitie of holding faſt fayth, Gods grace,Neceſsitie of Gods graces and gifts. the holy Ghoſte, and euerlaſting lyfe. For all theſe good things are ſhaken of by euill woorkes or ſimes ageinſt conſcience.
                  Fourthly, the rewardes of good woorkes promiſed byRewardes:
                     
God .j. Tim. iiij. Godlyneſſe hath promiſes of the preſent lyfe and of the lyfe too come. For although remiſſion of ſinnes & eternall lyfe bée giuen fréely for Chryſts ſake onely: yet are good woorkes recompénſed with other moſt bountefull rewardes as well ghoſtly as bodyly, both in this lyfe and in the euerlaſting lyfe.
                  And Paule giueth commaundement by name concerning loue of our neyghboure, which repreſſing bitterneſſe, yrefulneſſe, backbyting, and all malice, honoreth wel dooing, mercye, and frankhartedneſſe towardes others. For the beginning of the fifth Chapter too the Epheſians hangeth too this part of the fourth chapter. Therfore all the whole ſumme of the doctrine concerning the loue towards a mannes neyghbour, &c, may bée conueyed hither out of the expoſition of the firſt, fifth and ſeuenth commaundements.
                  Concerning Chaſtitie whiche eſcheweth whordome, vnclenneſſe,Chaſtitie. and filthyneſſe, matter too entreate off may bée taken out of the methodicall expoſition of Chaſtitie whiche I haue regiſtred in the ſixth commaundement.
                  Concerning Couetouſneſſe which fyghteth with the firſtCouetouſneſſe. and .vij. commaundements, let doctrine bée ſought out of the declaration of the vertues of the .vij. commaundement.
                  Concerning the ſacrifice of Chryſt who offered him ſelfe for vs too the father an oblation and ſacrifyce of ſwéete ſent, wée will ſpeake about a fortnight hence, vppon the Sunday called Iudica. Now will I bréefly expound the text.
                  
                     Bee yee folowers of God therefore, that is too ſay, in loue &Followers of God. benefiting .j. Iohn. iiij. Héerin is Loue, not that wée haue loued God, but that he hath loued vs, and hath ſent his ſonne, too bée a reconcylement for our ſinnes. Déerbeloued, if God haue loued vs ſo, wée alſo muſt loue one another. GOD is loue, and he that dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in God, and God in him.
                  
                     Walke in loue, toward God and your neyghbour. TooToo walke. walke is too liue, or to rule the will and outward dooings in

ſuche wyſe, that wée may loue our neybor and doo him good.
                  
                     And gaue himſelfe for vs. That is alſo a witneſſe of Chriſtes feruent loue towards vs, which is ſet out. Rom. v.
                  
                     An offering and ſacrifyce. The ſacrifyſe intoo which wasSacrifyſe. conueyed Gods wrath ageinſt our ſinnes, whom it béehoued too bée ſlayne and put too death, too the entent wée myght bée ſpared.
                  
                     For a ſent of ſweete ſmell. For a ſwéete ſauor and acceptable.Sweete ſmell. It is a phraſe taken out of Moyſes. Leuit. j. The Préeſt ſhall burne it vppon the Altare for a burnt Offering and a ſwéete ſmell vntoo the Lord. Geneſ. viij. The Lord ſmelled a ſwéete ſmell. God is woonderfully delyghted in the obedyence of his ſonne the ſacrifyſe. And he ſheweth that for his ſake our prayers alſo and our thanks giuing and our almefdéedes are acceptable and ſwéete vntoo him, in like wyſe as wée are delyghted with the freſh ſent of a Vyolet or a Roſe. And all the ſacrifyſes and good woorkes of the godly muſt bée ſmelles, that is too ſay a farre ſpred and wel ſented fame concerning God.
                  
                     As it becommeth Sainctes. The ſaincts are clean. Whorehunting,Sainctes. filthyneſſe, ribaudry. &c. are vncleane, Ergo they become not Sainctes.
                  
                     A couetous man whoo is an Idolater. He is an IdolaterWhoo is an Idolater. eyther which ſurmyſeth that too bée a GOD, which is not God: or which yéeldeth to ſome other thing that is not God, the honor peculyarly due vntoo God, as fayth, feare, and loue aboue all things. So is a couetous perſone an Idolater, bycauſe he beſtoweth his loue aboue all things, and his truſt (which are due only too God) vppon his mony, and ſetteth more by it than by God.
                  
                     Ye wer ſometime darkneſſe, that is too ſay, without knowledgeDarkneſſe. of God, & nouzeling your ſelues in all ſinnes: yée were without true acknowledgement of God, without true ryghtuouſneſſe, and without lyfe.
                  
                     
                     But now you are lyght in the Lord. Now yée are lightened with true knowledge of God: yée know what woorks pleaſe God, and what woorkes diſpleaſe him: yée are borne ageine by the holy Ghoſte.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday called Laetare, or the fourth Sunday in Lent.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Galath. iiij.
                  
                     FOr it is wryten that Abraham had two ſonnes: the one by a bondmaide, the other by a freewoman. Yea, and he which was borne of the bondwoman, was borne after the flesh: but he which was borne of the freewoman, was borne by promys: which things are ſpoken by an allegorie: For theſe are twoo Teſtamentes, the one from the mount Sinai vvhich gendreth vntoo bondage, vvhich is Agar: For mount Sinai is Agar in Arabia, and bordreth vppon the Citie vvhich is novv called Ieruſalem, and is in bondage vvith hir children. But Ieruſalem vvhich is aboue, is free, vvhich is the moother of vs all. For it is vvrytten: Reioyce thou barren that beareſt no chyldren: breake foorthe and crye, thou that traueyleſt not: For the deſolate hath many mo children than shee vvhich hath an huſbande. Brethren, vvee are after Iſaac the children of promys. But as then he that vvas borne after the flesh, perſecuted him that vvas born after the ſpirite: Euen ſo is it nowe. Neue
                        •
                     theleſſe, vvhat ſayth the ſcripture? put avvay the bondvvoman and hir ſonne. For the ſonne of the bondvvoman shall not bee heire vvith the ſonne of the freewoman: So then brethren, vvee are not children of the bond vvoman, but of the free woman.
               
               
                  
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of that kynd that inſtructeth. For it is a Doctrine concerning the difference of the old Teſtament and the new, ſet foorthe with a ſimilitnde of Abrahams twoo wiues and their children, taken out of the .xvj. and .xxj. of Geneſis. And therewithall are mingled places concerning the church, or the difference betwéene the true church and the hipocritall church, and concerning chriſten libertie.
               
               
                  The firſt place concerning the difference of the old Teſtament and the new.
                  A Teſtament in generall is a promis whereby one that isA Teſtament or laſt will. towardes death leaueth his will vntoo others vnder witneſſe, and bequetheth his goodes too his heires, and declareth what he will haue performed on the behalfe of the heires.
                  Paule in the nynth too the Hebrewes ſayeth: Chryſte is the mediator of the new Teſtament, that through his death which befell for the redemption of thoſe tranſgreſſions that were vnder the firſt Teſtament, they which were called myght receyue the promis of euerlaſting lyfe. For whereſoeuer is a Teſtament, there alſo muſt néedes bée the death of him that makes the Teſtament: for the Teſtament is not of authoritie and force till the Teſtator bée dead.
                  Chriſt therfore when he was redy too die for vs, made his Teſtament, in which he witneſſeth this too bée the will of him and of his eternall father: that all which repent and flée too him by Fayth, ſhould obteyne forgeueneſſe of ſinnes and endleſſe ſaluation, for his bodyes ſake which was deliuered for vs, and for his bluds ſake which was ſhed for vs: and theſe his goods dooth he diſtribute too vs by his woord and Sacramentes.
                  
                     The new Teſtament, Then (too define it moſt proprely) is nothing els but the goſpel, y• is too ſay, A promis of remiſsion
                     
                     of ſinnes, of the holy ghoſt, and of life and ſoulehealth euerlaſting,
                     A definition of the new Teſtament. 
                     too bee giuen freely too thoſe that beleeue, for Chryſtes ſake who dyed and roſe agein for vs. This definition is builded vppon the woords of our Lords ſupper, and vpon the .viij. and .ix. chapters too the Hebrues, and vppon the .iij. and .iiij. chapters too the Galathiās. The mediator of this new teſtament is Chryſte, bycauſe he hath vttered too men the promis of forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and by his owne bludſhed & death, fully diſcharged the raunſome or pryce ſufficient for ye ſinnes of men, which could not bée purged by our owne woorks and ſacrifiſes, and hath performed ſuch an obedience as is the very deſert for which remiſſion of ſinnes, the holy Ghoſt, new ryghtuouſneſſe, & eternall lyfe are beſtowed vpon vs. Theſe benefits applieth he vntoo vs by his interceſſion, and the outward meanes of his woord and ſacraments.
                  
                     The olde Teſtament is properly a publishing of the lawe,A definition of the old Teſtament. or a couenant whereby God bounde the people of Iſraell too keep the law deliuered by Moſes, & on the otherſide promiſed them the lād of Canaan, & a certein cōmon weale & defence, and all good things, and added ceremonies and ſacrifyſes, too bee figures of the perſone and benefites of Chryſte, for whoſe ſake only, the beleeuers are at all tymes receiued into the leage of eternall ſaluation. For there is but one ſelfſame principal and euerlaſting Teſtament or couenant of God, by which al the Patriarks, Prophets, Apoſtles, and the reſt of the choſen at all tymes are receyued, that is too wit, The promis of Gods fauor or of forgiueneſſe of ſinnes too bée giuen fréely for Chriſtes ſake. Act. xv. Rom. iiij. By theſe definitions it appéerethThe difference betweene the old▪ Teſtamēt and the new. that the difference betwéene the old Teſtament & the new is in maner the ſame that is betwéene the law and the goſpell. In another place wée haue recited .vj. differences of the law and the goſpel, among which the chéef are theſe two. The firſt is in the maner of the promiſſes.
                  The lawe or the old Teſtament promiſeth good things, but vntoo ſuch only as kéepe the lawe vncorruptly.
                  
                     But the Goſpel or the new Teſtament promiſeth remiſſion of ſinnes and euerlaſting lyfe fréely for Chryſt.
                  The ſecond is of the effects. The law or old Teſtament deliuereth no man from ſinne and death, ne giueth inheritance of eternall lyfe, but denounceth vs the bondſlaues of ſinne and death, accuſing and encreaſing our ſinne, & caſting vs intoo endleſſe damnation.
                  But the Goſpell or promiſſe of the new Teſtament, deliuereth the children of the promiſſe from ſinne and death, and maketh them heires of euerlaſting lyfe and of all heauenly good things. This difference of the old Teſtament & the new, or of the lawe and the Goſpell, or of the people of the lawe and the people of grace, is chéefly ſet out by Paule in this Epiſtle and garniſhed with the Allegorie of Abrahams two wiues and their children, which Allegorie is brought in this place not too confirme, but too beautifie and garniſh the matter: For like as Abraham had twoo wyues, Agar a bondwoman,Agar, Sara, Iſmael, and Iſaa
                           •
                        
                      and Sara a fréewoman, by whom he had twoo ſonnes, Iſmael bond, and Iſaac his heire: Euen ſo God deliuering too men twoo kindes of doctrine the lawe and the goſpell, or the olde and the new Teſtament, hath twoo peoples among mankynd, of which the one embracing only the lawe ſéeketh ryghtuouſneſſe and eternall ſaluation by obſeruing the law deliuered by God in mount Sinai, and proudly deſpiſeth the glad tydings of Gods frée fau
                        •
                     r and of faith, like as the moſt part of mankind, and ſpecially the 
                        •
                     ewes & other hipocrites which know none other ryghtuouſneſſe than the ryghtuouſneſſe of the law, ye image of which people is Iſmael born as touching ye fleſh without Gods promis, of ye handmaid Agar (by which name the Arabians are wont too cal moūt Sinai) Gen. xvj. who imagineth that the true children of Abraham or heirs of God, are made or begotten, by the fleſhly regeneration and by the lawe, or by deſertes and woorkes of men.
                  This people béeing begotten too bondage vppon Agar, or by Gods law publiſhed vppon Mount Sinai, extendeth euen

too the ſame Citie which is now called Hieruſalem, or too the ſinagog of the Iewiſh people, which although it vaunt it ſelf ſtoutly too bée the true Churche and people of God, deſcended from Abraham, hauing the lawe and Ceremonies deliuered them by God: yet is it in bondage with the children therof: that is too ſay, is not by the lawe deliuered from ſinne and death, nor made heire of ryghtuouſneſſe and eternall ſaluation, but continueth oppreſſed with the thraldome of ſinne and death, and is caſt out of the heauenly houſe or Church intoo endleſſe damnation.
                  Now if the very lawe of God deliuered by God himſelfeA very good argument. vppon mount Sinai, begetteth none but bondmen, ne deliuereth any man from death and ſinne: muche leſſe can the woorkes of mennes traditions procure ryghtuouſneſſe and inheritance of eternall lyfe.
                  The other people or ſonne of God by Sara the frée womā borne ageine of the frée promis of the goſpell, truſteth too no woorks or merits of his owne, nor too any prerogatiue of the fleſh: But reſteth by fayth vppon the only and frée mercy of God promiſed for Chryſtes ſake, accounting his owne ryghtuouſneſſe which is of the lawe, too bée but dung, ſo he may win Chryſt, and obteyne Gods ryghtuouſneſſe by Fayth.
                  This Church embracing the frée promis of the Goſpel byThe heauenly Ieruſalem. Faith, is that heauenly or ſpirituall Hieruſalem diſperſed through the whole world, and the moother of vs all, bearing new children and new heirs too God, from tyme too tyme, by ye miniſterie of ye goſpell without the law & without woorks. Now albeit y• this true church which wtout ye law & without woorks is madè heire of ryghtuouſneſſe and euerlaſting lyfe, bée deſpyſed before the world, and oppreſſed with perſecutiō, and hath not the lawe too hir huſband, and therefore ſéemeth vtterly barrein, and hath not ſo many diſciples nor ſo many ſonnes as Agar hath or as the law hath that was made vpon mount Sinai: yet is ſhée before God moſt glorious and moſt fruteful, and dayly (not by hir huſband the law but by the goſpel

and ſpirit of Chryſt,) conceueth, beareth, and bringeth vp children without number, exempted from the bondage of ſin and death, and ſet frée from the tyranny of the law, and made heires of all Gods benefites.
                  Of this frée woman Sara and this heauenly Hieruſalem, wée know our ſelues too bée Citizens and the heirs of God, when wée embrace the promis of the Goſpell by true and effectuall faith. By this applying of the figures too the difference of the old Teſtament and the new, and of the people of grace, or of the true Church and the counterfet Church, it is no hard matter too eſpye after what fort eche member in the text agréeth too this Doctrine, and how the phraſes are too bee vnderſtoode.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday called Iudica, or the fifth Sunday in Lent.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Heb. ix.
                  
                     CHriſt beeing an hye preeſt of good things too come, came by a greater and a more perfect tabernacle, not made with handes, that is too ſay, not of this building, neyther by the bloud of Goates and Calues, but by his owne bloud he entred once intoo the holy place, and found eternal redempcion. For if the bloud of Oxen and of Goates, and the ashes of a yong Cowe when it was ſprinkled, purified the vncleane as touchyng the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the bloud of Chryſt (which through the eternal ſpirit, offered him ſelfe without ſpot too God) purge your conſcience from dead woorkes, too ſerue the lyuing God? And for this cauſe he is the mediator of the new Teſtamēt, that through death, which chaunced for the redemption of thoſe tranſgreſsions that were vnder the firſt Teſtament, they which are called, myght receyue the promis of eternall inheritance.
               
               
                  
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of that kind that inſtructeth. And the ſtate of it or the matter wherof it entreateth, is a doctrine concerning the préeſthod and ſacrifiſe of Chryſt.
                  
                     The cheefe places are three.
                     1 Of Chryſtes préeſthood, and of the benefites of his préeſthode.
                     2 The foure differences betwéene Chryſtes ſacrifice and the ſacrifyſe of the Leuites.
                     3 Of the difference betwéene the old Teſtament and the new.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place concerning Chryſtes preeſthod.
                  FIrſt and formeſt let vs conſider the definition. A préeſt inWhat preeſthod is in general. generall is a perſon ordeyned of God too teache the goſpel, and too offer Sacrifyſes & too pray too God both for himſelfe & for others, hauing Gods promis wherby he may warrant himſelf that he is herd. By this deſcription there appéere too bée thrée chéefe dueties of a préeſt. Firſt too teach, not only the lawe, but alſo the Goſpel concerning Chryſt. Secondly too offer Sacrifyſes commaunded by God. For a Sacrifyſe is a ceremonie or woorke commaunded of God, which wée yéelde vntoo God too honor him withall, that is too ſay, too witneſſe that he is the true God whom wée woorſhip after that ſort.
                  
                     That preeſt dooth offer God a ſacrifyſe,
                     That ſhewes the Goſpell foorth in ryghtfull wyſe.
                  
                  Theſe offices are cōmon too all préeſtes. But in this EpiſtleA definition of the hygheſt preeſt or of Chryſt. is entreated of the hygheſt préeſt, of whom let this definition be faſtned in mind. The high préeſt Chriſt is a perſon immediatly ordeined by the eternal father, & anoynted with ye fulneſſe of the holy Ghoſt, too the entent he ſhould bring foorth the Goſpel out of the ſecret boſom of the euerlaſting father,

and make interceſſion for the whole Churche, hauing promiſe that he ſhall aſſuredly bée herd, and too offer ſacrifice, (that is too wit himſelfe) once for all: By which ſacrifice he deſerueth remiſſion of ſinnes, rightuouſneſſe, and euerlaſting ſaluation too the whole Churche. This whole definition may bée builded and warranted out of the textes of the Epiſtle to ye Hebrewes. But this dayes leſſon of the ninth chapter, entreateth chéefly of the third part of Chriſts préeſthod, that is too wit, of his Sacrifice.
                  And too the intent this doctrine concerning the ſacrifyceGods iuſtice medled with mercy, was the cauſe of chriſts ſacrifyce. of our hygh préeſt Chryſt may bée drayned from the verye ſprings: firſt let vs conſider that God is verely and vnchaū
                     geably iuſt, and that it is an euerlaſting and vnchaungeable rule of Gods iuſtice, that the reaſonable creatures ſhould eyther perfectly and throughly agrée with Gods wiſdome & rightuouſneſſe, or (if they agréed not,) that they ſhould ſuffer puniſhment accordingly, and bée horribly deſtroyed. Therefore in as much as the firſt man and woman had offended & forgone the ryghtuouſneſſe and ſoundneſſe that was giuen them in their creatiō: they were too bée caſt away intoo eternall damnation. But of his vnmeaſurable mercie, the ſonne of GOD made intreatance for mankynd, and too the intent Gods Iuſtice might bée ſatiſfyed, he offered himſelfe too puniſhement and too make amendes too Gods moſt rightfull wrath. And ſo vppon the wonderfull tempering of Gods Iuſtice and his mercie toogither, there was a decrée enacted of receyuing men intoo fauour for the ſacrifyce of the ſonne of God, whereby Gods wrath was too bée pacifyed, and rightuouſneſſe and euerlaſting ſaluation too bée recouered too mankynd.
                  For this ſacrifyce of the ſonne of God, all the elect haue at all tymes obteyned remiſſion of ſinnes and inheritaunce of eternall lyfe, as is ſayd. Actes. iiij. There is none other name vnder heauen, in whiche wée muſt bée ſaued, than the name of Ieſus Chryſt.
                  
                     And too the intent men ſhould bée put in remembrance, &Why the ſacrifyſing of beaſts was ordeyned. taught of this ſacrifyce of Chryſtes, God ordeyned the ſacrifyſing of beaſts euen frō the beginning of the world, whiche in no wyſe purchaſed remiſſion of ſinnes, (as is ſayd in this Epiſtle, It is impoſſible for ſinnes too bée taken away by the blud of Buls and Gotes:) But were figures or images of Chryſtes true ſacrifice, by which is obteyned continual and euerlaſting redemption from ſinne, and the heritage of eternall lyfe. This doctrine concerning Chryſts ſacrifyce, which is the foundation of rightuouſneſſe, ſaluation, fayth, and chriſten Inuocation, let vs myndfully think vppon: not only theſe fewe dayes, but in all our whole lyfe, and in our dayly prayers.
                  Yea and at all tymes there hath bin ſacrifyſing in theThe ſacrifiſes of the Hēathē. world, euen among the Heathen, not only of beaſts but alſo of men: as, Calchas, Alexander, lulian, the Frenchemen at their paſſing ouer Po, and others ſlew men and offered them in ſacrifiſe. Theſe cuſtomes were borowed out of the church of the Fathers, (which had ſpred abrode the doctrine concerning the ſacrifyſing of the man Chryſt that was too come,) and of euill zeale in coūterfetting the example of Abraham. And here vntoo were added ſuperſtitious opinions, that God was pacifyed and made at tone with vs for the preciouſneſſe and woorthyneſſe of the ſacrifyſes. But in deed there is but one only ſacrifyſe of Chryſte that reconcyleth too God, the merit and recompence whereof pacifyeth Gods diſpleaſure, of whiche the other ſacrifyſes of the Fathers and of the Leuits were but ſhadowes.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  PAule therfore in this Epiſtle compareth the figuratiueDifferences of Chryſtes ſacrifiſe and the Leuiticall ſacrifiſes. préeſthod of the Leuits with the préeſthod of Chryſte. And before in the vij. chapter he reherſed eyght differences which I haue expounded in another place. In this dayes leſſon are reckened vp foure differēces betwéene the ſacrifyſe of Chriſt

and the Leuiticall ſacrifyſes: of which the chéefeſt is.
                  Firſt, Chryſt being a hygh préeſt of good things too come,Eternall ſaluation. (or of eternall good things,) that is too wit, of bliſſing, and deliuerance from ſinne, which the Fathers by their ſacrifyſes witneſſed themſelues too looke for:) found euerlaſting redemption (that is too ſay, deliuerance from ſinne, frō gods wrath, and from euerlaſting death) and attonement with God, and clenzing of the conſcience from dead woorkes (that is to ſay from ſinnes, for which wée are ſubiect too death) and alſo the frée giuing of the heritage that was promiſed.
                  But the Leuiticall préeſts by their ſacrifyſing of Cattel,Leuitical ſacrifiſes are figures. of Calues, and of Gotes, deſerue not eternal redēption, but only are figures of the true préeſt Chryſt, and make men holy only concerning the outward clenneſſe of the fleſh.
                  Secondly, Chryſt offered but once only, and but one ſacrifyſe,Chryſtes ſacrifice once for al by which he purged all ſinnes of the whole world. But the Leuiticall préeſts offer ſacrifyſes dayly, and enter intoo the holy of holyes euery yéere, and can not deliuer thoſe from ſinne for whom they offer, as is ſayd more at large in the beginning of the .x. chapter.
                  Thirdly, Chryſte is entered in by his owne bludſhed, orChriſt purgeth by his own blud. hath purged the ſinnes of all men by his owne bludſhed, as is ſayd .j. Iohn .j. The blud of Chryſte clenzeth vs quite from all ſinfulneſſe. But the Leuitical préeſtes ſprinkle the altar with the bloud of Calues and Gotes, whiche purgeth not ſinnes: but all the bludſheds of beaſts in the Leuiticall ſacrifiſes were only figures of Chriſts bludſhed, by which only the church is redéemed: as in Act. xx. Ephe. j. Col. j. j. Iohn. j. Rom. v. and elſwhere is written.
                  Fourthly, the Leuiticall préeſts when they ſhould makeChryſt is entered into heauē. ſacrifiſe, entered yéerly intoo the holy place or temple made with mannes hand. But Chryſte is entered euen intoo heauen, that is too ſay, intoo the ſyght of GOD, and is priuie too Gods ſecret purpoſe concerning mannes redemption.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Ʋppon Palmes Sunday.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. Philip. ij.
                  
                     LET the ſame mynd bee in you, that was alſo in Chryſte Ieſu: whiche when he was in the shape of God, thought it no robbery too bee equall with God: neuertheleſſe, he made him ſelf of no reputation, taking on him the shape of a ſeruaunt, and became lyke vntoo man, and was found in his apparell, as a man. He humbled himſelf, and became obedient too the death, euen the death of the croſſe. Wherefore God hath alſo exalted him on hygh, and gyuen him a name whiche is aboue all names: that in the name of IESVS, euery knee should bowe, both of things in heauen, and things in earth, and things vnder the earthe: and that all tongues should confeſſe, that Ieſus Chryſte is the Lorde, vntoo the prayſe of God the Father.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of that kynd that is perſuaſiue. For it is an Exhortation too lowlyneſſe or humilitie, taken of the examples and rewardes of Chryſtes humilitie.
                  
                     The places of doctrine are theſe:
                     1 A notable witneſſe of the twoo natures in Chryſt, very God and very man, to bée ioyned too the reſt which are gathered toogither in the place concerning the ſonne of God.
                     2 Of Chryſts paſſion and death.
                     3 Of the aduauncement or glorie of Chriſt reigning.
                     4 Of humilitie or lowlyneſſe.
                  
               
               
                  The text of the Epiſtle.
                  THe ground of the exhortation whiche Paule purpoſeth, is ſet downe next before the woordes of this dayes Epiſtle.

                     Let euery one of you through lowlyneſſe think another man better than himſelf. Bée lowly.
                  Too this propoſition he addeth a reaſon grounded vppon the example of Chryſt. Let the ſame mynde bée in you, that was in Ieſu Chryſt: that is too ſay, Let there bée true lowlyneſſe of mynd in you as was in Chryſte, who being in the ſhape of God, (that is too ſay being God in verye déed and by nature) did notwithſtanding abace himſelfe before the eternall Father, beneath all Angels and men.
                  
                     Who being in the ſhape of God, that is too ſay, in the nature and ſubſtance of God. For the Gréeke woord Morphe ſignifieth a ſubſtātiall ſhape or expreſſe and perſonal image, and not a proportion, figure, or counterfet wauing before ones eyes. This therfore is the méening: Chryſte when as he was in the ſhape of God, that is, when as he was in déed and by nature God: or, whereas he was the ſhape and lyuely ymage of God the father, begotten of the ſubſtance of the father, and equall too God the father in power, maieſtie, and glorie:
                  
                     Thought it no robberie too bee equall with God. The Gréeke phraſe is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      which is, too cōmit robberie. Like as 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      too make a paſſage, or too paſſe. So like wiſe 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      too count it robberie, that is too ſay, too robbe. So is there a very like phraſe, Heb. x. Treading the ſonne of God vnder foote, and accounting the blud of his Teſtament vnholy, that is too ſay, diſhonouring it. The méening therfore is: He thought it no robberie too bée equall with God, that is too ſay, He vſurped not equalitie with God. In this his calling when it was decréed that the ſonne ſhould béecōme a ſacrifyſe and obey God in ſuffering death, he vſed not his power ageinſt his calling, nor was proud or haultye for this his equalitie of the Godhead, whiche he vſurped not, ne poſſeſſed too the wrong and diſhonour of ye other, but obteyned it by birth as a good thing of nature.
                  
                     
                     But humbled him ſelf, that is too ſay, he exercyſed not his godly power, but humbled and abaſed himſelf in ſuch wyſe as he tooke vppon him▪ 
                     the ſhape of a ſeruaunt, that is too ſay, the ſubſtantiall ſhape of man, or the verye nature of man bodye and ſoule. He is termed a ſeruaunt, both for taking vppon him mannes nature, ſubiect to death and other miſeries: and alſo for his ſeruiſableneſſe in teaching and ſuffering, as he himſelfe ſayeth Math. xx. The ſonne of man is not come too haue ſeruice doone vntoo him, but too doo ſeruice himſelfe, and too giue his lyfe as a raunſome for the whole multitude of mankynd. Alſo let the yonger ſort beare in mynd that this moſt cōmon and ordinarie maner of ſpéeche of the Churche, wherby wée ſay that the ſonne tooke vppon him the nature of man, is taken out of this place of Paule, and out of the ſecond too the Hebrewes: for hée tooke not vppon him the Angels, but the ſéede of Abraham, that is too ſay, he cuppled not too himſelfe the nature of Angels, but the nature of man, of the poſteritie of Abraham.
                  
                     Framed after the likeneſſe of men, that is too ſay, he becameMarcion & the Manichees. altogither like other men. He was no Ghoſt or counterfet of a man as Marcion and the Manichees ſurmyſed: but a very man and in all things like his brethren, yea and mortall alſo, ſinne only excepted. Heb. ij. iiij.
                  
                     And in faſhion he was found as a man, that is too ſay, not only in proportion and geſture of bodye, but alſo in inclinations and motions of mynd, in fearfulneſſe, ſorowfulneſſe, ioyfulneſſe, and other affections, whiche notwithſtanding were well ordered in Chryſte, and conformable too his heauenly mynd.
                  
                     He humbled or caſt himſelf downe, becoōming obedientChryſtes humilitie. too death, euen too the death of the croſſe. This notable ſentence hathe Ciprian expreſſed with great lyghtſomneſſe of woords, in his ſermon of Almeſdéeds: Chryſte the ſonne of God would become the ſonne of man, that he myght make vs the ſonnes of God. He brought himſelf lowe, y• he myght

lift vs vp which lay vnder foote, he tooke vpon him the ſhape of a ſeruaūt, that he myght make vs frée. He was wounded, that he might heale our wounds. He was contented too dye, that he myght gyue vs mortall wyghtes immortalitie.
                  
                     Wherfore God hath alſo exalted him on hygh. God hathe exalted Chryſt the man, and ſeruant that was crucified and dead for vs as in reſpect of his manhod.
                  
                     He hath giuen him a name which is aboue all names, that is too wit, Iehoua, or the Lorde, which is the peculiar name of the onely true and moſt hygh God the maker of heauen and earth: as is ſayd in Eſai. xlij. I am the Lord, this is my name, and I wil not giue my glorie too another. This name Iehoua or Lorde, is not onely attributed too his Godhead, which had it from euerlaſting, but alſo too his manhod, the which is ioyntly woorſhipped and ſerued in one ſelfeſame woorſhip and ſeruice, toogither with the ſonne of God, the woord to which it is vnited.
                  
                     That in the name of Ieſu euery knee should bowe. SomeIESV. deryue the name Ieſu of the Hebrewe woord Iehouah which being vnutterable of it ſelfe, is (as they wryght) made vtterable by putting in the letler Ieſchua, and ſo by contraction Ieſu, that is too ſay, the Lorde incarnate or God become man. Paule taketh theſe woordes out of Eſay. xlv. Turne vntoo mée and yée ſhall bée ſaued all the endes of the earth: for I am the Lord, and there is none other, vntoo mée ſhall euery knée bow, and vntoo mée ſhall euery tung ſwere.
                  
                     That IESVS Chryſte is the Lord, that is too ſay, that he is the Lorde, or in very déed and nature GOD. By this Grammaticall declaration of the woordes, the ruder ſorte may the ryghtlyer vnderſtand the Text of the Epiſtle. Which, in as much as it is red vppon this day, chéefly in this reſpect, bycauſe it maketh mention of the wonderfull abacement and death of the ſonne of GOD, the memoriall whereof is celebrated by all the Chriſten Churches of the

whole world as the next wéeke. Let a ſumme of the doctrine concerning the paſſion and death of our Lord Ieſus Chryſte included in the vſuall queſtions of Methodicall order bée repeted in this place. The conſideration of the wonderfull purpoſe of GOD concerning the redemption of mankynd wrought by the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſte, who ſuffered and was crucifyed for vs, farre ſurmounteth the wiſdome of all Angels and men.
                  Too this end hath God by the wonderfull temperatureWhy Chryſt was made a ſacrifyce. of his Iuſtice and mercie ſtabliſhed this ſecret decrée, and made his ſonne (who is the Mediator) a ſinne offering and ſacrifyſe: too the intent that wée men being ſet frée from Gods wrath, from ſinne, and death, might bée made the rightuouſneſſe of God, as is ſayd .ij. Cor. v. And in conſideration of this maruelous benefite, let vs acknowledge the horrible wrath of God ageinſt our ſinnes, and the vnmeaſurable largeneſſe of Gods mercye towardes vs, and alſo let vs ſtirre vp the feare of God, fayth, and thankeſgiuing in our harts.
                  It is an eternall and vnchaungeable Maxime of Gods iuſtice, that the reaſonable creatures, ſhold eyther thorowly agrée with the wiſdome and rightuouſneſſe of god, or elſe ſuffer due puniſhement and bée horribly deſtroyed for not obeying. Foraſmuch therfore as the firſt man and woman had of their own frank & fréewill caſt from them the rightuouſneſſe and pureneſſe whiche God had giuen them in their creation: they ageine on the other ſyde were too bée caſt intoo eternall peynes. But the ſonne of God of his vnmeaſurable goodneſſe pitying mankynd, made intreatance for vs, and too the intent Gods wrath myght bée ſatiſfyed, he offered himſelfe too puniſhement and too make amendes vntoo Gods moſt iuſt diſpleaſure: and ſo in that ſecret counſell of the Godhead, this decrée was made, that the ſonne of GOD taking mannes nature vpon him, ſhould becōme a ſacrifiſe, and by his paſſion and death pacifye Gods dreadfull wrath, and ſatiſfye his iuſtice, and reſtore forgiueneſſe of ſinnes,

ryghtuouſneſſe, and euerlaſting lyfe too all thoſe that flée vntoo him by faith.
                  Now, the paſſion of Chryſt, is firſt a féeling of Gods dredfullThe firſt part of Chryſtes Paſsion. wrath ageinſt all the ſinnes of mankynd, which were poured out vppon Chryſt as vppon a ſacrifyſe, which great burden of Gods wrath enforceth Chryſt too ſay thus: My ſoul is heauy euen vntoo death. And agein: my God my God why haſte thou forſaken mée.
                  Mennes myndes are not able▪ too ſée throughly the greatnes of this extreme & vnutterable ſorow of Chryſtes, bicauſe they vnderſtande not ſhe greatneſſe of ſinne and of Gods wrath which is a conſuming fire. Notwithſtāding, mennes myndes are too bée ſtirred vp too conſider truely and earneſtly the horrible wrath of God ageinſt ſinne, bothe by the miſeries of all mankynd, and the examples of the conſciences of wicked men, and alſo by the teſtimonies of Gods woorde: too the entent that they on their behalfe may the cléerlyer perceyue the greatneſſe of the mercy and benefits of Chriſt, who hathe vndertaken that dreadefull burthen of Gods wrath for vs.
                  Notable teſtimonies of the true & horrible wrath of God,Teſtimonies of gods wrath ageinſt ſinne. are firſt the innumerable calamities of all mankynd, as the death of all men, ſwarmes of diſeaſes, fluds, burnings, warres, deſtructions of Cities, and other innumerable miſeries of all men, and the ſlaughters of all the Sainctes, (as of Abel, and Iohn Baptiſt,) by which notwithſtanding, Gods wrath could not bée pacifyed, but that the ſonne of God muſt bée made a ſacrifyſe.
                  Ageine the greatneſſe of Gods wrath is after ſome manner ſhewed by the examples of many men, who for the conſcience of one wickedneſſe, haue bin ſtriken with moſt heauie fearfulneſſe which hathe driuen them too fordoo themſelues: As the examples of Oreſtes, of Ariſtobulus king of the Iewes, of Iudas the traitor, of Theodorich of Verona and of dyuers others.
                  
                     Now if the féeling of Gods wrath ageinſt one ſin alone, doo bréede ſo bitter ſorow in the hart, that it diſpatcheth a mā of his life: What an vnmeaſurable huge heape of Gods wrath and of horrible ſorowes (think you) wer thronged vppon Chryſt, who ſuſteined, not one ſinne alone, or the ſinnes of ſome only one mā, but mine and thine, yea and al mennes offences, Idoll gaddings and murders: all their ſinfull inclinations, affections, and outward faultes: toogither with the fire of Gods wrath ageinſt theſe ſinnes?
                  Being ouerwhelmed with this houge burthen of Gods wrath, he cryeth out. Pſalm. xxij. O God my God, why haſte thou forſaken mée? My hart is become like melting wax, my ſtrength is withered like a potſherd, and thou haſt brought mée downe too the duſt of death.
                  This féeling of the houge and horrible wrathe of God ageinſt al the ſinnes of all men, was the firſt and chéefeſt part of Chryſtes paſſion.
                  The ſecond part was the heauineſſe and excéeding greatThe ſeconde part of Chryſtes paſsion. torment ryſing in his hart for the féeling of Gods wrathe ageinſt ſinnes and for the feare of death and tearing of his bodie, which ſo appalled all the partes of his bodie, that he ſwet droppes of blud.
                  The third and lyghteſt part of all, was the tearing of hisThe third part of his paſsion. bodie and ſtreyning of his ſinewes, when he was whipped▪ & buffeted and faſtened too the croſſe with nailes.
               
               
                  The cauſes of Chryſtes paſſion.
                  IT is not the wiſdome of any creature, that can ſerche out the cauſes of Gods woonderfull purpoſe concerning the redemption of mankynd, too bée brought too paſſe in this wyſe, that the ſonne of God ſhould make intreatance for vs, & take our nature vpon him, and bee ſacrifyſed for vs: neuertheleſſe, God will haue the conſideration of this woonderfull Decrée begonne in this lyfe.
                  
                     The principall efficient cauſe is the will of Gods ſonneThe loue of Gods ſonne. making interceſſion of his owne mere motion, for mankind falne intoo ſinne and death, and offering himſelf too this obedience and punniſhment, wherby he myght make ſatiſfaction for mankynd. Iohn .x. I am the good ſhepeherd, and I giue my life for my ſhéepe.
                  The inward cauſe that moued or enforced him too doo ſo,Gods mercie tempered with iuſtyce. is the vnmeaſurable mercy of God tēpered with his iuſtice. For ſith that God is vnchaungeably iuſt, he is in déede and horribly angry with ſinne, and deſtroyeth ſinners like a conſuming fire. Neyther relenteth he his anger ageinſt ſinne, of a fondneſſe & lyghtneſſe: but vnchaungeably & moſt ſtreightly kéepeth this rule of iuſtice, that men ſhall eyther performe due obedience, or elſe abyde the fire of Gods wrath. Therefore God receiueth not men that are faln without equal and ſufficient amends: which forbicauſe mākind was not able to yéeld, & therfore was too bee caſt intoo endleſſe torments: the ſonne of God béeing inflamed with vnmeaſurable loue and mercy towards mankynd, maketh intretance for vs, and too ye entent Gods iuſtice ſhould be ſatiſfied, he vndertaketh him ſelf the puniſhmēt & amends making for our ſinnes, & taking our nature vppon him, becometh a ſacrifiſe ſuſteining Gods dreadful wrath ageinſt ſin, & payeth too Gods maieſtie a rā
                     ſome too the full value of our ſin, vanquiſhing ſin and death, and reſtoring men too ryghtuouſneſſe and eternall lyfe.
                  The outward cauſe that moued or enforced him ſo too doo,The fall of Adam. was ye fal of our firſt parents, & the ſin that frō thens did ſhed it ſelf intoo all vs, who for the ſame muſt haue periſhed in euerlaſting paynes, had not the ſonne of God bin ſacrifyſed.
                  The inſtrumentall and outward woorking cauſe, are theThe feendes & the Iewes. Diuels and their inſtruments the Iewes, who burning in hatred ageinſt Chryſte, for finding fault with their wickedneſſe and falſe opinions, coueted too rid him away and too deſtroy him, too the entent they myght without checke maynteine their hypocriſie and wicked luſtes.
                  
                     Theſe enforcing and finall cauſes make an infinite difference betwéene the will of the Iewes crucifying Chryſte, and the will of God: Who béeing moued by his owne exceeding mercie toward mankynde, and through the entreatance of his ſonne, would haue Chryſt too ſuffer, too dye, and too ryſe alyue agein, too the entent he might reſtore men too lyfe and euerlaſting ſaluation.
                  The matter wherin as in moulds Chriſtes Paſſion wasThe matter of Chryſtes Paſſion. The forme or maner. wrought, are the mynd, will, hart and body of Chryſte.
                  The forme or manner, is the very feeling of Gods horrible wrath, and the anguiſhe as well of Chryſtes mynd as of his bodie, and his chyldly obedience, through which he willingly ſubmitted himſelfe with true reuerence and woonderfull lowlyneſſe too the eternal father, and without grudging or repyning endured Gods wrathe poured out vppon him, and moſt bitter formentes, for the loue of Gods iuſtice and mannes ſaluacion.
                  The end of his Paſſion is, firſt, that mankynd béeing redéemedThe endes too which Chryſt▪ ſuffered. with ſufficient ranſome from Gods wrath and euerlaſting damnacion, myght bée rewarded with ryghtuouſneſſe and euerlaſting lyfe. Iohn .iij. Like as Moyſes lifted vp the Serpent in the wilderneſſe: ſo muſt the ſonne of man be lifted vp, too the entent that all that beléeue in him ſhould not periſhe but haue lyfe euerlaſting. Secondly that wée myght become conformable too the image of Gods ſonne, (that is too ſay that wée myght bée like the ſonne of God our patterne) in bearing the Croſſe. Romaines .viij. Thirdly that wée ſhould folowe the example of Chryſtes patience and méekneſſe .j. Peter. ij. Fourthly, that wée in all our lyfe ſhould expreſſe the humilitie that Chryſte performed in his paſſion. Philip. ij. Through lowlyneſſe of mynde, let euery man eſtéeme others better than himſelfe. And let the ſame mynd bee in you, that was in Ieſus Chryſt. Fifthly that being dead to ſinne, wée might liue vprightly and blameleſſe. For like as Chryſt caryed downe our ſinnes intoo his graue,

and aboliſhed them by his death: euen ſo wée mortifying the dregges of ſinne as yet ſticking in our fleſh, muſt performe new obedience and ryghtuouſneſſe agréeing with the will of God. j. Peter. ij. Chryſte bare our ſinnes in his bodye vppon the trée, that wée béeing dead to ſinne, ſhould lyue too ryghtuouſneſſe.
               
               
                  The effectes of Chryſtes paſſion, are all his benefites, which for inſtruction ſake wee will diſtribute intoo eyght formes.
                  FIrſt the redemption of mankynde from Gods wrath, ſin,Redemption. death and the diuels tyranny. j. Tim. ij. There is but one mediator betwéene God and man, the man Ieſus Chryſte, who gaue himſelfe for vs too redéeme vs. The ſecond benefitRemiſsion of ſinnes. is remiſſion of ſinnes. Epheſ. 1. and Col. 1. In whome wée haue redemption & remiſſiō of ſinnes by his blud. The third is reconciliation or attonement with God. Rom. viij. WhenReconciliatiō. as wée were enemies too God, wée were reconcyled too him by the death of his ſōne. Eph. v. Making peace, that he myght reconcyle the Iewes and Gentyles in one body vntoo God▪ by his croſſe. The fourth is Iuſtification. Rom. iij. Wée are iuſtifyedIuſtification. fréely, by his grace, through the redemption made by Ieſus Chryſt, whom GOD hath appoynted a ſeat of mercy through fayth in his blud, too declare his ryghtuouſneſſe in y• he forgiueth y• ſinnes which are paſt. The fifth is the giuing of the holy ghoſt & of holyneſſe. Gal. iij. Chryſt hath redéemedThe holy Ghoſt. vs, and is become accurſed for vs, that wée might receiue his ſpirit by fayth. Iohn. vj. If I go not away, the comforter ſhall not come too you. The ſixth is the deſtruction of the DiuelsThe deſtruction of the Deuils kingdom. kingdome. Hebr. ij. By death he hath aboliſhed him that had the power of death, (that is too wit the Diuel) and reconciled thoſe that for feare of deathe were in bondage all their lyfe

long. The ſeuenth is the aboliſhing of ſin & death. j. Cor. xv.Aboliſhment of ſinne and death. Death is ſwalowed vp intoo victorie. O death, where is thy ſting? O Hell, where is thy victorie? For the ſting of death is ſinne, and the power of ſinne is the lawe. But thankes bée vntoo God, who hathe giuen vs victorie by our Lord Ieſus Chryſte. The eyght is euerlaſting lyfe and ſaluation.Euerlaſting lyfe and ſaluacion. Iohn. iij. The ſonne of man muſt bée lifted vpon the Croſſe, too the entent that euery one which beléeueth in him ſhould not periſh, but haue lyfe euerlaſting.
                  The application of theſe benefits is made by true repentanceHow Chryſtes benefites may bee applyed too vs. and faith. That is too wit, when acknowledging gods wrath, and the horibleneſſe of our ſinnes, wée are earneſtly afraide and hartely ſory that wée haue offended God: and by faith acknowledge that Chryſt the ſonne of God ſuffred and was crucifyed & made a ſacrifiſe for vs, & perſuade our ſelues aſſuredly, that for this ſacrifyſe of Chryſtes, our ſinnes are forgiuen vs, & ryghtuouſneſſe and euerlaſting lyfe giuen vs.
                  Of this Application there are teſtimonies too bée ſéen euery where. And notable is this ſaying of Chryſt. Iohn. xvij. I ſacrifyſe my ſelfe for them, that is too ſay, I offer my ſelfe for them, that they alſo may bée holy in déede. And I pray, not for them only, but for all that ſhall beléeue in mée through their prayer. In this prayer Chryſt our byſhop or préeſt executeth the chéefeſt duetie or office of a high préeſt, and applyeth his ſacrifyſe too the whole Churche. Therefore in this place the whole Doctrine concerning the préeſthoode and ſacrifyſe of Chryſt, is too bée thought vppon and repeated.
               
            
            
               Vppon Eaſter day.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Cor. xv.
                  
                     PVrge therefore the olde leuen, that yee may bee new dowe as yee are ſweete bread. For Chryſte our Eaſter Lambe is offered vp for vs. Therefore let vs keepe holyday, not with olde leuen, neyther with

the leuen of maliciouſneſſe and wickedneſſe, but with the ſweete bread of pureneſſe and truthe.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THe foūdacion of our fayth and ſaluacion, and the end andOur hauen and comfort▪
                      marke of the whole ſtorie of the goſpel, & the chéefe hauen of comfort in which only our hartes may reſt in all troubles & in death, is the moſt ioyful reſurrection of the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, where through he being conqueror of ſin, death, hel, and the féends hy him vanquiſhed, leadeth a glorious triumphe, and imparteth vntoo vs that flée vntoo him, ryghtuouſneſſe & eternall ſaluation, calling agein euen our bodyes from death vntoo lyfe. This excéeding great and wonderful woork of God, and benefite towards vs worthy too bée had alwayes in memorie, let vs embrace and ſet out cōtinually with thankfull hart and voyce.
                  This Epiſtle is of that kynd that is perſwaſiue. For it is an exhortacion too the true celebration of the feaſt of Eaſter, that is too ſay, too the true acknowledgement of the perſone and benefites of the ſacrifyſe or Lamb Chtyſt, ſlaine and offered vp for vs vppon the Altar of the Croſſe: and too true repentance, or acknowledgement of our owne ſinne & of Gods wrath conueyed intoo this Lamb: too true faith (in the gréefes which riſe vppon the féeling of Gods wrath, and the beholding of our own ſinne, death and other calamities) aſſuredly beléeuing that our paſſeouer is ſlaine and offered vp already for vs, & that our ſinnes are taken quite away by this Lamb of God, and that euen when wée bée dead, lyfe and ioy euerlaſting ſhall doutleſſe bée reſtored too vs with Chriſt who is riſen agein. Uppon which Faith there muſt enſew new obedience, or clenſing from the ſinne that yet remayneth in our nature, and a beginning of new lyght, ryghtuouſneſſe, and conuerſation wholly agréeing with the will and woorde of God, and continewally ſetting foorth theſe incomparable benefites of Chryſt with godly minde and voice.
                  
                     This is the true Celebration of the Paſſeouer in this lyfe, yea and for euermore: Untoo which Paule exhorteth vs by a repreſentacion of leuened bread, taken of the cuſtome of the Iewiſh Paſſeouer. Now too the entent the ſumme of the moſt large Doctrine ſet foorth in this Epiſtle may the eaſlyer bée comprehended in mynd. Let vs diſtribute it intoo thrée places.
                  
                     1 Of the woord Paſcha or Paſſeouer.
                     2 A conferring of our Paſſeouer with the Paſſeouer of the old Teſtament, which caryeth with it the doctrine of the benefites of Chryſte the Lamb that ſuffered for vs, and roſe agein for vs.
                     3 How wée may celebrate this feaſt of Paſſeouer aryght in this lyfe.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  THe woord Paſcha which is an Hebrew woord, deriued ofPaſcha or Paſſeouer. the verbe Paſah, ſignifyeth in Engliſhe a Paſſingby or a Paſſingouer, namely in that the Lord paſſing through Egipt, ſlew the firſtborne of the Egiptians, and ſpared the Iſraelites whoſe doore pooſtes were ſprinkled with the blud of a Lamb. Exod. xij. Secondly it ſignifyeth the holyday wherin the rememberance of that Paſſeouer is continued by killing of a Lamb. Luke. xxij. The feaſt of ſwéete bread drew nye, which is called Eaſter. Thirdly in this Epiſtle it ſignifyeth the Paſchall Lamb which was a ſigne or rememberance of the Lordes paſſing through Egipt, and of the paſſing of the Iſraelites through the red Sea: And it was a figure of Chryſt the true Lambe that was offered vp for vs, and paſſed by death too the eternall Father, that by his paſſage he myght obteine vs deliuerance out of the bondage of Egipt, that is too ſay of the Diuell, ſinne, and death, and reſtore vs ryghtuouſneſſe and euerlaſting lyfe.
                  Now aſſoone as Chryſte the true Paſſeouer was once offered,

the figuring paſſeouer ceaſed, and there was inſtitutedThe true paſſeouer. a new Paſſeouer, the name where of dooth properly agrée too that day in which the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus was offered vp for our ſinnes vppon the Altar of the croſſe. But the Chriſtians (to the intent they would diſſent from ye Iewes, who kept their Paſſeouer the .xiiij. daye of the moone of the March
                           •
                        .firſt mooneth) did (after the tyme of the Apoſtles) remoue the feaſt of Eaſter vntoo the Sunday that folowed next after the ſayd foortéenth day of the moone, or the full moone of the firſt mooneth, vppon which day Chryſt roſe agein frō death. Therfore in this ſaying (Our Peſſeouer for vs) the woord Paſſeouer is in the Predicament of Relation: the foundation whereof the perſone of Chryſte, and the bound is that Chryſt is appoynted too bée ſlayne & too pacifye Gods wrath ageinſt our ſinnes, which are conueyed intoo this Lambe, or layd vppon this Lamb too beare. Let the yoonger ſort at the beginning conſider this ſignification of the woord Paſſeouer, and therewith all let them alſo marke the tymes. The firſt paſſeouer was inſtituted at the paſſing of the Iſraelites out of Egipt, the yéere of the world. 2453. From the firſt paſſeouer or frō the departure of Iſraell out of Egipt vntoo this Eaſter of the yéere after Chryſts birth. 1570. are paſſed. 3079. yéeres. From the firſt paſſeouer vntoo the paſſion of Chryſt the Paſcall Lamb that was offered for vs, are, 1542. yéeres. From the laſt Iewiſh paſſeouer which Chryſt hild with his Diſciples before his paſſion, are paſſed. 1537. yéeres. And frō the beginning of the world vntoo this preſent yéere. 1570. are accounted. 5532. yéeres.
               
               
                  The ſecond place. A comparing of the Iewiſh Paſſeouer with paſſeouer of the Chriſtians.
                  THe Storie of the inſtitution of the Iewiſh paſſeouer and the ceremonies▪ of the ſame are deſcribed in Exod. xij.

which in very goodly portrayture peynteth out the doctrine concerning the perſone and benefits of Chryſt, & concerning the new obedience that is too bée yelded too God. All the ſayd compariſon may for inſtructions ſake bée diuided intoo ſix Articles.
                  
                     The marking out of the tyme. For as in the firſt moonethThe tyme. (the beginning wherof was always the coniunction or méeting of the Sun and the Moone next too the equinoctial of the ſpring tyme) the tenth day of the mooneth, the paſcall Lamb was too bée choſen out of the whole flocke, and too bée kept til the .xiiij. day or full moone: So Chryſte the tenth day of the firſt mooneth, that is too wit, vpō Palmeſunday entered into the citie of Hieruſalem, and the .xiiij. daye was taken in the Gardein, and ſacrifyſed for the ſaluation of mankynd.
                  2 Of the perſone of Chryſt. As the Lamb was too béeChryſts perſon choſen without ſpot, a Male, and a yéerling: So is Chryſt a Lamb without ſpot, without guyle, vndefyled, and cléerly without all ſinne and blemiſh. j Pet. j. Hebr. vij.
                  3 Of the ſacrifiſe of Chryſt. Like as it behoued the LambChryſts ſacrifyſe. too bée ſlayne and offered by the whole multitude. So was Chryſt our Paſſeouer offered for vs. Hither may all the doctrine concerning the paſſion and ſacrifyſe of Chryſt offered vppon the Alter of the croſſe, bée referred.
                  4 Of the benefits of Chryſts ſacrifyce. Like as God ſparedThe benefites of Chryſtes ſacrifyſe. the Iſraelites whoſe poſts were ſprinkled with the blud of the Lamb, euen ſo all they that are ſprinkled with ye blud of Ieſus Chryſt, obteyne forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and euerlaſting lyfe, according too this ſaying: Behold, the Lamb of God which taketh away the ſinnes of the world. j. Pet. j. Yée are redéemed with the precious blud of the immaculate Lamb Chryſt.
                  5 Of the applyment of Chryſtes benefites. Like as theThe applyment. poſts of the Iſraelites were ſprinkled with a bundle of Iſop dipped in the blud of the Lamb: So is the vertue and woorking of Chryſtes blud or ſacrifiſe, offered and applyed too vs,

by his woord, & by the ſacraments of Baptim and the Lords Supper. Pſalm. lj. Thou ſhalt ſprinkle mée with Hiſop O Lord, and I ſhall bée made cleane.
                  6 Of conuerſion or new obedience. Like as it behouedNew obediēce. the dowe too bée taken out of the houſes of the Iſraelites, and that they ſhould eate vnleauened bread: So Paule willeth vs too put away the old Leuen, that is too ſay, ſinne, falſe opinions, and leawde luſtes: and earneſtly too practiſe ſincere fayth, prayer, and al vertues that pleaſe God, and ſo to kéepe a continuall feaſt of Paſſeouer in vnleauened bread of vncorruptneſſe and truthe.
               
               
                  The benefites of Chryſts reſurrection, are cheefly three.
                  FIrſt, glorious deliuerance from the tyrannye of the Deuill,The benefites of Chryſtes reſurrection. ſinne, and death: and reſtorement of rightuouſneſſe and euerlaſting lyfe, whiche Paule ſetteth foorth with excellent lyghtſomneſſe of woords and figures. Col. ij. Yée are ryſen agein in Chryſt through faith in Gods power, who hath rayſed him from death, and with him alſo quickened vs who were dead in our ſinnes, forgiuing vs all our treſpaſſes, and putting out the hādwriting that was ageinſt vs in the lawe written, which he hath taken away & faſtened too his croſſe, and hath ſpoyled rule and power, and made a ſhewe of them openly, and hath triumphed ouer them in his own perſone.
                  Let vs alwayes haue before our eyes this moſt beautiful deſcription of the victorie and triumphe of Chryſt ryſing frō death. And bycauſe he termeth it a Triumphe, let vs conſider the compariſon.
                  Whē the Romane Captaynes made warre with puiſſantA deſcriptiō of a Triumph. Kings and ouercame them in battaill, they were woont too bée caryed intoo the citie of Rome ſitting in a charyot of gold, and a chayre of Iuorye, which was drawen by foure whyte horſes. Before the Charyot were led and ſet out too the ſhowe, the vāquiſhed enemies & Kings that were priſoners.

And aloſt before the charyot were caried tables in whiche were paynted the battels, the winnings of Cities, and the other things doone by the conquerour. After the charyot folowed the ſouldiours by whom the conqueſt was made. Vntoo them were rewards giuen. The Graundcaptein that was the Conquerour, being crowned with bayleaues or fig leaues was led intoo the Capitoll, where knéeling downe before the Altar of the moſt mightie and moſt mercifull Iupiter. he gaue him thankes for beſtowing that victorie vpon the Romanes, and when he had made his ſacrifiſe, departed too the court.
                  So when Paulus Aemylius had vanquiſhed Perſey, King of Macedonie, he led him priſoner in Tryumph, & his ſonne alſo who afterward became a Clerk in Rome.
                  
                  Of this maner of the Romane triumph dooth Paule take patterne in this place.
                  Chryſt our king hath hild continual and ſore warre withThe Triumph of Chryſt. the whole kingdome of Sathan, whiche is diuided intoo certein principalities, Poteſtates, and degrées. At length by his owne death he hath ouercome death, by his paſſion he hathe taken away ſinne, by becōming accurſed he hath ſet vs frée from the curſe of the Lawe. Theſe thrée enimies, ſin, death, and the curſe of the lawe or the handwryting of our owne cō
                        ſcience, are the chéefeſt ſinewes of the Diuels power. Theſe hath Chryſt vanquiſhed and taken away, not with gunnes, ſwoordes and ſpeares, but with his owne croſſe. This caryeth he in Triumph, and vppon it faſteneth he our enemies the Diuell, ſinne, and the accuſatiō of the Lawe or the handwryting of our conſcience: and of the ſubduing of theſe dooth he make his ſhewe.
                  Of this moſt high benefite of Chryſtes reſurrection ſpeaketh Paule, the greatneſſe whereof no tung of man is able too vtter. All goods, all Lordſhippes, all kingdomes are nothing in compariſon of this benefite. For whereas all men muſt néedes dye: yet ſhall thoſe that flée vntoo Chriſts death

and Reſurrection with fayth, bée deliuered from death, and ſhall bée crowned with ryghtuouſneſſe, lyfe, and glorie euerlaſting.
                  The ſecond benefite is true comfort and ioy of hart in allThe true ioy and comfort. miſeries, too thoſe that vphold themſelues with aſſured hope of the reſurrection and the euerlaſting lyfe with Chryſt.
                  Art thou poore, deſpyſed, ſick, banniſhed, &c? Chryſte who is ryſen from death, will defend thée, comfort thée, gouerne thée, and at length render thée eternall lyfe.
                  All men ſaeke and wonderouſly couet gladneſſe and ioy in this lyfe, and comfort in aduerſitie. The couetous peſone delyghteth more in his monye than in God. The Marchantman ioyeth in his gayne. Kings and Princes make warres too enlarge their Dominions, that they may afterward take their pleaſure with eaſe. But there is but only one ioy and comfort that is ſtedye, namely Chryſt ryſing from death, and rayſing vs vp toogither with himſelf and quickening vs.
                  The third benefite is Reſurrection of our bodyes, wherof wée will (by Gods helpe) entreate too morowe.
               
               
                  Of the third place.
                  THe true kéeping of the Eaſter feaſt, is all the whole timeThe true keeping of Eaſter. of our lyfe too acknowledge Chryſt our paſſeouer offered for vs, taking vppon him the ſinnes of the world, and earneſtly too repent vs of our ſinnes which are put ouer too this Lamb: and in our anguiſhes (whiche ryſe by the féeling of Gods wrath, or by beholding our own ſinnes, death, or other calamities,) ſtedely too beléeue that Chryſt our paſſeouer is offered vp for vs: and that our ſinnes are taken away by this Lamb of God: And that (euen after wée bée dead) wée ſhall doutleſſe bée reſtored too lyfe and ioy euerlaſting with Chryſt.
                  And too the intent wée may bée thankfull too Chryſte for theſe his ſo excéeding great benefites: wée muſt ageine on the other ſyde with reuerent mynd and voyce ſet them foorth, and ſo frame and gouerne our whole lyfe, all our intentes,

endeuers, and dooings, that they may pleaſe Chriſt and agrée with his will and woord.
                  In this méening Paule ſayeth that too kéepe the paſſeouer is all one as too purge the old leuen, (that is too ſay ſinne, or the old man, or forworne & falſe opinions concerning God,) luſtes, vicious inclinations, affections, and out ward actions fyghting ageinſt the Lawe of God.
                  He boroweth his maner of ſpéeche, of the Iewiſh Paſſenuer, in which they were compelled for ſeuen dayes toogither too eate vnleuened or ſwéete bread, wherevppon it was alſo called the feaſt of ſwéete bread. And thereuppon commeth the cuſtome ye is vſed at this day too diſtribute vnleuened bread in the Lordes Supper. Alſo oftentymes elſewhere in theLeuen. ſcripture Leuen betokeneth falſe doctrine or faultie behauiour and ſinnes, which make other folks the woorſe & marre (or make ſower) all the meale or lump of dowe. Paule therefore willeth the old leuen too bée purged away, that is too wit, that falſe doctrine and other ſinnes ſhuld bée caſt out and taken away by repentance.
                  
                     That yee may▪ bee new dowe, that is too ſay, a neweNew dowe. lump or new men, ſprinkled and clenzed with the precious blud of the Lamb Chryſt, and hauing new lyght, new ryghtuouſneſſe, and new obedience acceptable too God.
                  
                     As yee are ſweet bread, that is too ſay, vnleuened, orSweete bred. without the leuen of ſinne, or rightuouſe and holy, namely by imputation of Chryſtes ryghtuouſneſſe & holyneſſe, and by beginning new obedience, but not as yet by accompliſhing it. And therefore there is as yet néede of continuall purging the remnaunts of ſinne. There remayne in al the Sainctes in this lyfe, great weakeneſſe, and much filthyneſſe of ſinne. The mynde is ſtill ſteyned with the dregges of the leuen of many doutings and falſe imaginations concerning God: ageinſt whiche, thoſe that bée borne ageine by the holy Ghoſte, doo kéepe continuall warre by

helpe of the holy Ghoſte. Fayth, feare, loue of GOD, and the reſte of vertues are verye faint and féeble in the will. And on the contrarie part, there bée many ſinfull inclinations and vehement enforcementes too careleſſeneſſe, diſtruſt, and pride: many burning flames and heates of leawde luſtes, and many furious fyers of affections in the hart, ageinſt which they ſtryue that are regenerated by the holy Ghoſt.
                  Theſe dregges and filthyneſſe of the old leuen dooth ſainct Paule will vs too clenze out continually during our whole lyfe, and in the meane whyle too aſſure our ſelues by fayth, that though wée bée bothe vnworthy and vncleane: yet for the ſonne of GOD our Paſſeouer offered vp for vs, (who is the roof that couereth our filthyneſſe,) wée are thorough excéeding great mercye receyued, and by imputation of his clenneſſe and holyneſſe vntoo vs, are accepted for pure ſwéet bread, that is too ſay, for ryghtuouſe and holy, as fully as if there remayned no dregges at all of the old Leuen in vs. But wée haue ſpoken of this principall méening of this Epiſtle, a little before. Nowe let vs go thorough with the Exhortation too the true kéeping of this Feaſte of Paſſeouer.
                  
                     Therfore let vs make good cheere. In the Gréeke it isWhat it is too keepe holyday. 
                     Heortazomen, which is as much too ſay, as let vs kéepe holyday, eyther of the woord Rhezo, too doo holy things, or of the woord Agora, which is a congregation or aſſembly, or elſe of the woord Ageiro, which ſignifyeth too come toogither or too aſſemble. Heortazein therefore ſignifyeth, not too eate or too drinke, and too ſpend the tyme in fond and ſlouthful ydleneſſe, but too celebrate a feaſtfull day, or too allowe a Saboth, or too aſſemble too the miniſtration of the Goſpell: too héere the doctrine concerning the perſone and benefites of the Lamb Ieſus Chryſte, who ſuffered for vs and is ryſen ageyne: too haue a féeling of Repentance: too beléeue that wée are accepted of GOD for this onely Lambes ſake:

And vppon truſt of this Lamb, too demaund and looke for all good things at gods hand: too acknowledge him: too giue him thanks: too mortifie the remnantes of the leuen or of ſinne ſticking ſtill in vs: and with new lyght, righteouſneſſe, and obedience, too glorifye God both all the tyme of this lyfe and euermore.
                  
                     Not with old leuē, that is too ſay, not with folowing ſinneOld leuen. ageinſt conſcience.
                  
                     Nor in the leuen of maliciouſneſſe & wickedneſſe, yt Gréek woord Kakia is a general name of al vyce, & ſignifyeth ye ſins of ouerſyght or doone willingly, which are cōmitted by negligence, lyghtneſſe, or wantonneſſe: As, Honorius offendeth through negligence or ſlouthfulneſſe. Yea and ſometyme euen a good man may doo amiſſe and yet bée a good man ſtill. But the woord Poneria is a more ſore and heynous name of ſingular and prepenſed malice and of deſyre too doo harme, which euen delyghteth in wickedneſſe, too whom it is euen meate and drink too doo another man diſpleaſure and to hurt him wickedly, as in Nero, Diocletian, and Iulian, &c.
                  
                  
                     But with the ſweete breade of pureneſſe and truthe, that is too ſay, with the pure doctrine concerning God, and with pure acknowledgement and confeſſion of the doctrine, and with true faith, true feare of God, true inuocation, true and vnfeyned loue of God and ones neyghbour, thankeſgiuing, and continuall obedience, which is not counterfet, nor hypocritiſh, but voyd of craft, guyle, and leude luſtes, pure and true. And ſo dooth Paule in theſe twoo woordes pureneſſe and truthe, comprehend the whole lyfe of a Chriſten man, and all the duties of godlyneſſe, or all vertues.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the ſecond and third holydayes in Easter weeke.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Cor. xv.
                  BRethren, as parteyning too the Goſpell which I preached vntoo you, which yee haue alſo accepted, and in the which

yee continue, by the which alſo yee are ſaued: I doo you too wyt, after what maner I preached vntoo you, if ye kepe it, except yee haue beleeued in vaine. For firſt of all, I haue deliuered vnto you, that which I receyued: how that Chryſt died for our ſinnes, agreeing too the ſcriptures, and that he was buried, and that he roſe ageine the third day, according too the ſcriptures: and that he was ſeene of Cephas, then of the twelue. After that, he was ſeen of mo than fiue hundred brethrē at once, of which many remaine vntoo this day, and many are fallen a ſleepe. After that appeared hee too Iames, then too all the Apoſtles. And laſt of all he was ſeen of mee, as one that was born out of due time. For I am the leaſt of the Apoſtles, which am not worthy too bee called an Apoſtle bicauſe I perſecuted the cōgregation of God. But by the grace of God, I am that I am. And his grace which is in mee, was not in vaine, but I laboured more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which is with mee. Therfore whether it were I or they, ſo wee preach, and ſo haue yee beleeued. If Chryſt bee preached how that hee roſe from the deade: how ſay ſome among you, that there is no reſurrection of the dead? If there be no riſing agein of the dead: then is Chryſt not riſen. If Chryſt bee not riſen, then is our preaching vaine, and your faith is alſo in vain, yea, and wee are found alſo falſe witneſſes of God. For wee haue teſtified of God, how that he rayſed vp Chryſt: whom hee raiſed not vp, if it bee ſo that the dead riſe not ageine. For if the dead riſe not agein, then is Chryſt not riſen agein. If it bee ſo that Chryſt roſe not, then is your faith in vain, and yet are yee in your ſinnes. Therfore they which are fallē a ſleep in Chriſt are perished. If in this lyfe onely wee beleeue on Chryſt, then are wee of all men the myſerableſt. But now is Chryſt ryſen from the dead and is become the firſt fruites of thē that ſleep. For by a man came death, and by a man came the Reſurrection of the deade. For as by Adam all die: euen ſo by Chryſt, shal all bee made alyue, and euery man in his owne order. The firſt is Chryſt, then they that are Chryſtes at his comming.

Then cometh the ende, when he hath deliuered vp the kingdome too God the father, when hee hath put downe all rule, authoritie, and power. For he muſt raigne till he haue put all his enemies vnder his feete. The laſt enemie that ſhall be deſtroyed, is death. For he hath put all thinges vnder his feete. But when he ſaith, all things are put vnder him, it is manifeſt, that he is excepted, which did put all things vnder him. When all things are ſubdued vnto him: then ſhall the ſōne alſo him ſelfe be ſubiect vntoo him that did put all things vnder him, that God may be all in all things. Els what do they whiche are baptiſed ouer the dead, if the dead riſe not at all? Why are they then baptiſed ouer the dead? Yea and why ſtand we in in ieoperdy euery houre? Be my reioyſyng which I haue in Chryſt Ieſu our Lord, I die dayly. That I haue fought with beaſtes at Epheſus after the maner of men: what auantageth it me, if the deade ryſe not ageine? Let vs eate and drinke: For to morow we shall dye. Be not deceiued: euyll ſpeakings corrupt good manners. Awake truly out of ſleepe, and ſinne not. For ſome haue not the knowledge of God, I ſpeake this too youre rebuke. But ſome man will ſay: howe aryſe the deade? with what body come they? Thou foole that whiche thou ſoweſt, is not quickned, excepte it dye. And what ſoweſt thou? Thou ſoweſt not that body that shall bee: but bare corne (I meane eyther of wheate, or of ſome other) and GOD giueth it a body at his pleaſure, to euery ſeede his owne body. All flesh is not one manner of fleshe, but there is one manner flesh of men, another manner fleshe of Beaſtes, another manner flesh of fyshes, another of byrdes. There are alſo celeſtiall bodyes, and there are bodies terreſtrial. But the glory of the celeſtiall is one and the glorye of the terreſtriall is an other, there is one maner glory of the Sunne and an other of the Moone, and an other glory of the Starres. For one Starre differeth from another in glory. So is the reſurrection of the dead. It is ſowen in corruption, and ryſeth in incorruption. It is ſown in dishonor, and ryſeth in glory. It is ſowen in weakeneſſe,

& riſeth in power. It is ſown in a natural body, & riſeth a ſpirituall body. There is a naturall body, and there is a ſpyrituall bodye, as it is alſo wrytten: the firſt man Adam was made alyuing ſoule, and the laſt Adam was made a quickenynge ſpiryte. Howbeit, that is not firſt which is ſpirituall, but that vvhiche is naturall, and then that vvhiche is ſpirituall. The firſt man is of the earthe earthy: the ſeconde man is the LORDE from heauen. As is the earthy, ſuche are they that are earthy. And as is the heauenly, ſuche are they that are heauenly. And as wee haue borne the Image of the earthy, ſo shall wee beare the image of the heauenly. This ſay I brethren, that flesh and bloud can not enherit the kingdome of GOD. Neither doothe corruption inherite vncorruption. Beholde I shewe you a myſterie. Wee shall not all ſleepe: But wee shall all bee changed, and that in a mooment, in the twinckelyng of an eye (at the ſounde) of the laſte trumpe. For the trumpe shall blow, and the deade shall ryſe incorruptible, and wee shall bee chaunged. For thys corruptible, muſte put on incorruption, and this mortall, muſt put on immortalitie. When this corruptible hath put on incorruption, and this mortall hath put on immortalitie then shall bee brought too paſſe the ſaying that is vvritten: Death is ſwallovved vppe intoo victorie. Deathe where is thy ſtyng? Hell where is thy victory. The ſtyng of Deathe is ſinne: and the ſtrength of ſinne, is the lawe. But thankes be vnto God, which hath giuen vs victorie, through our Lorde Ieſus Chryſte. Therfore my deare brethren, be yee ſtedfaſt and immoue able, alvvayes rich in the woorks of the Lorde, for as much as yee know how that your laboure is not in vayne in the Lorde.
               
               
                  
                  The diſpoſement of the .xv. Chapter of the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians, which is the ſeat of the Doctrine concerning the Reſurrection or ryſing of the dead.
                  THe moſt ioyful end and hauen of the whole Chriſten lyfe and Faith, and the ſouereine and moſt aſſured comfort in all the miſeries and ſorowes of this moſt flightful and wretched lyfe, is the Reſurrection from death and the bliſſed and euerlaſting lyfe with God: In which not only our ſoules remayning after death ſhall enioy the beholding of our Lord God in quiet peace & ioyfulneſſe: but alſo our bodies which were rotted and conſumed in the duſt of the earth, ſhall liue ageine, and bée repaired, and being ioyned with their ſoules ageine and ſet frée all ſinne and death, ſhall bée glorifyed and receyue immortall honor.
                  
                     And where in death they heertofore were dround,
                     they ſhall heerafter weare the rayment bryght
                     Of true renowne, and euermore bee found
                     before the Lord in endleſſe lyfe and lyght.
                  
                  This doctrine concerning the Reſurrection of our bodyes (which is the peculiar wiſdom of the chriſten church) is euidently confirmed and lyghtſomly ſet out by Paul in this xv. chapter of his firſt Epiſtle too the Corinthians. Therefore it is of that kynd of caſes that inſtruct.
               
               
                  The cheefe partes of the whole diſputation are three.
                  
                     1 Whither there bée any ryſing of the dead.
                     
                        2 What manner a one it is, or what manner of bodyes they ſhall ryſe with.
                     3 Of the cauſe of the ryſing of our bodies which is Chryſtes victorie, in which he ſwalowed vp ſin, death, and hell by his death, and reſtored eternall lyfe and glorie too his Church by his Reſurrection.
                  
                  
                     THe enterance intoo the matter putteth vs in mynde that the true and néedfull Doctrine concerning the chéefe articles of the Chriſten faith, is often & continually too bée repeated and beaten intoo the hearers eares: Euen in this conſideracion, bicauſe the Goſpell is the power of God effectuall in woorking ſaluacion too euery one that beléeueth. I do you too vnderſtand, or I put you in mynd of the Goſpel which I haue preached vntoo you, which you haue embraced by fayth, by which alſo you bee ſaued if you holde it faſt by faythe, onleſſe peraduenture by this tyme hauing shaken off fayth, you haue beleeued in vayne: This ſelfſame goſpell (I ſay) doo I put you in mynd of, that you may bethinke you, wirh what words I haue preached vntoo you. For I haue deliuered. &c.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The propoſition, ſtate, or ground of the firſt part is, The dead shall vndoutedly ryſe agein.
                  
                  THis propoſition doth he warrant by ſixe Argumentes. Firſt, of the efficient cauſe. The totall or ſufficient cauſeThe efficient cauſe of our reſurrection, which argument holdeth of conſequence of a thing being ſet downe, the effect foloweth of neceſſitie, in ſuch tyme and maner as the cauſe or the wil of God hathe appoynted. Chryſt who is the cauſe of our Reſurrection and lyfe, is verely riſē in his very body from death, and hath promyſed of certeyntie that he wil rayſe vntoo lyfe the bodyes of all men that bée dead: Ergo without any dout euen our dead bodyes ſhall alſo ryſe agein.
                  Paul concludeth this argument in the forme of an Ethuthymema. Chryſt who was dead is riſen ageine in very déed.

                     Ergo wée alſo ſhall ryſe agein when wée bée dead.
                  The conſequent is of force, holding from the efficient and ſufficient cauſe, too the effect: which he will accompliſh as he hath promyſed.
                  This reaſon of the conſequence, Paule himſelfe poynteth out a little after. For ſéeing that by man came death, by a man alſo muſt come the reſurrection of the dead. For like as in Adam all men die: So alſo by Chryſt ſhall all men bée called agein too lyfe.
                  The Antecedent, (which is the ground woorke of the Reſurrection of our bodyes, and of our whole Fayth and ſaluacion,)That Chryſt is riſen. is confirmed at large by Paule. Firſt by witneſſe of the Scripture, which teſtifyeth that Chryſte dyed for ourBy teſtymonies of the prophets. ſinnes. Eſay. liij. Daniel. ix. Zach. iij. and .xiij. Pſalm .xxij. And that he roſe agein the third day. Oſée. vj. in the ſtorie of Iones. Pſalm .xv. Zach. xiij. Eſay. xj. Actes .xiij. Secondly by the record of many that ſawe Chryſt after he was riſen,By record of ſuch as ſawe him. and were familiarly conuerſant with him full fortie dayes. Chryſt the ſame day that he roſe from death, appéered, not only too Cephas or Simon Peter, and the twelue Apoſtles, of whom Paule maketh mencion in this place, but firſt of all too Marie Maudlin. Iohn .xx. Marke .xviij. next too the reſt of the women. Math. xxviij. Thirdly too a cupple walking intoo the féeldes, whom the Apoſtles beléeued not. Mark .xvj. Fourthly too Cephas or Simon Peter. Fifthly too Cleophas and Nathanael as they were going toowards Emaus, too whome at their returne, all the Apoſtles giue credit. Luke the two and twentith. Sixthly too all the Apoſtles as they were aſſembled toogither, ſauing Thomas. Luke the foure and twentith. Iohn the twentith. j. Corinthians. xv. And all theſe appéerings were made the very day of his Reſurrection, vppon which day alſo S. Hierom is of opinion that Chryſt ſhewed himſelfe too Iames the leſſe, of whom Paule maketh mention in this place. Afterward he ſhewed him ſelfe ſundrye tymes too the Apoſtles when Thomas

was with them, and at the ſea of Tyberias. Iohn xx. xxj. Alſo in Galilie too mo than fyue hundred brethren at once. And alſo too his Apoſtles, or too the thrée ſcore and tenne and too all the reſt of his Diſciples. Finally after his Aſcention Chryſte ſhewed himſelfe too Paule alſo, that hée was riſen ageyne.
               
               
                  Paules ſecond argument.
                  WE ſée the Apoſtles doo preache that Chryſte is riſenOf the authoritie of the Apoſtles. from death: Ergo there is in very deede a ryſing ageine of the deade. The conſequens holdeth of the authoritie of the Apoſtles who are ſent from God, and are aſſured that they cannot erre.
                  The third argument is a bringing back by impoſſibilitie.An argument by impoſſibilitie. It is impoſſible that twoo ful contraries ſhould both at once be true or falſe.
                  This Expoſition, The deade ryſe not ageine, or no deade folkes ryſe ageine, is falſe:
                  
                     Ergo the contradictorie or full contrarie propoſition, The deade ſhall ryſe ageine, is true and certeine.
                  The minor or Second parte of the Argument is proued thus: of truthe there can come nothing but truthe. But of this propoſition No deade folks riſe ageine, folow things manifeſtly falſe and irkeſome too heere, namely, that not euen Chryſte is riſen ageyne, and that the preaching of the Apoſtles is vayne, whych are falſe witneſſes of GOD, and ſo GOD himſelfe who hath auouched that he rayſed Chryſt alreadye and will hereafter call all the deade ageyne too lyfe, ſhoulde be a lyar. But for aſmuch as theſe thyngs are manifeſtly falſe and impoſſible, it followeth that the propoſition out of whiche theſe thinges enſue, is falſe. And therefore the playne contrarye is true, namely that the deade ſhall ryſe.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth argument.
                  IT is impoſſible that the beſt and holyeſt part of mankyndAn argument of ryght and reaſon. ſhould bee created only too the miſeries of this preſent lyfe and too eternall deſtruction. For ſéeing that God is ryghtuous, and alſo a iudge: it muſt néedes fall out, that the godly and the ryghtuous muſt at one time or other bée in good caſe, and the wicked in ill caſe.
                  But thoſe that liue godlyly in Chryſt Ieſu, are of all men moſt miſerable in this lyfe:
                  
                     Ergo it muſt néedes bée that there remayneth an other hauen and another lyfe, in which the godly béeing rayſed from death, ſhalbée ſet frée from all miſerie, and bée crowned with eternal bliſſe and glorie.
               
               
                  The fifth argument.
                  
                     BVt now is Chryſt riſen from death, and is the firſt frutes of the dead.
                  
                  Fifthly he repeteth the firſt Argument and reaſon whichA repetition & confirmation of the firſt argumēt which holdeth of cō
                        ſequence or of neceſsitie. holdeth of conſequence, expounding and enlarging the conſequence with many woordes: Chryſt is ryſen ageine: Ergo all the dead shall ryſe. He proueth the conſequence. For like as by Adam death entered vppon all men: So by Chryſte the cauſe and author of lyfe, all men ſhal bée called too lyfe agein. In this order, that the firſt frutes or fyrſt of them that ryſe ageine from death, bée Chryſt himſelf. Then thoſe that bée Chryſtes, or which haue departed out of this life in the faith of Chryſt, ſhall riſe at Chryſtes comming too iudgement. Afterward ſhall bée the ende of the world or of worldly things, when he ſhal deliuer vp his kingdom too God the father, that is too ſay when he ſhall bring vntoo his Father all the whole Church gathered toogither on earth by the miniſterie of the Goſpell: too the entent that all kingdomes being aboliſhed, and all power as well of Diuels as men ſuppreſſed, yea and

the miniſterie of the ſonne of God (whereby he gathered his Church in this world ceſſing,) onely GOD without other meanes may reigne in the godly, and bée all in all, filling all things with his lyght, wiſdome, ryghtuouſneſſe, lyfe, bliſſedneſſe, and glorie vnſpeakable.
               
               
                  The ſixth Argument.
                  THe very maner of Baptim whereby wée are firſt graffedAn Argument taken of our profeſsion and order in baptim. intoo the churche or body of Chryſte, betokeneth that wée looke aſſuredly for the reſurrection from death: for they are baptized ouer the deade, or ouer the graues of the dead, as it is vſed in theſe dayes alſo: proteſting in the behalfe of the dead, that they beléeue of a certeintie that they ſhall returne too lyfe ageine, according as the Créede whiche wée hold profeſſeth in our Baptim. And the very dipping in the water and taking out agein, is a token and repreſentation, not only of the aboliſhment of ſinne, and of the regeneration and renewing of the ſoule, but alſo of the death of our bodyes and the ryſing of them ageine.
               
               
                  The .vij. Why are wee alſo in daunger euery houre.
                  HErepeteth the .iiij. Argument and amplifyeth it by anA repetition of the fourth argument which holdeth of ryght & reasō: abſurditie of Epicure heathniſhneſſe enſewing it, which he deſcribeth in woordes taken out of the .xxij. of Eſai. And he expreſſeth the reproof of it in a verſe of Menanders. Euill communication corrupteth good manners. With whiche agréeth this ſaying of Theogius: Thou mayſt lern good of the good, but if thou kéepe companie mith the wicked, thou marreſt thyne owne mynd.
               
               
                  The .viij. Argument, of a like.
                  LIke as ſéedes that are caſt intoo the ground doo rotte thereAn Argument taken of the like thing. and ſpring vp agein, and eche of them yéelde foorth moſt

goodly frute in their kynd: So our bodyes being ſowen intoo the ground and buryed, ſhall certeinly liue agein & ryſe ageine much more beautifull and bryght than they were héere vppon earth. This compariſon hath Stigelius expreſſed in very trim verſes.
                  
                     This corne that growes of bodye voyd of blud, in lyuely plyght,
                     Immortall honor after death our bodyes dooth behyght.
                     Deepe vnderneath the turned clod the dryed ſeedes lye hid
                     In which a man would ill ſuppoſe that any ſtrength abid.
                     Yet growing vp by ſecret meane they ryſe agein, and beare
                     A greater ſtrength encreaſt too more thā heretofore they were.
                     Euen ſo our courſes being layd too rot in holowe graue
                     A lyuely beautie afterward in glorious ſtate ſhall haue
                     When death hath hild thē downe awhyle, anon they ſhal aryſe▪
                     
                     Eternally too liue in lyght with God aboue the ſkies.
                  
                  Right many and notable tokens of the reſurrection hatheTokens of the reſurrection impreſſed in nature. God imprinted in the whole nature of things, which too conſider after a reuerent and godly faſhion, it is behouefull. The day dooth dayly fade intoo nyght, and is buryed in darkneſſe. But in the morning killing his death, and breaking out of his graue of darkneſſe, it becommeth alyue agein as Tertullian ſayeth. And this entercourſe of dayes and nyghts is fynely expreſſed in this Gréek ridle:
                  
                     A father there is that hath ſonnes nine and three,
                     And eche of thoſe ſonnes eke hath children thrice ten:
                     Not one like another, ſome fair and white bee,
                     Some black, all immortall, yet dead now and then.
                  
                  The Moone dying euery mooneth quickeneth agein andThe Moone. recouereth hir lyght that ſhée had loſt.
                  The beames of the Starres whiche are dimmed by theThe Starres. ryſing of the Sunne, are kindled agein in the nyght.
                  
                     The foure ſeaſons of the yéere, Lenton, Sommer, HarueſtThe ſeaſons of the yeere. and Winter doo fade and returne by mutuall courſe.
                  In Springtyme the earth that was dead and barrein in the winter, becōmeth lyuely agein & bringeth foorth herbes, graſſe, floures and frutes. The trées are clad agein with leaues, floures and fruites.
                  The ſwallowes which were dead and buryed in the watersSvvalovves. in wintertyme, recouer lyfe agein in the Springtyme.
                  Flyes alſo and other Cutfoules whiche were killed withFlyes. cold, recouer their former force and lyfe by warmth.
                  The Phenix bréedeth ageine with fyre, and hir own aſſhes:The Phenix. For ſhée periſheth too liue, and yet ſhée ingenders hirſelf, atteyning immortalitie by the benefite of death, as Lactantius ſayeth.
                  Finally, all this moſt beautifull Theater of heauen and earth which was made of nothing, giueth vs to vnderſtand that God who made all things of nothing, may with much more eaſe at the latter day reſtore our fleſh or bodyes agein, which haue bin ſomewhat before, than he made them at the beginning. But in thinking vppon this Article, let vs alwayesThis is the ſureſt ground & Argumēt for a Chriſtian. haue our myndes and our eyes faſtened vppon our Lord Ieſus Chryſtes death and reſurrection, and vppon the promiſes concerning the reſtitution of our bodyes and the eternal lyfe too enſue without fayle after this lyfe, warranted by the Reſurrection of himſelf and the rayſing vp of Lazarus and others. Iohn. xj. I knowe he ſhall ryſe agein in the reſurrection at the laſt day. Ieſus ſayd vntoo hir: I am the reſurrection and lyfe. He that beléeueth in mée, yea though he were dead, he ſhall liue. Iohn. vj. This is the will of my eternal Father, that euery one which ſéeth the ſonne & beléeueth in him ſhould haue lyfe euerlaſting, & I will rayſe him vp at the laſt day. Iohn. v. The houre ſhall come that al that are in their graues ſhal héere his voyce and come foorth, thoſe that haue doone good, too the reſurrection of lyfe, and thoſe that haue doone euil, too the reſurrectiō of iudgement. Io. xix.

I knowe that my Redéemer liueth, and I ſhall ryſe out of the earth in the laſt day, and ſhall bée compaſſed ageine with my ſkin, and in my fleſhe ſhall I ſée my God. I ſhall ſée him my ſelf, myne owne eyes ſhall behold him, and none other: this hope is layed vp in my boſom.
                  This reſtitution of dead bodyes, and commencement ofSufficiēt vvarrant for a true Chriſtian. new and euerlaſting lyfe, is not only warranted by euident textes verye openly and cléerly in the ſermons of Chriſt and his Apoſtles: but alſo was manifeſted too the eyes of the Apoſtles and the reſt of Gods church that was at thoſe dayes in Iewrie, when by the ſpace of full forty dayes, Chryſte being riſen agein and many of the Patriarkes and Prophetes that were riſen with Chryſte, were openly and familiarly conuerſant with the Apoſtles and Marie his moother, and a great companie that was ioyned with them, (for Paule in this Chapter witneſſeth that he was ſéene of mo than fyue hundred brethren at once) and talked with them of the kingdome of God. Act. j. of the wonderfull ſtate and redemption of the Church, of heauenly reuelatious, of the promiſe of the ſéede that ſhould cruſh the Serpents head, or of the perſone, office, and benefites of Chryſt, of the aboliſhemēt of ſinne & too the reſtorement of our bodyes & of the lyfe euerlaſting. Vppon theſe heauenly reuelements warranted by ſure and euident recordes, let vs ſet our eyes when wée thinke vppon the reſurrection of our bodyes, and the lyfe too come.
                  Philoſophie knoweth vtterly nothing of the reſtoremētPhiloſophie knovveth nothing of the reſurrection. of the dead bodyes, but holdeth opinion that they periſh, and are reſolued intoo the ſtuffe whereof they were firſt made, & vtterly come too nothing, after the ſame ſort that the bodyes of brute beaſts doo. Neyther hath it any ſure and ſtable beléef at all concerning the immortalitie of the ſoule and the euerlaſting conuerſation with God and the bliſſed wyghts. But as in a dubble and doutfull matter, it diſputeth too and fro of it, and reaſoneth that (whither mennes ſoules remayne after death, or whither they dye and periſh with their bodyes)

yet there is none euill at all in death. And the chéef reaſons whereby mennes ſoules are auouched too bée immortal, are gathered toogither by Cicero in his firſt booke of Tuſculane queſtions: which it is good too conſider, too the intent, the cō
                     ferring of them may bring ſome lyght too both the kyndes of doctrine.
               
               
                  The firſt reaſon is of Authoritie.
                  ANtiquitie, the néerer it was from the creation and fromAntiquitie. the offpring of GOD, ſo much the better did it ſée what things were true. All Antiquitie was of opinion yt mennes ſoules are immortall: and that man by departing out of this lyfe is not ſo cleane ſwept away, that he ſhould vtterly periſh:
                  
                     Ergo, it is true that mennes ſoules are immortall.
               
               
                  He proueth the minor or ſecond part.
                  
                     1 By naturall inſtincts.
                     2 By the Lawe of their préeſts.
                     3 By the ceremonies of buryall.
                     4 By Canonization.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond reaſon.
                  IN all matters, the conſent of all Nations, is too bée accoū
                     tedConſent of all Nations. the Lawe of Nature.
                  All men, wherſoeuer they bée, doo agrée in this, that there is ſomwhat, which perteyneth too thoſe that are departed out of this lyfe.
                  
                     Ergo, wée alſo ought too bée of the ſame opinion.
               
               
                  The third reaſon.
                  THe proof of Nature muſt bée taken of euery ſuch natureThe beſt natures. as is beſt.
                  
                     The beſt of all ſortes of men, as Princes, Poets, woorkmē, & others doo hold moſt ſtedfaſtly the hope of immortalitie.
                  
                     Ergo, men find by nature that mennes ſoules are immortal.
               
               
                  The fourth reaſon.
                  EVery thing that moueth it ſelfe, is euer moued, and is euerlaſting:Selfmouing. The ſoule of man moueth it ſelfe.
                  
                     Ergo, it moueth euer, and is euerlaſting.
               
               
                  The fifth reaſon.
                  THat which is not cōpounded of the Elements is not corruptible:Simpleneſſe vncōpounded. mānes ſoule is not cōpounded of the elements.
                  
                     Ergo, mannes ſoule is not corruptible or mortall.
               
               
                  He proueth the minor thus:
                  NO nature compounded of the Elements, hath ingraffed in it inſtincts of knowledge, power too ſearche ſecretes, memorie able too conceyue and beare away things moſt diuerſe, foreſyght of things too come, ſo many Artes. &c.
                  Mannes mynd hath ingraffed in it inſtincts of knowledge, ableneſſe too inuent new things, too call too mynd things paſt. &c.
                  
                     Ergo, mannes mynd is not compounded of the elements.
               
               
                  The ſixth reaſon.
                  IT is an vnmoueable maximée of Gods prouidence & iuſtice,Ryght and reaſon. that good ſhould befall the good, and euill ſhould befall the euill: But in this lyfe the good fare woorſt, as Socrates. &c.
                  
                  
                     Ergo, there muſt néedes remayne another lyfe, in which the good may receyue good, and thoſe that in their humane bodyes haue ledde their lyfe like Gods, may returne too the Gods frō whom they came.
                  Theſe foreſayd ſix Arguments are the Arguments of Cicero.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond part of the Chapter.
                  
                     IN what ſort shall the dead ryſe, and with what maner a body come they?
                  
                  Paule anſwereth, that the woord of the Almighty GODGods almyghtyneſſe. ought ſimply too bée beléeued, though wée know not the mā
                     ner how God will bring too paſſe the things he promyſeth. For (as ſainct Iuſtine ſayeth) It is an euident token of vnbeléef, too demaund (as too Godward or in Gods matters,) how any thing is or may bée doone. For fayth alone ought too diſpatch all doutes in vs. Paule therfore in this place rebuketh ſuch as bée inquiſitiue of the maner how dead mennes bodyes rotten in their graues and cōſumed too nothing ſhall come too lyfe ageine: commaunding them too ſettle their mynds by fayth ſimply in the promiſe and woord of the almighty God. And ageinſt our diſtruſtfulneſſe he ſetteth an Example moſt ordinarie in nature, concerning the growing of corne which ſpringeth vp of the ſeede caſt intoo the ground and dead and conſumed intoo fyne cinder. Therfore can God eaſly rayſe our buryed corſes out of the duſt intoo which they bée turned and buyld vp the whole bodye ageine, making it much more beautifull and glorious than it was before: like as thou ſoweſt not the ſame bodye that ſhall growe vp, but bare corne which rotteth in the ground, and yet there ſpringeth vp other corne of the ſame kynd and ſubſtance, much better and more full of ſap, clad, garniſhed, and ſenſed with ſpindle, eare, huſk, ayles, &c.
                  
                     Al flesh is not a like, but there is one flesh of men, an otherDiuerſities of glorie in the reſurrection. of beaſts, &c. That is too ſay, All the dead ſhall not ryſe with like honor, but there ſhall bée a difference, howbéeit, not in the ſubſtance but in the glorie of them that ryſe.
                  
                     Alſo there bee heauenly bodyes and there bee earthly bodyes,
                     Liuing ſoule. that is too ſay, there ſhall bée a difference betwéene the bodyes of the godly and the bodyes of the vngodly.
                  
                     There is one glorie of the Sunne, and another glorie of the Moone, and another glorie of the ſtarres, y• is to ſay, euē amōg

the godly and the Saincts in heauen there ſhall bée a differente of glorie. For like as one Starre excelleth another in bryghtneſſe: ſo ſhall Chryſt, the Prophetes, Apoſtles, and other conſtant Martyrs and acknowledgers of the ſonne of God, ſhyne bryghter than the other common ſort of the godly, as is ſayd Dan. xij. Then ſhall the lerned ſhyne like the bryghtneſſe of heauen, and thoſe that haue inſtructed many in ryghtuouſneſſe ſhall ſhyne like the Starres for euer and euer.
                  Then declareth he by foure Iſcolies ſet one ageinſt another,The ſtate of our bodyes in the reſurrectiō
                      what maner of bodyes the bodyes of them that ryſe agein ſhalbée: verely euen the ſelfſame yt they bée at their buriall as touching their ſubſtāce, but immortal, made bright, and glorified.
                  Wherein the phraſe of Paules wryting is too bée conſidered, how the nowne adiectiue in forme of a ſubſtantiue is ioyned too the ſubiect by the prepoſition In. It is ſowen in corruption, that is too ſay, it is buried in the ground a mortall or corruptible bodye▪ 
                     It ryſeth in incorruption, that is too ſay, it ryſeth an incorruptible or immortall bodye. It is ſowen in diſhonour, that is too ſay, a foule or ylfauoured bodye, ſtinking and crawling full of wormes. It ryſeth in glorie, that is too ſay, glorious, ſhyning, cléered, and pure from all blemiſh. It is ſowen in weakneſſe, that is too ſay, weake, frayle, tranſitorie, of a dayes continaunce, a ſhadowe, a froth, a Ghoſte, a ſteme, a blaſt, a fether, a breth, a puffe, a dreame, a bubble, a flud, a temple, a ſtrydey, a wynd, a duſt.
                  
                     It ryſeth in power, that is too ſay, myghtie, ſtrong, floriſſhing, and frée from all infirmitie. It is ſowen a natural body, that is too ſay, liuing the naturall lyfe by reaſon, ſenſe, and nouriſhing power, which is ſuſteyned with meat and drink, and is encreaſed, and begetteth, and may dye. It ryſeth a ſpirituall body, that is too ſay, liuing the ſpirituall lyfe, kindled by the holy Ghoſte, which is not maynteyned with meate & drink, ne begetteth, ne dyeth, but is like the lyfe of the Angels,

Math. xxij. and like the lyfe of God.
                  
                     The firſt man was made a liuing ſoule. Gen. ij. That is tooLiuing ſoule. wit, not ſimply as the beaſtes liue: but ſuch a one as Chryſt ſhould alſo with his ſpirit quicken without meat and drink, too the ſpirituall and euerlaſting lyfe.
                  
                     The firſt man is of the earth earthly. Hée alludeth too theThe firſt man. originall of the woord Adam, which ſignifyeth earth or clay, whereof he was made, like as alſo among the Latines, man is called Homo of Humus, which ſignifyeth the earth, as if he had ſayd, made of the earth, clay, and earthly.
                  
                     The ſecond man is the Lord from heauen. Chryſte beingThe ſecond man. riſen from Death, hath now a heauenly, immortall, and glorious body, too which our bodies ſhall in all reſpectes bée like and conformable, when they are raiſed ageine from Death. Phil. ij. Like as before Death they were altoogither like Adams body, which was ſubiect too Death and other miſeries.
                  
                     Flesh and blud cannot inherite the kingdom of God, thatFleſh & blud. is too ſay, this corruptible body defiled with ſinfull inclinations and fleſhly affections and ſubiect too death, cannot poſſeſſe the kingdome of God, vnleſſe it bée altered, (& of a body mortall, defyled and ſtained with ſinne) bée made a body pure and cleane, and fined from all filthineſſe, & immortal. The ſame fleſh that is buryed ſhal riſe agein, and the ſame ſubſtance of fleſh and blud ſhall remaine ſtill, as Iob ſayth: I ſhal ſée God in my ſelf, whom I my ſelf ſhall ſée, and none other for mée. For as Tertullian reaſoneth plainly in his bóoke concerning the reſurrection of the fleſh, God forbid that God ſhould for euermore abandon too deſtruction mannes fleſh which is the woorke of his handes, the care of hart, the caſe of his breth, the Quéene of his woorkes, the heire of his liberalitie, the préeſt of his religion, the ſouldyer of his warfare, and the ſiſter of his Chryſt▪ &c.
                  
                     Behold I shew you a myſterie, that is too ſay, I will more plainly expoūd and declare that which I told you more darkly in my former woords, when I ſayd: that fleſh & bloud ſhuld

not poſſeſſe the kingdome of God. For that ſaying is too hée vnderſtood, not of the ſubſtance of fleſhe and bloud, but of the exchaunge of their properties. For it behoueth this corruptible body which wée now beare about vs, too put on incorruption: and this ſelfſame mortal body too put on immortalitie, before it can obtein poſſeſſion of Gods kingdom. Some alſo ſhall not die at all, whom the ſonne of God ſhal find aliue at his comming too iudgement: but they ſhalbée ſodeinly changed, & endued with new lyght, glory, power & immortalitie.
               
               
                  The third part of the Chapter.
                  
                     THen shal the ſaying be fulfilled which is written. Eſay. xxv Oſee. xiij. Death is ſwallowed vp intoo victorie, O Death where is thy ſting, O Hell where is thy victorie? The ſting of Death is ſin, and the ſtrength of ſin is the law. But thanks bee to God who hath giuen vs victorie by our Lord Ieſus Chryſt.
                  
                  The efficient cauſe of the rayſing of our bodyes, and of reſtoremētThe efficient cauſe of our reſurrection. of ryghtuouſneſſe and euerlaſting lyfe: is the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, who in his Death hath ſwalowed vp our Death, and by his ryghtuouſneſſe & obedience hath purged our ſinnes, and pacifying Gods wrath & taking away the curſe of the law, hath gottē vs victorie ageinſt ſin, death, and the curſe of Gods law. For theſe thrée are the cruelleſt enemies of mankynd, and the chéef miſcheues & plages which mooſt cruelly and féerſly make hauock of all mankind, without difference, killing them and deuouring them euerychone. Therfore Paul in this place by feining a perſon, peintethDeath and ſin. out death like a moſt miſcheuous outlaw or cruell ſouldier armed with a pike or a darte, that is too wit with ſinne, wherwith he aſſaileth all mankind without gainſaying, and puſheth all men through and killeth them. For by reaſon of ſin all men are ſubiect too death, and are ſlaine by death, as is ſayd. Rom. v. By one man ſinne entered intoo the world, and by ſinne death. And ſo death ran ouer al men, bicauſe al men haue ſinne. Alſo, ſinne reigned by death, ſlaying all men. The

very ſame is the méening of the woords in this text, the ſting of Death is ſinne, that is too ſay, all men are ſlaine by Death bycauſe of ſinne.
                  Now when this ſting or ſpeare of Death wexeth dul and blunt, ſo as ſin cannot execute his ful force vppon vs and bée felt: Gods law like a whetſtone ſharpneth ſin, and both ſheweth the greatneſſe and horribleneſſe of ſin, and alſo makethGods lawe. it more heinous: ſo as ſin may become out of meaſure ſinful, and being fully felt too bée ſo, may ſtrike dreadfull feares and aſtraughtments into mennes conſciences: which immediatly vppon the ſtirring vp and diſcouering of ſin by the law, do giue ſentence of death ageinſt themſelues, & find themſelues giltie of eternall damnation. Too this méening it is ſayd, The power of ſin is the law, as in Rom. v. The law entred in that ſin myght abound. Alſo. Rom. vij. I had not knowne ſin but for the law. For when the commaundemēt came, ſin reuiued, and I am dead: that is too ſay, ye law ſhewed the hugeneſſe and heynouſneſſe of ſin, and of Gods wrath ageinſt ſin: and aſſoone as Gods wrath was once known, ſin which héertofore ſlept in quietneſſe, was ſtirred vp and became more ſtrong and effectual, and ouerwhelmed man with the féeling of Gods wrath, and with horrible dreadfulneſſe and endleſſe Death. For the law exacteth alwayes of vs ſuche an obedience and conformableneſſe as is vnpoſſible too mannes nature, and too thoſe that are not conformable, it thundreth out this thunder bolt, Curſſed is he that continueth not throughly in all thinges that are wrytten in the lawe. And ſo there was no ſhift but that all mankynde béeing ſubdued and oppreſſed by theſe moſte cruell enemies, ſinne, Deathe, and the curſſe of the lawe, which are the chéefe ſinewes of the DiuelsThe cheef finewes of the Diuels kingdome. kingdome, muſt haue periſhed vtterly. Neyther could he by any power of man or ſuccor of Angels, haue rid himſelfe out of this cruell Tyrannye, onleſſe theſe myghtye and dreadfull enemies of mankynde had bin vanquiſhed and ouerthrowne by the Sonne of God our Lorde Ieſus Chryſte,

who was born too vs & giuen to vs, who died for vs and roſe agein for vs, & that his victory had bin beſtowed vppon vs by faith. j. Ioh. v. Heb. ij. By his own death he put downe him y• had Lordſhip ouer death, that is too ſay the deuil: and reconciled thoſe which through feare of death wer all their life time oppreſſed with bondage. Coloſſ. ij. Yée are riſen ageine with Chryſt through faith, that is wrought by ye operation of GodOur victorie in Chryſt. which raiſed him frō death. And with him he hath quickened vs alſo that were dead in our ſinnes, and hath forgiuen our treſpaſſes, and put out the handwryting that was ageinſt vs in the law written, and hath takē it away, and faſtened it too his croſſe, and ſpoyled rule and power, and made a ſhewe of them openly, and tryumphed ouer them in his owne perſon. Eſay. ix. For the yoke of his burthen, (that is to wit, death and al calamities wherwith mankynd is ouerloden) & the ſtaffe of his shoulder, (that is too ſay ſin, which is the thing, ye ſtaffe or the dart with which death puſheth all men through & killeth them) and the ſcepter of his exaction, (that is too ſay, the law which exacteth perfect obedience, & with horrible wrath condemneth all men that are not conformable vntoo it) haſt thou ouercome or vanquished, as in the day of Madian. For like as Gedeon did put the Madianits too flight, not with bodyly armor and weapon, but only with the ſound of a trūpet, and by putting them in feare with burning creſſets: euen ſo the ſonne of God vanquiſheth his enemies, ſin, death and the diuel, with none other weapōs than a trumpet, that is to ſay the ſound of his Goſpel, and the fire of his holy ſpirite which kindleth in mennes harts the light of true fayth, ſettled vpon the ſonne of God the conqueror of ſinne and death, as is ſayd. j. Ioh. v. This is the victorie that ouercōmeth the world, euen your faith. And .j. Peter. v. Whom reſiſt you ſtrong in Faith. This excellent doctrine in al miſeries and ſorowes, the moſt ſouerein and aſſured comfort whereuppon our whole ſaluation is ſtayed, Paule ſetteth foorth in this place, beautifyed with twoo teſtimonies.
                  
                     
                     Eſay. xxv. Death is ſwalowed vp intoo victorie.
                  
                  
                     Oſe. xiij. Death, where is thy ſting? Hell, wher is thy victory▪
                      Now too the entent theſe textes alledged by Paule may bée vnderſtood the better, and the largeneſſe of the Doctrine and comfort compriſed in them bée looked the néerer vntoo and the eaſlyer cōſidered: I wil adde the grammaticall expoſition of them. The woordes of Eſay are theſe.
                  
                     In this mountaine shal he ſwalowe vp or deuour the wrappingEſays propheſie of the taking away of death by Chriſt. of faces wherein all people are wrapped, and the couering wherewith all nacions are couered. And he shall ſwalowe vp death intoo victorie. And the Lord God shall wipe awaye the teares from all faces, and shall take away the rebuke or reproche of his people out of all the earth.
                  
                  Eſay preacheth of the benefites of the ſonne of God, that he moſt puiſſantly deliuereth his Churche bothe from all other moſte ſorowfull and principall euils, and in eſpecially from Death, which no force and wiſdome of man can ouercome: When as by his Death he not only vanquiſheth and ouerthroweth our Death, but alſo vtterly aboliſheth it, and ſwalloweth it vp: and wypeth away and croſſeth out the reproche and teares of his people, that is too wit, ſinne, and all other miſeries and ſorowes. But in the beginning he ſpeaketh figuratiuely, when he ſayeth that the wrapping of the face wherwith all people are wrapped shall be deuoured. For by the figure Metonimya (which is a tranſpoſing of names) he noteth the thing ſignifyed by the name of the thing that betokeneth it. For the faces of dead folkes are woont too bée wrapped and hidden in clothes. Theſe wrappings ſhall bée taken away, that is too ſay, death it ſelfe ſhallbée taken away or deuoured according as Eſay himſelfe anon after expoundeth that properly, which he had ſpoken erſt figuratiuely, as the Prophets are accuſtomed too doo. He shall deuour or ſwalow vp death intoo victorie, or by ſwalowing vp deathe the ſonne of God shall get the vpper hand, and shall reygne and triumph, like as death had erſt reigned ouer mankinde, and
                     
                     made hauocke of all menne and none coulde wythſtande him.
                  
                  The thrée ſcore and ten interpreters haue trāſlated theſeEſays propheſie expounded by Paule. woordes of Eſay, thus. And Death preuayling deuoured, bycauſe Death waſteth away & deuoureth all men. But Paul too the intent too ſet foorth the true and natiue meening of Eſay, and too ſhewe that it ought not too haue bin tranſlated, Death preuayling deuoured, But he (that is too ſay the ſonne of God) deuoured Death: chaungeth the verbe actyue intoo a paſſiue, and ſo expreſſeth the ſame méening, how bee it muche more plainly and piththely. Death is ſwallowed vp intoo victorie, that is too ſay, Death which héertofore deuoured al mē, is now it ſelfe deuoured and ſwalowed vp intoo victorie by the ſonne of God the conqueror of Death, ſo as nowe from hencefoorth the ſonne of God is a continuall conqueror and euerlaſting tryumpher ouer Death. For the Hebrue woorde Nitzach, is as muche too ſay as too vanquiſhe, too preuayle, too tryumph, and now and then it ſignifieth alſo euerlaſting, continuall, and for euermore. Therfore in the Latin tranſlacion of Eſay, wée read: He shall ouerthrow death for euermore. But wée may moſt ſafely folow Paules tranſlation.
               
               
                  The other place is in Oſee. xiij.
                  
                     I Will redeeme them from the hand of hel, I wil deliuer themOſees propheſie expounded. from Death. where are thy plages O Death? wher is thy deſtruction O hell?
                  
                  Oſeas alſo preacheth of this moſt ſouerein benefite of the ſonne of God, that although his Church in this world bée oppreſſed with manyfold perſecution and miſeries as well as the reſt of men that are vngodly: yet will he vndoutedly deliuer it from Death and out of the very iawes of hell, and wil endue it with new lyfe and euerlaſting ioyfulneſſe. For the Hebrue woord Scheol▪
                      (which vſually they tranſlate hel,) dooth properly ſignifie the graue wherin the bodyes of deade

folkes are beſtowed, & alſo the place in which mennes ſoules departing from their bodyes, are reſerued till the laſt iudgement day. The Prophet therfore promiſeth deliuerance too the godly members of the church, not yt they ſhalbée priuiledged in this lyfe from all miſeries and from death it ſelfe: but that when they are diſpatched out of this lyfe and buryed in their graues, euen then he willeth them too looke for aſſured deliuerance or reſurrection, & a much better life which ſhall continue for euer, bicauſe Death (which héertoofore was the plage and deſtruction of all mankynd and deuoured al men) is now ageine deuoured and ſwalowed by Chryſt our redéemer, who paying the full pryce or raunſome for vs, hathe borowed vs out, for ſo doo the Hebrew woordes Pada and Gaal ſignifie, which the Prophet vſeth in this place.
                  And as touching the woordes that enſue, (which Hierom
                     Interpretation of the grammaticall ſenſe of the vvordes. hathe tranſlated thus: Ero mors tua ô Mors, Ero morſus tuus ô Inferne. That is too ſay, O Death I will bée thy Death, O hell I will bée thy ſting: and which Paule hath expreſſed by an Interrogation, O Death where is thy ſting? O Hell where is thy victorie?) It is euident that the diuerſitie of the interpretations ryſeth of the Hebrew woordes which haue many ſignifications.
                  For the woord Ehe, and the future tence Cal is of the verb Haiah by Apocape (which is a figure that taketh away a letter or a ſillable from the end of a woord (for the whole woord is Ehieh I will bée.) And ſo is the aduerbe where, which alſo by tranſpoſition of letters is red Aieh. It appéereth therfore why Paule and the .lxx. Interpreters, and Aquila of Sinope, and the fifth edition (all which Ierom citeth,) haue tranſlated the woord Ehe where,
                      and not I will bee. Where is thy inditement or accuſation?
                  The woorde following Deuareca (which S. Ierome tranſlateth Mors tua, thy Death) the thrée ſcore and ten Interpreters tranſlate 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      thy accuſation or inditement,

and Aquila, ſermones tui, thy ſayings,) is likewyſe of many ſignifications. For the woord Dibber ſignifyeth too ſpeake, and alſo too kill or deſtroy. ij. Reg. xxij. Athalia Dedabber ſlew all the kings ſtocke. Héeruppon Deber is as muche too ſay as a plage, a murreine, or a deſtruction. Exod. ix. ij. Reg. vlt. iij. Reg. viij. And the other word Keleb in the part folowing is almoſt of the ſame ſignification, for it ſignifieth a waſting plage, or deſtruction, and rooting out. As in the Pſalme xcj. Thou ſhalt not bee afrayd of Deber, the plage that rageth in the darke, nor of Keleb, the deſtruction that waſteth at the noone day. Where wée in our Latin tranſlation haue, A negocio perambulante in tenebris, ab incurſu & a Daemonio Meridiano. Which is, of the buſineſſe walking in the darke, of the ſodein ruſhing in, and of the Diuel of the noone day.
                  Therfore the proper méening of Oſée is (out of all dout)The proper meening of Oſce. this Where are thy plages O death? where is thy rooting out O hell? Death and Hell did héeretoofore bring plage and vtter deſtruction vppon all men, through ſinne wherewith all mankynd is horribly atteinted and appaired: And then cheefly is this plage felt, then dooth it ſhewe it ſelf, then dooth it ſtrike a man intoo horrible fearfulneſſe and ſorowes, (which are the enterances intoo euerlaſting Death,) when ſinne is ſtirred vp and rowzed by the lawe of God, as Paule ſayeth. Rom. vij. But Chryſte by his death and gooing downe intoo hell, hath brought a plage and deſtruction vppon deathe and hell. So that from hence foorth not only Chryſt himſelfe, but alſo all the godly that beléeue in Chryſt, may vaunt themſelues ouer vanquiſhed Death and deſtroyed Hel, with theſe woordes: Death vvhere is thy plage or ſting? wherwith thou haſte heretofore murdered all mankynd? Hell, where is thy victorie: whereby thou haſt vanquished all men? Thankes bée vntoo God who hath giuen vs victorie by our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, for God ſo loued the world, that he gaue his only begotten ſonne, too the entēt that all that beleeue in him ſhould not periſh but haue lyfe euerlaſting.
                  
                     For like as Moyſes lifted vp the ſerpent in the wilderneſſe: ſo behoued it the ſonne of man too bee exalted, too the intent that all that beléeue in him ſhould not periſh but haue lyfe euerlaſting.
                  
                     Therfore my deerbeloued brethren, bee ſtedfaſt, vnmouable, and alwayes abounding in the woork of the Lord, knowing that your labour is not in vayne in the Lord.
                  
                  He concludeth his diſputation with a ſhort Exhortation,An exhortation to ſtedfaſtneſſe. that they ſhould ſtedfaſtly hold them too the true doctrine cō
                     cerning the Reſurrection of the dead and the other Articles of the Chriſten fayth which they had receyued of Paule, and not ſuffer themſelues too bée drawen away from it by any likely perſuaſions of the falſe Apoſtles, but endeuer too profit in true godlyneſſe and full aſſuredneſſe of fayth, and the ſpreading abrode of the true doctrine, and in executing the reſidue of the labours of their vocation, vpon truſt of Gods helpe, and hope of luckye ſucceſſe and ſuch as may bée too the welfare of the Churche, according too this moſt ſwéete promiſe. Your labour ſhall not bee in vayne in the Lord.
                  
               
            
            
               Vppon the Sunday called Quaſi modo geniti, or the first Sunday after Easter.
               IT tooke this name of the Introit taken out of. j. Pet. ij. AsThe cuſtome of baptizing in old tyme. newborne babes deſyre the reaſonable and pure milke, that you may growe in it, if ſo bée you haue taſted that the Lord is ſwéete. For in the auncient Churche when in manner men growen were baptized, it was a cuſtome too baptize on the Eaſter holydayes, and too giue milke to taſte, too thoſe that were baptized and a whyte garment too put on, whiche was a token of freedome and innocencie. Whereuppon the wéeke is called yet ſtill in Albis, and the Sunday is called the Sunday in Albis, or whyte Sunday, and it is that which

foloweth next after Eaſter. And the verſes out of the hymne Salue feſta dies are knowen.
               
                  Behold o holy King great part of thy renowne is ſeene
                  When ſacred baptim doth aduāce the ſoules by thee made cleene.
                  Thy ſouldiers from the ſiluer ſtreame come pure and whyte of hew
                  Cleane waſhed from their aūcient ſinne with water freſh & new.
                  Their raimēt whyte betokeneth eke the brightneſſe of their mynd
                  It is the ſhepeherds ioy ſo fair and whyte a flocke too fynd.
               
               Therfore alſo were the reading of this dayes Epiſtle and the Introit in which mention is made of regeneration, ordeyned, that the baptized might bée inſtructed concerning their regeneration or newbirth, and of their encounters and victories ageinſt the Diuell and the world.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. j. Iohn. v.
                  
                     ALl that is borne of God, ouercommeth the world. And this is the victorie that ouercommeth the world, euen our fayth. Who is hee that ouercommeth the world, but he that beleeueth that Ieſus is the ſonne of God? This Ieſus Chryſt is he that came by water and blud, not by water onely, but by water and blud. And it is the ſpirit that beareth witneſſe, bycauſe the ſpirit is trueth. For there are three which beare recorde in heauen: the Father, the woord, and the holy Ghoſte, and theſe three are one. And there are three whiche beare recorde in earth: the ſpirite, and water, and blud: and theſe three are one. If wee receyue the witneſſe of menne, the witneſſe of God is greater. For this is the witneſſe of God that is greater, which he teſtified of his ſonne. Hee that beleeueth on the ſonne of God, hath the witneſſe in him ſelfe. He that beleeueth not God, hath made him a lier, bycauſe he beleeueth not the recorde that God gaue of his ſonne. And this is the recorde, howe that GOD hath giuen vntoo vs eternall

lyfe, and this lyfe is in his ſonne. Hee that hath the ſonne, hath lyfe: and hee that hath not the ſonne of GOD, hath not lyfe.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of that kynde of caces that inſtruct. The ſtate of it is a doctrine concerning fayth, leaning vppon the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, which fayth ouercommeth ſin, death, and receyueth rightuouſneſſe and euerlaſting lyfe.
                  
                     The cheefe places are theſe.
                     1 Of faith wherby wée are borne of God.
                     2 Of the obiect of fayth, or of the perſone and benefites of Chryſt.
                     3 A teſtimonie that the thrée perſones of the Godhead are all of one ſubſtance.
                     4 Of the miniſterie of the Goſpel, and of the Sacraments of Baptim and the Lords Supper.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  THe welſpring aud ſoule of godlyneſſe and Chryſten lyfeThe cōmendation of fayth. and the originall and head of our endleſſe welfare, is fayth in the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſu Chryſt our Mediator, King, and Préeſt: which fayth is in no wyſe an ydle and vayne perſuaſion, but the liuely and effectual inſtrument of our ſaluation, wherby wée receyue intoo vs the true knowledge of God, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and all Gods benefites, yea and euen God himſelf, and ouercome ſin and death, and obteyne rightuouſneſſe, lyfe, and glorie euerlaſting.
                  Of this true and effectuall faith there is a notable deſcriptionA deſcription of fayth. in this dayes Epiſtle, which wée will vnfold in theſe woordes. Fayth is a true perceuerance of Chryſts perſone and benefites & of al the whole doctrine deliuered by God, and it is an aſſent wherby wée perſuade our ſelues that all

the Articles of the doctrine are true, and in eſpecially beléeue that Ieſus is the ſonne of God, and Chryſt or the anoynted of God, that is too ſay, our King, Hygh preeſt, Mediatour and Redéemer. And it is an aſſured truſt ſtedfaſtly ſettled in the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, the vanquiſher of ſin, death and the Diuil, aſſuring a man for a certeintie that for Chryſts ſake his ſinnes are releaſed, and himſelfe ſet in gods fauour who receyueth, héereth, helpeth, defendeth, and freely rewardeth with lyfe and glorie euerlaſting. This fayth in Chriſt ouercommeth the world, that is too ſay, ſinne, and the entycementes of ſin, and the Diuell himſelfe the Prince of the world, and death which is the chéef ſinew of the Diuels power, as is ſayd. j. Iohn. ij. If any man loue the world, the loue of the Father is not in him, for euery thing that is of the world, (as the luſt of the fleſhe, the luſt of the eyes, and pryde of lyfe) is not of the Father, but of the world.
                  Now the lyfe of man vppon earth is a continuall warfareMannes lyfe a vvarfare. and deadly foode ageinſt foure cruell and mightie enemies, that is too wit, the Diuell (who is furniſhed with a thouſand pollicies too anoy) the ſinfull prouocations of our owne nature rebelling ageinſt the Lawe of God, the perſecutions of Tyrants: and the afflictions of all ſortes bothe of mynd and bodye. With theſe foure enemies muſt al godly folke fyght continually as long as they are in this world. Neyther is any man able too ouercome them, ſaue he that is borne of God. But they are borne of GOD, that beléeue inWho are borne of God. Chryſt, (as is ſayd in the beginning of this Chapter. Euery one which beleeueth that Ieſus is Chryſt, is borne of God) and whiche with ſtedye fayth embrace and hold faſt the woord that is deliuered by God, and in whom the holy Ghoſt dwelling, purgeth and putteth away the old Leuen, or falſe opinions, and ſinfull inclinations and affections: kindleth in them a new lyght, new ryghtuouſneſſe, new lyfe, and newe obedience agréeing with Gods will.
                  For in aſmuch as all men are conceyued in ſinne, andHovv folke are borne a nevve.
                     
borne the children of wrath and bondſlaues of the Diuell: they can not become the ſonnes of God and inheriters of euerlaſting lyfe and ſaluation, before ſuch tyme as they bée borne agein or begotten agein of GOD, that is too ſay, endewed with true fayth, or new rightuouſneſſe and lyfe. God regenerateth or begetteth men a new, by twoo meanes: by the Goſpell concerning Chryſte, or by the woord receyued by fayth, and by the Sacrament of Baptim. j. Pet. j. Yée are borne agein of vncorruptible ſéede by the woord of the liuing God. Iohn. iiij. Except a man bée borne ageine of water and the holy Ghoſt, &c. Tit. iij. He hath ſaued vs by the fountaine of the newbirth. And theſe woordes or termes, iuſt, ryghtuouſe, godly, holy, beléeuing in Chryſte, borne of God, childe or ſonne of GOD, new man, perfect, ſwéete or vnleuened bread, &c, ſignifie in a maner all one thing.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  THe chéef obiect of fayth is our Lord Ieſus Chryſt. And itThe cheef obiect or thing vvhereon fayth reſteth. ſtandeth the godly in hand too haue a ryght opinion and beléef concerning the perſone, office and benefites of Chryſt, according as Iohn ſayeth in this place, that wée muſt beléeue that Ieſus is the ſonne of God, and that he is Chryſte, and that he came by water and bloud, like as alſo in this dayes Goſpell he appoynteth the ſame end and ſhooteanker of the ſtorie of the Goſpell and of the whole ſacred Scripture. Theſe things are written too the intent yee should beleeue that Ieſus is Chryſt the ſonne of God, and that by beleeuing yee myght haue lyfe in his name.
                  
                  The name of Sonne ſheweth that Chryſt is in very déedThe name of Sonne. and by nature God, & begotten of the ſubſtance of the eternall father, as it is ſayd in ye Pſalme. Thou art my ſonne, this day haue I begotten thée. And in the Goſpell he putteth a difference betwene this only begotten ſonne & the Saints which are his ſonnes by adoption, and are beloued of the eternall father, and taken in place of Gods ſonnes and heires

of the lyfe and bliſſedneſſe that is with God, for the interceſſion of this only begotten ſonne.
                  Chryſt or the anoynted, ſignifieth the hygh Préeſt, or teacherThe name Chryſt. of the Goſpell, the Spokeſman and Redéemer of the Church, the King and conquerour of ſin, death, & the Diuell, and the reſtorer of rightuouſneſſe and lyfe euerlaſting.
                  
                     This Chryſt came by water and blud: not in water onely,Water & blud. but in water and blud, for he bringeth the doctrine of the goſpell out of the boſom of the eternall Father, concerning the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, rightuouſneſſe, cōfort, the holy Ghoſt, and euerlaſting ſaluation too bée beſtowed vppon all that are throughly put in feare, which wreſtle with the terrours, with Gods wrath, with ſinne and with death, and thirſt or with earneſt deſire long after comfort and lyfe, and are waſhed with the water of Baptim in token of remiſſiō of their ſinnes, as is ſayd in Eſai. lv. All yée that thirſt, come too the waters: and Iohn. iiij. and .vij. If any man drink of the water that I ſhall giue him, it ſhall become a fountaine of water flowing vntoo euerlaſting lyfe.
                  
                     Neyther is he come in water only, that is too ſay, he is notTo come in vvater. only a teacher of ye goſpel wherwith the thirſtie harts of the godly are refreſhed, but alſo he is a Redéemer which hath wt his blud pacified the wrath of the eternal father ageinſt our ſins, & redéemed ye whole church from ſin, death, & euerlaſting damnation. And this holy blud of his doth he diſtribute too vs in his holy ſupper. Ebr. ix. By his own blud hath he entered intoo the holy place once for all, and hath found eternall redemption. Rom. iij. Wée are iuſtified fréely by the grace of God, through the redemption made in Ieſu Chryſte, whom GOD hath ſet foorth a mercy ſeate by fayth in his bloud. Math. xxvj. This is my blud of the new Teſtament whiche is ſhed for many in remiſſion of their ſinnes.
                  
                     And it is the ſpirit that beareth witneſſe, that is too ſay, theThe ſpirit is a vvitneſſe of Chryſt and his doctrine. holy ghoſt beareth witneſſe of the perſone & office of Chryſt, namely y• this Ieſus is Chryſt, the ſonne of God. & the redéemer

that was promiſed too the church, as is ſayd Iohn. j. Vppon whom thou ſéeſt the ſpirit deſcending & abyding vppon him, the ſame is he that baptizeth with the holy ghoſt, and I ſawe & bare witneſſe that this is the ſonne of God. Rom. j. Who was certeinly ſhewed too bée the ſonne of God, by the ſpirit of ſanctification, in that he is riſen from death. Ageine, in the publick miniſterie, the holy ghoſt preſerueth, ſpreadeth abrode, and by teſtimonies of miracles confirmeth the doctrine concerning the perſone and benefits of Chryſt. Ioh. xv. When the comforter ſhal bée come, euen the ſpirit of truthe whom I will ſend you from my Father, he ſhall beare witneſſe of mée, and you alſo ſhall beare witneſſe, bycauſe you haue bin with mée from the beginning.
                  
                     Bycauſe the ſpirit is truthe, or the witneſſe of the holy ghoſt is true like as in Iohn. xv. and .xvj. he is called the ſpirit of truthe, bycauſe he is ſoothfaſt, and maketh folks ſoothfaſt, & kindleth true knowledge of God, true rightuouſneſſe, & true lyfe in the beléeuers.
               
               
                  Of the third place.
                  
                     THere bee three that beare witneſſe in heauen, the Father,The three perſones of the Godhead. the VVoord, and the holy Ghoſt, and theſe three are one.
                  
                  Let this euident witneſſe of the one ſubſtāce or only one ſelfſame being, godhead, power, maieſtie, & glorie of the thrée perſones of the godhead, bée conſidered in this place: and alſo let the deſcriptions & differēces of the thrée perſones, namely of the father, & of the ſonne (who in this place and in Ioh. j. & Apoc. xix. is named the woord) & of the holy ghoſt, bee repeated out of the place concerning God: the cheef poyntes whereof I will anon after expound vppon Trinitie Sunday.
               
               
                  The fourth place.
                  
                     THere are three that beare witneſſe in earth, the ſpirit, andThe end vvhy the miniſterie vvas ordeined. water, and blud, and theſe three are one.
                  
                  God hath ordeyned the publike preaching of his Goſpell, too the intent, the true doctrine concerning the ſonne of God our lord Ieſus Chriſt who ſuffered death & roſe agein for vs,

myght bée knowen, and many men bée conuerted too God by the voyce of his Goſpell, and ſo becōme heires of ryghtuouſneſſe and lyfe euerlaſting. For God gathereth too himſelf an euerlaſting Church by the ſound of his woorde, wherby he both rebuketh mennes ſinnes, and allureth them too repentance: and alſo giueth remiſſion of ſinnes and euerlaſting ſaluation too ſuch as repent and beléeue the woord. And alwayes too the woord God hath annexed outward ſignes, which lyght intoo the eyes, as pictures of his promiſes: which ſignes haue all one méening, all one ſtrength, all one vſe, and all one effect or working with the woord. For by theſe twoo meanes, namely the woord and the outward ſignes or Sacraments, dooth God beare witneſſe of his ſonne, and offereth too vs forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and euerlaſting ſaluation for his ſonnes ſake: and alſo kindleth encreaſeth, and ſtrenghtheneth fayth in our myndes. And therfore Auſtin termeth a Sacrament, a viſible woord.
                  And like as Chryſt ſayeth that the holy Ghoſt reprouethWhat the vvoord ſpirit ſignifyeth in the foreſayd text. the world of ſinne, and beareth witneſſe of him: and like as it is ſayd in Geneſis, My ſpirit ſhall not iudge in man, bycauſe he is fleſhe, that is too ſay, I will take away the miniſterie or vſe of the holy Ghoſte from men. So in this place the woord Spirit muſt moſt ſimply bée vnderſtood of the holy Ghoſt reprouing the world of ſinne by the miniſterie of the Goſpell, and bearing witneſſe of Chryſtes perſone and benefites, and of the eternall lyfe.
                  
                     VVater and blud ſignifie the Sacramentes of Baptim,What vvater and blud ſignifye. (which is the Lauer of water clēzing vs cleane by the woord from all iniquitie) and of the Lords Supper, in whiche the bodye and blud of Chryſt that was ſhed for vs, is diſtributed in aſſurance of remiſſion of ſinnes. And theſe three are one, that is too ſay, they are directed all too one end and haue all one ſelfſame force, vſe, and effect. For the meanes by which God witneſſeth of his ſonnes benefites, and by which he imparteth remiſſion of ſinnes and euerlaſting lyfe too vs, and

wherby he rayſeth vp, encreaſeth and confirmeth our fayth, are alwayes toogither.
               
            
            
               Vppon the Sunday called Miſericordia, or the ſecond Sunday after Eaſter.
               
                  The Introit.
                  THe earth is full of the Lords mercy. Prayſe yee the Lord. The heauens are ſtabliſhed by the woord of God. Prayſe yee the Lord. Reioyce yée rightuous in the Lord, praiſing becommeth the ryghtuous. &c. Pſalm. xxxij.
               
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Peter. ij.
                  
                     CHryſt alſo ſuffred for vs, leauing vs an enſample that yee should folowe his ſteps, which did no ſinne, neither was there guile founde in hys mouth: which when he was reuiled, reuiled not ageine: when he ſuffered, he threatned not: but committed the vengeance too him that iudgeth ryghteouſly, which his owne ſelfe bare our ſinnes in his bodye on the tree, that wee beeing deliuered from ſinne, should liue vntoo ryghteouſneſſe. By whoſe ſtripes yee were healed. For ye were as sheepe going aſtray, but are now turned vnto the shepheard, and Bishop of your ſoules.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THe ſtate of it is an exhortacion to patience and méekneſſe taken of the example of Chriſt who was patient & méek. And therwithall is annexed a doctrine concerning the merit and benefites of Chryſtes paſſion. The ch
                        •
                     ef places are four.
                  
                     1 Of patience in troubles which are not procured by a mannes owne fault, but happen too him vndeſerued. It belongeth too the firſt commaundement.
                     2 Of méekeneſſe repreſſing deſire of reuenge, & forgiuing euen open wrongs for Gods ſake & the common quietneſſe.

Which perteyneth too the fifth commandemēt.
                     3 Of the cauſes and effects of Chriſtes paſſion, or of remiſſion of ſinnes, and of the health of our ſoules reſtored by Chryſtes paſſion.
                     4 Of true turning vntoo God.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  COncerning patience and méekneſſe, and putting vp of reproches quietly, let the Methodicall or orderly expoſitiōs bée reherſed out of the declaration of the vertues of the firſt, fifth, and eigth commaundements.
                  Concerning the paſſion of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and the cauſes and effectes of his paſſion, which is the chéefe place of this Epiſtle, I haue intreated already the laſt Sunday after Eaſter.
                  Now therefore wée wil vnfold the laſt ſentence of the Epiſtle of this day, which conteineth the Doctrine concerning true conuerſion, and the right applyment of the benefites of Chryſtes paſſion. Yee were as ſtray sheep, but now ye are turned to the shepherd and bishop of your ſoules. Theſe woords are taken out of the .liij. of Eſay, and out of the parable of Chriſt concerning the loſt ſhéep. Lu. xv. and out of this dayes Goſpell. Iohn. x. and out of Ezech. xxxiiij. and out of Pſalm. xxiij. and therfore by conferring theſe places toogither, there may bée gathered a cléere propoſition.
                  All man kynd without Chriſt, wandreth in the thick miſtMākind vvyth out Chryſt. of ignorance of God, and in ſorowfull darkneſſe of ſinne and death. And the wyſer and more religious that men bee, and with how much the more earneſtneſſe and endeuer they goe about too know God and too woorſhip him aryght: ſo muche the more doo they ſtray aſide from the true God and true godlyneſſe, and from the ryghtuouſneſſe which pleaſeth God.
                  The heathen wyſemen, Philoſophers, Poets, and the folowersErrour touching Gods beeing. of Mahomet doo openly erre: firſt about the béeing of God. For either they alow and woorſhip a monſtrous multitude

of Gods & ſurmiſed powers: or at leaſtwiſe they deny him y• is the father of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, too bee the only true God creator of heauen & earth. Yea they vtterly abhor this ſonne of God who is all one ſubſtance with the father.
                  Secondly they erre about the will of God. For althoughTouching Gods vvill. they vnderſtād after a ſort, that the wil of God reueled in his law, is this, that wée ſhould liue honeſtly and vprightly, & eſchue the outward offences of ſlaughter, whordom. &c. yet are they able too determine nothing of certeintie cōcerning gods loue towards vs, cōcerning remiſſion of ſinnes, & concerningErrours of the papiſtes in ſeruing God. life, without the goſpel of Chriſt. After al this, not only they, but alſo euen thoſe that boaſt themſelues to be the chéef mē
                     bers of the true church, doo erre manifoldly in dooing ſeruice to God, and ſpecially in praying: while ſome chuſe the monkiſh ſeruices & woorks, ſome pilgrimages to Sainctes, ſome maſſes, ſome pardōs, ſome other ſacrifices, & ſome one woork, and ſome another, euery man according too his owne fanſie, truſting therby too pacifie God, & too earne life and ſaluation euerlaſting. The heathen alſo offred mē in ſacrifiſe, & burned their own children in the fire, to the intent by ſo hard & bitter a woork, to open to thēſelues a néerer acceſſe vnto God. But al theſe run very far a ſtray from the true way yt leadeth tooChryſt is the only vvay too▪ God and godlyneſſe. the true God & to eternal ſaluation. Neither cā they by their own power, deuiſes, or endeuer return agein into the way, onleſſe Chryſt the ſhepherd and Biſhop of ſoules ſéeke them out, and laying them vpon his ſhoulders, cary them home too his flocke and ſhéepfold, that is too ſay, onleſſe they bée turned too Chriſt, who only is the way that leadeth, bringeth, & conueyeth vs vntoo God, and by which alonly wée may come too the true acknowledgement and woorſhipping of God, and too the bliſſed and eternal company with God. He is the truth or the welſpring & founder of the true doctrine concerning God and our own ſoulhealth, & he bendeth our minds to giue aſſēt too the true doctrine, and kindleth true faith, and true euerlaſting good things in the hartes of the godly.
                  
                     He is Lyfe, that is too ſay, the author and giuer of lyfe andChryſt is lyfe. ſaluacion euerlaſting, who by his Death hath pacified Gods wrathe, and reſtored ryghtuouſneſſe and eternall lyfe vntoo vs. Neyther commeth any man too the father, that is too ſay, No man acknowledgeth, calleth vppon, & woorſhippeth God aryght, ne becommeth heire of ſaluation and eternall lyfe: onleſſe he bée turned by him and too him who is the ſhepherd and Biſhop of our ſoules.
                  Therfore the Hebrewes terme repentance (or the amēdmentRepentance. and chaunging of a wicked lyfe intoo a lyfe that is vertuous and acceptable too God,) by the notable & pithy woord T
                           •
                        ſ
                           •
                        ubah, which ſignifieth turning backe or retyring, of the original woord Shub, which is as much too ſay as, he is returned, he is come backe he hath called himſelfe home. For all men being turned from God, haue ſtrayed like ſhéepe euery man away by himſelfe, as Peter ſayeth in this place. But by the infinite mercye of God, they are called too repentaunce, that they ſhould returne vntoo God, and by comming home too their ſhepherd Chryſt, bée coupled too God ageine through Faith, and obey him in new lyght, ryghtuouſneſſe and conuerſation.
                  In generall there bée twoo chéefe poyntes belonging too aPointes of a good ſhepherd good ſhepherd. The one is to féed his ſhéep or too lead them too wholſome féeding: and the other is to defend them from the wolues. For vntoo theſe twoo poyntes may the other things be referred which are ſpoken of in Ezech. xxxiiij. & Pſal. xxiij.
                  So good Princes which maintein their ſubiects in honeſtGood Princes be ſhepherds. awe, peace, and foyzon, (the cheefeſt benefites in this ciuil ſocietie of men) and which defend them ageinſt outlawes and forrein enemies, are ſhepherds of the people.
                  Good and faithfull Biſhops or miniſters of Churches, areBiſhops and miniſters are ſhepherds. ſhepherdes, which lead their hearers intoo wholſom paſtures of the Euangelicall doctrine, and of the Sacraments, wherby God imparteth remiſſiō of ſinnes, ryghtuouſneſſe & euerlaſting ſaluation to the ſhéep yt embrace their voyce by faith:

and driue away the Woolues, that is too ſay, Heretikes and Tyrants by feruent prayer, ſtout ſtanding too the truth, and euident diſprouing of errors.
                  But the ſōne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt is not a ſhepherdHovv Chryſt is a ſhepherd. and Biſhop of our ſoules, only after the ſame manner that S. Peter and the reſt of the Apoſtles and miniſters that teach the goſpel are: but alſo he is our high préeſt and ſacrifiſe taking vp the loſt ſhéep vpon his ſhoulders, and tranſferring all our ſinnes, making ſatiſfaction for them with his death & paſſion, and euen by his owne proper power reſtoring euerlaſting lyfe and rightuouſneſſe vntoo vs. He giueth vs the holy ghoſt: he kindleth in vs new lyght, cōfort, lyfe and ioy ſettled in God: he defendeth vs from all daungers: he vpholdeth ſuch as are oppreſſed with perſecution and miſeries: he healeth our miſdeedes and wounds: he ruleth the purpoſes of our vocation: he giueth healthful ſucceſſe: he diſapointeth the lets and ſnares of the Diuel: he repreſſeth the rage of Tyrantes: and in the end deliuering vs from death and all miſeries, he raiſeth vs vp too euerlaſting lyfe & glorie. And ſo wée ſée that in this ſhort text of Peters, there are conteyned the chéef and moſt ample places of Chriſten doctrine, concerning ſin, true repentance or turning vntoo God, the office and benefites of Chriſt, and the health of our ſoules: A more large and ful declaration of which things, may bée repeted out of my wrytings that comprehend the ſumme of the doctrine, and out of the proper and peculiar exercyſes of repentance and fayth.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday called Iubilate, or the third Sunday after Eaſter.
               
                  The Introit.
                  BEe ioyfull vntoo the Lord all the earth. Halleluia. Sing Pſalmes vntoo his name. Halleluia. Giue glory vntoo his maieſtie Halleluia. Say vntoo God, howe dreadfull are thy woorks O Lord in the abundance of thy power. &c. Pſal. lxv
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Peter. ij.
                  DEerly beloued I beſeech you as ſtrāgers & pilgrims, abſtein frō fleshly luſts which fight ageinſt the ſoul: and ſe that ye haue honeſt conuerſation amōg the Gentiles, that wheras they backbite you as euil doers, they may ſee your good works, and praiſe God in the day of viſitatiō. Submit your ſelues therfore to euery mā for the Lords ſake, whether it be vnto the king as vnto the chefe hed: either vnto rulers, as vnto them that are ſēt of him for the punishment of euil doers, but for the laud of thē that doo wel. For ſo is the wil of God, that with wel dooing, ye may ſtop the mouthes of folish and ignorant men: as free, and not as hauing the liberty of a cloke for maliciouſneſſe, but euē as the ſeruants of god. Honor al mē, loue brotherly felowship, fear God, honor the king▪ Seruants obey your maſters with all feare, not only if they be good and curteous, but alſo thoughe they be froward. For it is thanks worthy if a man for conſciēce ſake towards God endure greef, ſuffering wrongfully.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  IT is of thoſe kind of caſes that perſuade. And the ſtate of the Epiſtle is this: I exhort you too liue honeſtly, and too bée obedient too your ſuperiors. The places are thrée.
                  
                     1 A general precept cōcerning good maners or new obediēce.
                     2 Of obedience too bée performed too the magiſtrate, & lawes of the countrie, & of bearing the burthens of the common weale, yea though they bée ſomewhat too ſore.
                     3 Of Chriſten libertie, and the abuſe of the ſame.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  
                     I Beſeech you as ſtrangers & pilgrims▪ that you abſteine from fleshly luſts which fight ageinſt the foul. This firſt part of ye Epiſtle is a generall exhortacion too the deſire and diligēce of dooing wel, or of repreſſing ſinful luſts, & to gouern all the intents & dooings of our lyfe after a godly & holy maner. Therfore the whole doctrine cōcerning good woorks or new obedience, as what it is, why it is to be performed, how it may bée

done in this our weakneſſe, and in what wiſe it pleaſeth god, may be repeated in this place. The propoſition is, Be of good conuerſation among the Gentiles, that is to ſay, liue honeſtly or gouern your life & behauior honeſtly. For conuerſatiō ſignifieth the ſame thing that life or the purpoſes & doings of a mans life. This propoſition doth Peter cōfirm and enlightē: firſt, by entretāce: and ſecondly by ſetting down ye contrary. Abſtein frō fleshly luſts, that is to ſay, eſchue ſin, or féed not ye ſinful inclinacions & affections of the flesh, yt is too ſay of nature corrupted and marred with ſin, which like enemies kéep war ageinſt the mind lightned with the ſpirit, or ageinſt the law of God, as is ſaid. Ro. 8. The méening of ye fleſh, or what ſoeuer mans fleſh méeneth, thinketh, & deſireth of it ſelf with out the holy ghoſt, is enmitie ageinſt God. Ro. vij. I ſée another law in my members (the ſame law is it yt he calleth héer fleſhly luſts) fighting ageinſt ye law of my mind (renued by ye holy ghoſt) and ſubduing me to the law of ſin which is in my members. Gal. v. The fleſh luſteth ageinſt the ſpirite.
                  Now ye 
                     fleshly luſts ſignifie not ye very deſires themſeluesFleſhly luſtes what they be. created in ye wil or ſenſe by god, but ye headineſſe of ye wicked deſires, affections & doings, raging with great violēce ageinſt the law of God: as, in ye mind, darkneſſe & doutfulneſſe cōcerning God: In the wil, diſtruſt, fleſhly careleſſeneſſe, pride. &c. and in ye hart, vnlawful loues, heats of irefulneſſe, of hatred, of luſts, of deſire of reuenge, of ambition, of couetouſneſſe, of ſingularitie and ſuch other: out of which as out of a fountain flow all outward offences and miſchéeues, according as it is truely ſayd. The groundes from whence all euils doo commence, Is heady lust or foule concupiſcence. And in the firſt of ye Epiſtle of S. Iames. Concupiſcence conceyuing, bringeth foorth ſin.
                  Peter vſeth a very notable and veheemnt kind of ſpéeche when he ſayth that the fleſhly luſtes or ſinfull affections doo keep war ageinſt the ſoule: that is to ſay, like ſturdy & cruell ſouldiers marche foorth with violent and enemylike rage ageinſt the iudgement or commaundement of reaſon renued

by the holy Ghoſt. Which encounter or deadly 
                        •••
                     d betwéene the fleſh and the ſpirit, euen in thoſe that bée regenerated, Paule deſcribeth with notable woords and ſentences. Rom. vij. Gal. v. And the encoūter of fayth and vertues kindled by the holy Ghoſt, ageinſt vyces and luſtes bidding them battell, is excellently deſcribed in moſte lyuely maner by Prudentius in the battell of the ſoule: which encounter the godly doo euery one of them dayly féele within their owne hartes.
                  3 Peter enlargeth his propoſition with making mention of the enforcing cauſe, I beſeeche you as ſtraungers and Pilgrimes. For ſeeing wée haue not in this world a continuing Citie or a quiet ſeate and place of reſt, but that our home is in heauen: let vs alſo caſt away the deſires and luſts of this world, and lead a holy and heauenly lyfe acceptable too God.
                  4 He maketh mention of one of the finall cauſes of good woorkes: Namely, too the entent the ſlaunders of the vngodly which father horrible wickedneſſes vppon the Chriſten religion, myght bée proued vntrue: and by our godlyneſſe, modeſtie, and other examples of vertues, many may bée allured too learne and loue the Doctrine of the true Churche, and thereuppon turning vntoo Chriſt, glorifie God, as is ſaid in the fifth of Mathew. Let your lyght ſo ſhyne before men that they may ſée your good woorkes, and glorifie your father which is in heauen.
               
               
                  The ſecond place, of the ciuill Magiſtrate.
                  NO worldly power, no armyes doo more ſtrongly fortifieMagiſtrates ordeyned by God. and maintein the authoritie of the ciuill ordinaunce and the obedience due too the magiſtrate, than theſe commaundementes of God. j. Peter the ſecond, and Romaines the xiij. which doo moſt ſtreytly charge men too obey the magiſtrate, and all mannes ordinaunce or ciuill order, which in déede is the woorke of God, and a ſingular witneſſe of his wiſdome,

ryghtuouſneſſe, and goodneſſe. For God by his wiſdome hath made differences in the degrées of perſones whiche rule and are ruled: as of Magiſtrates and ſubiectes, Huſbandes and wyues, parents and children, &c. Alſo he hath by his owne voyce ſet foorth Lawes of vertues▪ and of al duties to bée performed, too Godward, too the Magiſtrates, and too other men: and hath appoynted and eſtabliſhed a forme of iudgements which are the defence and execution of the Lawes, a Rule of vpryghtneſſe too bée obſerued in bargayning, handycraftes néedfull for the lyfe, Lawes of ſucceſſions, puniſhmentes of tranſgreſſers, defences of good men, lawfull taxes and tallages, warfare and the lawe of armes, and all other partes of eiuill order and policie▪ too the intent he may bée knowen too bée preſent in all common weales: and that the duties of iuſtice may bée vnderſtood and executed, and that honeſt diſcipline, peace, the Vniuerſities and Schooles of lerning, and other good things may bée maynteyned among mankynd.
                  This ciuill order is with great 
                        ••
                     ede too bée diſcerned frō the vyces and confuſions which the f
                        •
                     endes and their inſtruments, (that is too wit, vngodly and Tyrannicall Gouernours) doo foyſt intoo the order appoynted by God. And let the diffinition of a Magiſtrate bée conſidered, whiche Paule Rom. xiij. and Peter in this Epiſtle haue ſet foorth.
                  A Magiſtrate is a Miniſter appoynted by Gods ordināceThe definition of a Magiſtrate and armed with Lawes and ſwoord, too bée ye keeper of outward diſcipline and peace, and too puniſh th
                        〈…〉
                      dooers, and too defend and prayſe the well dooers.
                  Peter willeth men too obey the worldly Magiſtrate, andMagiſtrates muſt be obeyed as God. the ordinances and lawes made by man that is a Lawfull Magiſtrate, for the Lord Gods ſake, who moſt ſtreightly cō
                     maundeth obedience, and will haue Magiſtrates too bée his deputies and miniſters, and the ſetters foorth of his wiſdom, and the executers of his diuine Iuſtice: and therefore he vouchſaueth Magiſtrates the name of Gods. Pſal. lxxxij. I haue ſayd yée are Gods. And hereuntoo alſo may the moſt

graue ſentence of Plutarch bée referred:
                  Iuſtice is the end of the Lawe, the Lawe is the woorkeAn excellent ſaying. of the Gouerner, the Gouerner is the Image of God who beautifieth all things, and by vertue the gouerner maketh himſelfe like vntoo God.
                  Wherefore, for Gods ſake who is the author of ciuill gouernement, let vs bée ſubiect too our King and his Capteyns which are ſent by him, that is too ſay, by God or the King too puniſh the vngratious, and too maynteyne the good, and too honor them with rewardes. For in that reſpect are they called gracious Lords. Luc. xxij.
                  And men muſt patiently obey, not only the good, courteouſe,Obedience too Princes, Lords, and Maiſters for conſcience ſake. and gracious, but alſo the rough, hard, crabbed, and froward Lords or Maiſters: yea and bondage (euen though it bée ſomwhat with the ſtreyghteſt) is too bée endured, as long as wée may obey without ſinne. But all ſeruices become harder and gréeuouſer in this old age of the forworne world: for as the ſinnes of the worlde increaſe, ſo alſo the puniſhements and miſeries as well publike as priuate are heaped one vppon another. Therefore wée muſt the more patiently beare the burthens of the Magiſtrates though they bée euen with the foreſt. And although wée haue before God deſerued all puniſhments: yet notwithſtanding when wée haue vniuſt burthens layd vppon vs by the Magiſtrate or by others, wée may beare the burthen with ſo much the more quiet mynd, bycauſe our conſcience is aſſured that wée are blameleſſe. For what ſoeuer a man ſuffereth vnwoorthily, is to bée borne patiently: But when the pain enſewes deſert, it comes too worke thee wo and ſmart. And therefore S. Peter in this place ſayeth: It is woorth thanks if a man ſuffer puniſhment for conſcience ſake to Godward. That is too ſay, it deſerueth thanks or prayſe, or it is acceptable too GOD, when a man beareth out iniuries patiently in a iuſt quarell or in Gods behalfe. For it is the cauſe that makes a Martir, and not the martyring of him.
               
               
                  
                  The third place.
                  CHriſten libertie is not a lawleſneſſe too folowe all kyndChriſten libē
                        
                           •
                        
                        tie. of concupiſcence and wickedneſſe, & to doo what a man liſteth, as the ſeditious Bowers dreamed, who thought them ſelues exempted frō payment of tributes & frō obedience too bée performed too the ciuill Magiſtrate, bycauſe all Chriſten men are in
                        •
                     raunchyſed intoo the libertie of the ſonnes of God through Chryſt. Uerely theſe men made the Chriſten libertie a cloke of their malice. For the chriſten libertie is a cleere riddance from ſinne, from Gods wrath, from curſe of the Lawe, and from endleſſe death, giuen too vs by and for the ſonne of God, who was as a ſeruant and dyed for vs: and not an exemption from the obedience that is too bée performed too God or too the ciuill Magiſtrates, as is ſhewed more at large in an other place.
               
            
            
               Vppon the Sunday called Cantate, or the fourth Sunday after Easter. Sing vntoo the Lord a new ſong, &c. Pſal. 97.
               
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Iames. j.
                  
                     EVery good gifte, and euery perfect gift is from aboue, and commeth downe from the Father of lyghtes, with whom is no variableneſſe, neither ſhadow of chaunge. Of his owne will begate he vs with the woorde of truthe, that wee ſhould bee the firſt frutes of his creatures. Wherefore (deere brethren) let euery man bee ſwifte too heare, ſlowe to ſpeake, ſlowe too wrath. For the wrath of man worketh not that which is ryghtuous before God. Wherfore laye a parte all filthyneſſe, and ſuperfluitie of maliciouſneſſe, and receyue with meekeneſſe the woord that is graffed in you, which is able to ſaue your ſoules.
               
               
                  
                  The diſpoſement. The cheef places are fyue. The firſt place is
                  AN euident proofe that God is not the cauſe of euill. ForNot God but wee our ſelues are cauſe of euil too our ſelues. the beginning of this Epiſtle matcheth with y• diſcourſe going before, in whiche Iames hath taught that God tempteth no man, that is too ſay, enforceth no man too ſinne or too fall, but that eche man is tempted of his own concupiſcence, (that is too ſay of his own ſinfull inclinations) or of the darkneſſe and vnrulyneſſe of all the powers of man raging ageinſt the Lawes of God. This concupiſcence like a welſpring bredeth and bringeth foorth actuall ſinnes euen in the regenerate, when (ouer and beſydes the miſtineſſe of mynd, and the ſinfull inclinations, and the ſodein brayds of affections,) there commeth alſo an aſſent or agréement of the wil, and a ful purpoſe too commit the ſin euen in outward woork. And ſo hath ſinne his being, not of God, but of concupiſcence ſticking in vs, or of originall ſinne whiche is bred and borne with vs. And therefore dooth Iames ryght ſagely affirme, that nothing commeth from God but good, as is ſayd in Geneſis, God ſawe all things that he had made, and behold they were excéeding good, and Pſalm. 91. They ſhall declare that our Lord GOD is ryghtuouſe, and there is no iniquitie in him. The ſame is the méening of Iames in this place: Euery good gift is from aboue, and commeth from the Father of lyght with whom there is no variableneſſe nor ſhadowing of chaunge, that is too ſay, like as God is good: ſo there procéedeth nothing but good from him. Yea, all good things, vertue, wiſdome, and happyneſſe in compaſſing things, are the gifts of God only, according too this text, what haſt thou whiche thou haſt not receyued? And godlyly and ſagely ſayeth one in Plutarch: God hath made theſe things, and he dooth lende his hand vntoo mée.
                  
                     All good things come downe from the Father of lyght,Good things are all of God, and none euill commeth of him. that is too ſay from God who is the ſouerein and eternall lyght, or the fountaine of lyght and of al good things. And in aſmuch as he is vnchaungeable and alwayes good without alteration, and ſhyning with light of ryghtuouſneſſe and vpryghtneſſe, he is neuer turned or ſhadowed with the darkneſſe of ſinne, or at any tyme the cauſe of ſinne, as is ſayd in Deut. xxxij. God is voyd of all iniquitie, vpryght and ryghtuouſe. Let this text therfore bée ioyned with the reſt whiche auouche God not too bée the cauſe of ſinne: and ageinſt al the ſleyghtye diſputations concerning Gods foreſight, and ſufferance of ſinnes, and mayntenāce of the nature that ſinneth, ſet this one true, certein, and vnmouable ſentence, with which the ſounder ſort euen of the Heathen alſo doo agrée. As Euripides in his Bellerophon ſayeth: If the Gods peocure any diſhoneſtie, then are they no Gods.
                  And Plato alſo moſt reuerently in the ſecond booke of his Common weale the. 390. page, ſayeth: It is too bée endeuered with all earneſtneſſe, that inaſmuch as God is good, no man may (in this common weale which we will haue too bée well gouerned,) ſay that he is cauſe of any euill▪ neyther yoong man nor olde man, eyther in Poetrie or in other Diſcourſe.
               
               
                  The ſecond place: Concerning regeneration.
                  
                     GOD of his owne good will hath begotten vs with the woord of truthe, that wee myght bee the firſt frutes of his creatures.
                  
                  God by his woord or by his lawe hath kindled in mennesRegeneration or newbirth. myndes a knowledge of their ſinnes, and a fearfulneſſe and gréef ryſing of the féeling of Gods wrath ageinſt ſinne. And afterward by ſhewing in his goſpell the remiſſion of ſinnes too bée giuen fréely for Chryſtes ſake, he kindleth fayth in

their hartes, whereby they perſuade themſelues aſſuredly, that their ſinnes are releaſed: and intoo the hartes of them that beléeue he poureth the holy Ghoſte, who by little and little mortifieth the remnant of ſin, and woorketh new lyght and new ryghtuouſneſſe or obedience agréeing with the wil of God. This whole conuerſion of a man wrought by the miniſterie of the woord or Goſpell, and of Baptim, is called Regeneration, of which is ſpoken in Iohn. j. and .iij. j. Pet. j. and elſwhere more at large.
                  For as by Adam men are begotten of mortall ſéede of theA ſimilitude. fleſh too this bodyly lyfe ſubiect too ſinne and death: So are wée begotten a new of pure and vncorruptible ſéede by the woord of the liuing God, and as it were created a new, too a new and ſpiritual and eternal lyfe, which is the true knowledge and calling vppon God, true confidence ſettled in god, and true and earneſt loue and obedience, which are the ſacrifiſe and ſeruices moſt acceptable too God. Iohn. xvij. This is the eternall lyfe, that they acknowledge the true God, &c. Wée are his worke created too good woorks.
                  Too the enlightening of this ſhort ſaying of Iames, there may bée brought in the ſermons that are in Iohn. j. As many as receyued him, he gaue them power too becōme the ſonnes of GOD, too them that beléeue in his name, which are not borne, neyther of the ſéede nor of the will of the fleſhe, nor of the will of man, but of God. Ioh. iij. Onleſſe a man bée borne from aboue, he can not ſée the kingdome of God.
               
               
                  The third place is
                  A Precept concerning willingneſſe to lern, and the ſhunningAgainſt raſh ſpeaking, and haſty iudgement. of headye iudgement, and babling which giueth ſentence raſhly of gods ſufferance or determination cōcerning ſinnes and fallings. And it is a generall warning that wee ſhould bée ſwift and vnſ
                        •
                     outhfull too héere, but ſlow to ſpeake and well aduiſed ere we iudge. Which warning perteyneth too the whole lyfe of man, and ſpecially too the ſtudie of diuinitie

& of other, in which nothing is more hurtfull, than to
                        •
                      bée rype too ſoone, & to carie about a vayne perſuaſion of lerning, & to determine vppon moſt weightie cōtrouerfies raſhly and headely. Therfore did Pythagoras enioyn fyueyéeres ſilence too his Diſciples, yt they ſhould not raſhly burſt foorth to teaching others, before they had furniſhed their own breſt with true and ſubſtantiall lerning, yea and grounded themſelues in their doctrine by practyze of certein yéeres.
                  And Nazianzene wittely reproueth the fondneſſe or pride of thoſe that become teachers vppon the ſodein, as the Gyants in the Fables of the Poetes are ſayde too bée bred and borne vppon the ſodein. Theſe as a moſt noyſome plage dooth Plato in Thaeeteto will men too ſhunne, deſcribing thē among their things in theſe woordes. None of theſe héereth another man too the intent too lerne, but they bréede of their owne accord, and burſt out with ſodein brayde when the toy takes them in the head: and they think no man knowes aught but themſelues. For as much as ſuch ſelfelerned and ſelfewilled Doctors import verye great harme and aſſured deſtruction too the Churche, let vs with all earneſtneſſe, diligence, and héed, obey this rule of Iames, that we bée ſwift, quicke, chéerful, and alwayes redye too héere & lerne: but in ſpeaking and teaching ſlowe & circumſpect, or (that I may vſe Platos woords) deſirous too lerne, deſirous too héere, and alwayes inquiſitiue. For therfore hath God giuen vs twoo eares & but one tong, yt he might doo vs too vnderſtand how there bée mo things too bée herd than too bée ſpoken.
                  The fourth place is of of brydling yrefulneſſe, and ſpeciallyAgainſt a
                           •
                        ge
                           •
                         and trea
                           •
                        neſle. of brydling impatience or grudge and repyning ageinſt God in aduerſities o
                        •
                      when things go ageinſt vs, of whiche is ſpoken in the firſt and fifth commaundements. Men offend very ſore in all their lyfe, but ſpecially in their aduerſities, hurting themſelues and others through impatience. Therefore let vs haue before our eyes, the admoniſhements of other wiſe mē, as O foole, anger in aduerſitie auayleth not.
                  
                  
                     And in the ſame Tragedie: Thou giueſt place too anger which alwayes vndooth thée. And alſo ineſpecially this ſaying of Iames, The wrath of man worketh not the things that are ryghtfull before God, like as Theodoſius in his angre flew fyue thouſand giltleſſe people at Theſſalonica. Iob, Ieremie, and many other godly perſones offended in their troubles thorough wrathfulneſſe. Therefore let vs brydle wrath, partly with thinking vppon other caces and perilles, and ineſpecially with the example of Chryſte, who ſayeth: Lerne of mée, for I am méeke and lowly of hart.
                  The fifth is: A generall exhortation too eſchewe ſin, and too embrace and hold faythfully the woord of God, which is ye power of God. Therfore laying aſyde all vnclenneſſe (that is too ſay, ſinne that is bred and borne with vs) and abundance of malice, that is too ſay, the maliciouſneſſe and actuall ſinnes that flowe out of it. Embrace yée faythfully & kéepe yée the ſéede of Gods woord ſowen in you, of which you bée borne a new, as he ſayd afore: Of his owne good will begate he vs with the woord of truthe, by which onely and none otherwyſe God imparteth forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and euerlaſting ſaluation vntoo vs.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday called Vocem Iucunditatis, or the .v. Sunday after Easter.
               VTter yée the voyce of gladneſſe, and let it bée heard. Halleluia. Shewe it foorth too the vttermoſt boundes of the earth, for the Lord hath deliuered his people. Halleluia.
               
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Iacob. 
                        •
                     .
                  
                     SEe that yee be doers of the woord, and not heerers only, deteyning your own ſelues. For if any man heare the woord, and declareth not the ſame by his workes, he is like vntoo a man beholding his bodyly face in a glaſſe. For aſſoone

as he hath loked on himſelfe, he goeth his way, and forgetteth immediatly what his faſhion was. But who ſo looketh in the perfect law of libertie, and continueth therin (yf hee bee not a forgetfull hearer, but a dooer of the worke) the ſame shall bee happy in his deede. If any man among you ſeeme too be deuoute, and refrayneth not his toung, but deceyueth his owne hearte, this mans deuocion is in vayne. Pure deuocion, and vndefiled before God the father is this: to viſit the fatherles and widowes in their aduerſitie, and to keepe himſelfe vnſpotted of the world.
                  
                     IN the Sermon of this day, Tauler expounding this moſte ſwéete promiſſe of Chryſtes. Howe muche rather shal your heauenly father giue the holy Ghoſt too thoſe that aſke, reciteth that excellent ſaying which is cited in the place concerning Inuocation, and which otherwyſe alſo is woont too bée often repeated and beaten intoo mennes heades in our churches, Mannes mynd is neuer ſo greedy too receyue, but that God is much more redy too giue, for he is ſoothfaſt and a kéeper of his promiſſes.
                     It was the cuſtome of all Chriſtendome a late yéeres, tooRogation weeke. make publike proceſſions theſe twoo dayes folowing, intoo ye féeldes néere vntoo their Cities and toun
                           •
                        s, and too make ſolemne prayers for obteinment of luckie encreaſe of ye frutes of the earth, and for peace, and other good things at gods hād. And therupon it was called Rogation weeke or the wéek of publike prayers, and the Sunday was called the Rogation day.
                     Now foraſmuch as true inuocation is the chéefeſt & higheſtOf Inuocatio
                              •
                            and prayer. woorſhipping of God and the chéefe 
                           •
                        uttreſſe and wall of the Church and of all the godly: and in thoſe Letanies or opē Rogations there were many corruptions of true inuocatiō, and in eſpeciall Idolatrous woorſhipping of Sainctes receiued and ſtabliſhed: it is bée houefull too open too the héerers, a ſound ſumme of the true doctrine concerning the ryght inuocation

of God comprehēded in this moſt ſwéete ſaying of this dayes goſpel, Verely, verely, I ſay vnto you, whatſoeuer ye aſk of the father in my name, he will giue it you. Aske and ye shall receiue, that your ioy may bee perfect. Therefore I exhort the well mynded, that in the publike expoſition of this dayes goſpel, they diligently cōſider the doctrine of true inuocation, and often beat vpon it, and daily apply the ſame to their vſe. For Inuocation is the chéef & moſt hygheſt honoring of God, wherby our harts being ſtirred through the inſtinct of the holy ghoſt, doo with true and earneſt motion (vppon truſt of our mediator Chryſt) aſke and look for all good things both ghoſtly and bodily, preſēt and too come, at the true God the father of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, aſſuredly warranting our ſelues that wée are herd, and obtein the good things which wée aſke, according too his promiſſes.
                  
               
               
                  The partes of all true Inuocation or Prayer, are ſixe.
                  FIrſt the calling vpon the true God ye eternal father of ourThe partes of true prayer. Lord Ieſus Chryſt made manifeſt in his church by his aſſured woord, and by his ſōne now ſent: Not feyned Gods, not Iupiter, Apollo, or Pallas, not holy men that are dead: but the only true God, the father, the ſonne and the holy Ghoſt muſt bée called vppon.
                  Secondly the conſideration of Gods moſte ſtreight commaundement, which willeth the good things that are promiſed, too bée demaunded and looked for at Gods hand: as in this dayes goſpel, Aske and ye shall receiue. Luke▪ xviij. Pray alwayes. Pſal. xlix. Cal vpon mée in the day of thy trouble.
                  Thirdly, repentance or acknowledgement of our ſinnes and of our owne vnwoorthineſſe, as Daniel confeſſeth himſelf in his ix. chapter: wée haue ſinned, wée haue doone amiſſe. To thée O Lord bee rightuouſneſſe, but vntoo vs confuſion offace.
                  
                     Fourthly, the calling too mynd of the promiſſes cōcerning remiſſiō of ſinnes, & the héering of our prayers for Chriſt our mediators ſake, as is ſaid in this dayes goſpel: whatſoeuer ye shall aske of the father in my name, he will giue it you▪
                      if yée aſke it in ſuch maner as he hath expreſſed in his woord: Spirituall benefites peremptorily and without any condition: and temporall or worldly benefites and deliuerance from troubles with exception: firſt of our owne profit & welfare, if he of his fatherly wiſdome ſhall think the thing too bée profitable and wholſom which wee aſke. Secondly of▪ the croſſe or chaſtiſement of the godly, as is ſayd in Marke, they ſhall receiue houſe and lands, howbéeit with tribulation. Thirdly wée muſt not apoint God the maner and time of our deliuerance, according too this ſaying: if the Lord make taryance, abide thou his leyſure. And fourthly, bodily benefits are not too bée gotten by our owne deuiſes, before God beſtow them vppon vs.
                  Fifthly, faith embraſing gods promis, and aſſuring it ſelf certainly that a mannes ſinnes are releaſed and his prayers herd for Chryſt the mediators ſake.
                  Sixthly, the reckening vp of the things that are too bée aſked as well Ghoſtly as bodily, which by Chryſt himſelfe are included in ſeuen petitions. This profitable and neceſſarisWhat diuinitie is. Doctrine: let the well mynded diligently and earneſtly lerne and exerciſe▪ For the whole diuinitie or doctrine concerning God, is not a cō templatiue ſcience, whoſe end conſiſteth only in knowledge: But it is alſo a woorkfull conſcience which conſiſteth in dayly exerciſes of repentance, faith, Inuocation, aduerſities and comfortes: and is too bee practyſed and put in vre in all the deuyſes and dooings of our lyfe, like as Iames admoniſheth vs in this preſent Epiſtle, that it is not inough too héere the doctrine of the goſpel, and too allow of it: and that they are deceiued which beſtow the whole effect of their godlyneſſe vpon that poynt: But yt there muſt bée ioyned vntoo it faith & obedience as well of the hart as of outward woorks, &

(that I may vſe the woordes of Herodotus) thou muſt make thy deedes like vntoo thy woordes.
               
               
                  Now are there, of the whole Epiſtle of this day, twoo partes.
                  THe firſt warneth vs that wée haue néed of new obedience or amendment of life according too Gods word, as Chriſt ſayeth, bliſſed are they that heare the worde of God and keepe it, by fayth with a good conſcience.
                  
                  Iames cōpareth Gods woord too a glaſſe, in which wée beholdGods worde a looking glaſſe both the filth of our ſinnes, which is too bée ſcoured of & cleuſed: and alſo the rule of Gods wil, according too which all the deuiſes and dooings of our lyfe are too bée directed. They therfore that héere the woord of God and doo it not, or which endeuer not too waſh of the filth and vnclenneſſe of their nature, and too eſchue ſinnes, and too begin a new and faire lyfe agréeing with the woord of God, they (I ſay) are like a man that beholdeth his bodely ſhape in a glaſſe, and thinketh no whit of chaunging the faultes of his countenance. But he ye looketh intoo the perfect law of libertie, that is too ſay, he that diligently héereth, lerneth, and conſidereth the doctrine of the goſpel, by which wée are deliuered from death, and continueth in ſtedfaſt faith and obedience of life: he (bicauſe he is not a forgetfull héerer but alſo a performer of the woork,) ſhalbée bliſſed in his woork, that is too ſay, ſhall witneſſe and declare himſelf too bée bliſſed, bycauſe he expreſſeth true faythe in his déedes. For it is not the méening of Iames, that wée become ryghtuous before God, by our own woorks and wel dooings, for he himſelfe in the Synod of the Apoſtles. Act▪ xv. ratifieth this decrée, wee beleeue our ſelues too bee ſaued by the grace of our Lord Ieſu Chryſt. And all the whole Doctrine of the Prophetes and Apoſtles, witneſſeth vs too bee made bliſſed or ſaued through frée mercyfor Chryſtes ſake only.
                  Therefore the true bliſſedneſſe and chriſten Religion, isTrue bliſſedneſſe. too acknowledge God and his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chryſte

aryght, according too his woord, & too haue remiſſion of ſinnes for Chryſts ſake, and through this knowledge of Chriſt foreſhyning in vs, too bridle our tung by faith in our talk concerning God, Gods ſeruices, and other things, that it ſpeake not things repugnant too the word of God, and too doo good too the fatherleſſe and widowes, and too kéepe our ſelues vndefiled from the world, that is too wit, from all ſinne.
               
            
            
               Vppon the day of the Aſsenſion of Gods ſonne intoo Heauen.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. Actes. j.
                  IN my former treatyſe (deere Theophilus) wee haue ſpoken all that Ieſus beegan too doo and teache, vntill the day in which he was taken vp after that hee through the holy Ghoſt, had geuen commaundementes vntoo the Apoſtles, whom he had choſen, too whom alſo he shewed himſelfe alyue after his Paſsion (and that by many tokens) appearing vntoo them fortie dayes, and ſpeaking of the kingdome of God, and gathered them toogether, and commaunded them that they should not depart from Ieruſalem, but to waite for the promiſſe of the father, wherof (ſayth he) ye haue heard of mee. For Iohn truely baptiſed with water, but ye shall bee baptiſed with the holy ghoſt, after theſe few dayes. When they therfore were come toogether, they aſked of him, ſaying: Lord, wilt thou at this tyme reſtore agayne the kyngdome of Iſraell? And he ſayd vntoo them: it is not for you to know the tymes or the ſeaſons which the father hath put in his own power. But ye shall receiue power after the holy Ghoſte is come vppon you. And yee shall bee witneſſes vntoo mee, not onely in Ieruſalem, but alſo in all Iewry, and in al Samaria, and euen vntoo the worlds end. And when he had ſpoken theſe things, while they behelde, he was taken vp on hie, and a cloud receyued

him out of their ſight. And while they looked ſtedfaſtly vp towarde heauen as he went, behold, two men ſtoode by them in white apparel, which alſo ſayd; ye men of Galilee, why ſtand ye gaſing vp intoo heauen? This ſame Ieſus which is taken vp from you intoo heauen, shall ſo come, euen as yee haue ſeene him goe intoo heauen.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  A ſumme of the doctrine concerning Chryſtes Aſcenſion, out of the readings vppon the Actes of the Apoſtles.
                  
                     The cheefe places are foure.
                     1 The ſtorie of Chryſtes Aſcenſion and triumph is too bée conſidered.
                     2 A doctrine of the vſe and frute or benefites of the Aſcenſion of our Lord Ieſu Chryſt.
                     3 A deſcription of Chryſtes kingdome.
                     4 An expoſition of the phraſes in the Articles of our beléef: he aſcended intoo heauen, and ſitteth at the right hand of God the father almightie.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  THe foundation of the Chriſten faith, of true comfort inThe Anker
                        
                           •
                        old of chriſtian welfare, death and all aduerſities, and of the reſurrection of our bodyes and of euerlaſting ſaluation, is the ſtorie of the reſurrection & tryumph of the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt aſcending into heauen, leading captiuitie captiue, & ſitting at the right hand of God, as Paule ſheweth euidently. j. Cor. xv. If Chryſt bée not riſen from Death, then is our preaching in vaine, and in vaine is your Faith, and you are ſtill in your ſinnes. And if wée truſt in Chryſte but in this lyfe only, then are wée moſt wretched of all men. Therfore let thoſe that be wel minded diligently and héedfully read the whole ſtorie of Chryſtes reſurrection and Aſcenſion, and gather the teſtimonies

or proofes (as Luke nameth them in this place) which auouch Chryſt too bée in his owne very body and in very déed riſen from the dead, and aſcended intoo heauen. As for the record of thoſe too whom Chryſt ſhewed himſelfe after his ryſing from death, they are declared in the holy days of Eaſter laſt paſt.
                  Agein, y• he might not ſéeme too haue bin a ghoſt, but mightChryſtes conuerſation with his diſciples after his reſurrection. ſhew himſelf to be riſē in déed with his true body, he was viſibly conuerſāt by the ſpace of whole. xl. dayes toogither, with the Apoſtles & a great congregation of that time, (for Paule declareth that he was ſéen of mo than fiue hundred brethren at once) and in his company a great ſort of the fathers & prophets that were raiſed with him, as Mathew ſaith, that many bodies of Sainctes which had ſlept roſe with Chryſt, and came intoo the holy Citie, and were ſéene of many. And Epiphanius declareth yt our firſt father Adam aroſe with Chriſt. It is a good likelyhode therfore that theſe Saincts which roſe age in with Chryſt, were the firſt fathers & prophets too whō the promis was firſt made of the ſéed that ſhuld cruſh the ſerpents hed and vanquiſhe ſin & death, & reſtore ryghteouſneſſe and life euer laſting: as Adam, Abel, Seth, Noe, Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, Ioſeph, Eue, Sara, Rebecca. &c. With theſe did Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and Mary the moother of Chriſt, and other godly folke of that time talke toogither by the ſpace of ful. xl. dayes concerning the kingdom of God, diuine reuelations, the fal of the firſt man, the promis of the ſéed, the wonderful gathering and defending of the Church, the miniſterie of the Goſpel, the redemption of mankynd, & the reſtoremēt of rightuouſneſſe & euerlaſting lyfe, as is expreſly ſaid in this place: Hee was viſibly conuerſant with them by the ſpace of xl. dayes, talking of the kingdome of God. Alſo the contentes & ſumme of theſe ſermons of Chryſtes, which he made thoſe xl. dayes, are noted in Luk. xxiiij. where it is written yt he expounded al ye teſtimonies cōcerning Chriſt which are writtē in Moyſes, ye Pſalms & the prophets, & cōmanded repentāce &

forgiueneſſe of ſinnes too bée preached in his name. Iohn. xx. As my father ſent mée, ſo ſend I you. Receiue yée the holy Ghoſt. &c. And in Math. xxviij. and Mark. xvj. the commiſſion of preaching the goſpel and of Baptim, are repeted.
                  After this ſcholing by the ſpace of. xl. dayes, in which (by many moſt cléere certein, credit woorthy, and vnfallible teſtimonies) he ſhewed himſelf too bée riſen in his own very body and in very déede, and that the doctrine of the Goſpell concerning the kingdome of God is true and from heauen: He led his Diſciples intoo Bethanie, and from thence to Mount Oliuet, where lifting vp his handes he had his Diſciples farewel. Luke. xxiiij. and in moſt gloryous tryumph accompanyed with an innumerable multitude of Angels, and with that great train of holy fathers which were riſen with him, was caryed vp intoo heauen in the ſight of his Diſciples, wher he hath ſet himſelfe downe at the ryght hand of God, reigning in equal power and maieſtie with God the father almightie. j. Pet. iij. Mark. xvj. Act j. Luk▪ xxiiij.
                  And too the ſetting foorth of this ſtorie of Chryſtes Aſcenſion, let the deſcription of his tryumphe aſcending intoo heauen, hée added which is written by Dauid in the Pſal. lxviij. The chariot of God with thouſands of thouſands reioyſing, God is among them vppon the holy hill of Sinai. He is aſcended intoo heauen, he hath led captiuitie captiue, & he hathe giuen gifts too men. Our God is the God of ſaluacion, & our Lord is the Lord that deliuereth out of death.
                  For like as they that tryumphed at Rome, were caryedChryſtes tryumphant Aſ
                        
                           ••
                        nſion. in tryumphant Charyot through the Citie too the Capitoll, vppon which attended many thouſandes of men, and Kings and Princes were ledde before the Charyot as priſoners, and rewardes were woont too bee giuen among the Souldyoures: So the Pſalme peynteth out Chryſte (the conquerour of Death and the Diuels kingdome,) ſitting in a triumphant Charyot, too bée caryed vp intoo heauen, before a greate hoſte of the Churche of that tyme, wyth clappyng

of hāds of thouſand thouſands of Angels: and the féends and all the kingdome of hell too bée led priſoners before his charyot, (as it is ſayd in the ſecond too the Colloſſians, that hée ſpoyled rule and power, and made a ſhewe of them openly, and tryumphed ouer them in his owne perſone,) and moſt large and bountifull giftes of the holy Ghoſt and of euerlaſting ſaluation bée poured out by the king Chryſte, who gyueth, ſome too bée Apoſtles, ſome Prophetes, ſome Shepherdes, and ſome Teachers, too the intent wée may all come intoo the vnitie of fayth, and of the acknowledgement of the ſonne of God, as is ſayd more at large. Epheſ. iiij.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  VVEe will recite ſix of the chéef benefites of our Lorde Ieſu Chryſt, builded vppon this ſaying of the pſalme cited by Paule Ephe. iiij. He aſcended vp aloft, led captiuitie captiue and gaue gifts too men.
                  The firſt and peculiar benefite of Chryſte the RedéemerDeliuerance from ſin, death, & the Diuell. aſcending vp aloft, is too deliuer the Church from the captiuitie of ſinne, death, the Diuell, and the whole kingdome of Hell, wherein all men are hild priſoners. That Chryſt hath brought this deliuerance too paſſe, he ſheweth euidently, when by the power of his Godhead hauing vāquiſhed death and the kingdome of the Diuell: he aſcendeth intoo heauen and leadeth captiuitie captiue. Pſal. 68. Ephe. iiij. Hereuntoo may bée referred the like texts out of Zachar. ix. Thou haſt brought the priſoners out of the pit. Oſe. ix. I will rid them from the hand of death. I will redeeme them from death. O death I will bée thy death, O Hell I will bée thy ſting. Pſal. xiij▪ Who ſhall giue ſaluation too Iſraell out of Sion, when the Lord ſhall haue turned away the captiuitie of his people. Pſal. lxxxiiij. Thou haſt turned away the captiuitie of Iacob.
                  Secondly, he aſcended intoo heauen, too the intent that executingMediatorſhip. his peculiar office of Mediatorſhip and hygh Préeſt

in his owne very temple, he may make interceſſion for his Church too the eternall father, and performe the duetie of an aduocate and Patrone, as it is ſayd Hebr. ix. Chryſte is entred intoo heauen it ſelfe, that he may appéere in the ſyght of God for vs. Roma. viij. Chryſte being rayſed from death, ſitteth at the right hand of the father too make interceſſion for vs. j. Iohn. ij. If any man ſin, wée haue an Aduocate with God the father euen Ieſus Chryſt the ryghtuouſe. Hebr. iiij. Therfore ſéeing wée haue a hygh Préeſt who hath perced the heauens, euen Ieſus the ſonne of God, &c. Let vs approche with boldneſſe too the throne of grace, that wée may receiue mercie.
                  Thirdly, he is aſcēded aloft, that he may giue gifts vntooGiuing of gifts vnto men. men, namely that vppon ſuch as beléeue the goſpell he may poure out the holy ghoſt, who kyndleth true knowledge and calling vppon God in all the godly, and garniſheth ye church with ſundrie gifts néedful to the ſpredding abrode of the goſpell, and ſendeth foorth Apoſtles, Euangeliſtes, Shepherdes, and Teachers intoo the woorke of the Miniſterie for the reſtorement of the Saints, &c. Ephe. iiij.
                  Fourthly, by Chriſtes aſcenſion intoo heauen, the wayOpening our way intoo heauen. thither is ſet open for vs alſo. And like as Chryſte in his own bodye or in his humane fleſh is aſcended intoo heauen, where his godhead was before: So our bodyes being rayſed out of the duſt of the earth vnto immortall life, ſhalbée caried vp into heauē, and there bée garniſhed with euerlaſting life, and glorie. j. Theſ. iiij. Thoſe that dye in Chryſte ſhall ryſe firſt: then wée that are liuing, ſhalbe taken vp with them in the clowds, too méete the Lord in the aire, and ſo wée ſhalbée with the Lord for euer. Ioh. xiij. In my fathers houſe bée many dwellings, I go too prepare you a place, and Iohn. xvij. Father, I will y• thoſe which thou haſt giuen mée, bée where ſoeuer I am &c. This fourth benefit dooth Tertulliā
                      ſet foorth with a moſt graue ſentence. Ieſus ſitteth at the right hand of the father: Man, though alſo God: The laſt Adam though

alſo the firſt woord: fleſh and blud, though purer than ours, yet notwithſtanding he is the ſelfſame both in ſubſtāce and ſhape, in which he aſcended, and ſuch alſo ſhal he come down agein as the Angels affirme. He being termed the vmper betwéene GOD and man, and hauing committed too him a pawne of eyther part too kéepe, kéepeth alſo the pawne of fleſh in himſelfe, as a ſcantling of the whole péece. For like as he hath left vs the ſcantling of the ſpirit: ſo hath hée alſo receyued of vs the ſcantling of our fleſhe, and caried it vp intoo heauen in token that the whole péece ſhall bée brought thither in tyme too come. Bée of good chéere fleſh and bloud, for you haue gotten both heauen and the kingdome of God in Chryſt, &c.
                  Fifthly, Chryſtes aſcending vp intoo heauen, warnethPutting away of worldlineſſe▪
                      vs too lay a ſyde all deſire of earthly things, and too ſet al our care vppon this poynt, how wée may come too our celeſtiall countrey of the kingdome of heauen. Math. vj. Firſt ſéeke the kingdome of God. Coloſſ. iij. Séeke for the things that are aboue, where Chryſte ſitteth at the ryght hand of God: regard heauenly things and not earthly things.
                  Sixthly, the cauſe why Chryſt went vp viſibly, was tooToo rayſe our myndes tovvards heauen. ſhewe vntoo his Diſciples, that he vaniſhed not away like a Ghoſt, and that they ſhould not thencefoorth enioy Chryſtes viſible companie: and that his kingdome ſhould not bée worldly, wherein there ſhould bée one viſible head garded with armour and armyes.
               
               
                  The third place: Of Chryſtes kingdome.
                  LVke wryteth that Chryſte forty dayes full after his Reſurrection did talke with his Apoſtles concerning the kingdome of God, and that the Apoſtles dreaming yet ſtill of a bodily kingdome of the Meſsias, aſked Chryſt, whyther that were the tyme that he would reſtore the kingdome of

Iſraell. And therefore I will in this place repete the whole definition of the kingdome of God.
                  The kingdome of Chryſt or the kingdome of God, in thisThe kingdom of God or of Chryſt. lyfe, is Gods gouernement, whereby he not only maynteyneth and preſerueth all things by him created, and ſpecially mankynd, and puniſheth the wicked: but alſo throughe the preaching of the Goſpell doone by Chryſt and the Apoſtles & other Miniſters, gathereth too himſelf a Churche, that is too ſay, a companie of men ryghtly acknowledging and calling vppon God, who forgiueth their ſinnes, and deliuereth them from the Diuels Tyranny, not by politike Lawes and bodily weapons, but by the holy Ghoſte and his woord, defending them wonderouſly when they are oppreſſed with perſecution in this lyfe, and at length rayſing them vp from death and crowning them with glorie and lyfe euerlaſting. By this definition it appéereth that Chryſtes kyngdome is not bodyly or worldly, as the Apoſtles dreamed, that the tyme was now at hand in which the Iſraelites ſhould haue the ſouereintie of all nations: but that it is ſpiritual, which ſhalbée gouerned & mainteyned by y• only woord of ye goſpell & the woorking and power of the holy ghoſt, and not by force of armes and mannes power, according as Chryſt interpreting the ſayings of the Prophetes concerning the kingdome of the Meſsias, ſayeth in this place: yée ſhall receyue power or ſtrength and ableneſſe too ſpred abrode and too eſtabliſhe Chryſtes kingdome, of the holy Ghoſte, whoſe gifts ſhalbée ſheaded out abundantly vppon you, and you ſhalbee vntoo mee, not Captaynes or warryours, but witneſſes, that is too ſay, Preachers of the Euangelicall doctrine, whereby you ſhall enlarge the bounds of Chryſtes kingdome throughout all Iewrie and Samaria, yea and too the vttermoſt coſts of the earth, and ſubdue men vntoo Chryſt, that they may obey and beléeue his Goſpell. Vntoo this place may the like ſayings bée referred, Iohn. ix. My kingdome is not of this world. Lur. xxij. The Kings of the Gentyles are Lords ouer them▪
                     
but you ſhall not bée ſo. Saint Iohn ſayth in his twentith Chapter of his Goſpell: As my Father hath ſent mée, ſo ſend I you. And vnder the name of Gods kingdome are comprehended theſe things folowing.
                  Firſt, the preſeruation and maintenance of the whole nature of things created by God, or Gods generall operation and woorking.
                  Secondly, the gathering of the Churche by the miniſterie of the Goſpell.
                  Thirdly, the very doctrine of the goſpel it ſelf, by which the kingdome of Chryſt is mainteyned.
                  Fourthly, all benefites which Chryſt beſtoweth vppon his Churche, as true knowledge of God, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, deliuerance from ſinne and death, and the heritage of eternall lyfe.
                  And fifthly, the beholding and companie of GOD, as lyfe, lyght, ryghtuouſneſſe, wiſdome, and ioy euerlaſting wherewith all the godly ſhall bée filled in heauen. By this declaration of the woord it appéereth, that when Chryſte talked full fortye dayes with his Diſciples, he inſtructed his Apoſtles 
                        •
                     ath diligently and at large in all the poynts of Chriſtian Doctrine, and in all ſuch things as are neceſſarie too the true knowing of God, too the gouernement of the Churche, and too true godlyneſſe and our eternall welfare.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth place.
                  AN expoſition of the phraſes, He aſcended intoo heauen, and ſitteth on the right hand of God the Father almightie.
                  
                  The Article of our fayth concerning the Aſcenſion of Chryſt intoo heauen, is ſet foorth in the woorde of GOD with many notable recordes. As in the foure and twentith Chapter of the Goſpell of Saint Luke the Euangeliſt. Further in the ſixtenth Chapiter of Saint Markes Goſpell. And in the thrée ſcore and eight Pſalme of Dauid the Prophet. And likewiſe in the fourth Chapter too the Epheſians. Item in the third Chapter of the firſt Epiſtle of Saint Peter the Apoſtle. And in the ſixth and the twentith Chapters of Saint Iohn the Euangeliſt.
                  And foraſmuch as I haue a little afore ſpoken of the benefites in Chryſtes Aſcenſion, too the intent the Phraſe may bée the ryghtlyer vnderſtoode, I will now declare the ſignifications of this woord Heauens.
                  For the firſt Heauen in the holy Scripture, ſignifyeth the ſkie, or the nyne Celeſtiall compaſſes: That is too witte, the firſt moueable or mouer, the Firmament or compaſſe which is decked with the fixed Starres, and the ſeuen compaſſes or welkins of the Planets, which ſtarres the Scripture calleth the powers or hoſte of heauen. As is ſayde by the holy Prophet Dauid in the thr
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      thirteth Pſalme. By the woord of the Lord the heauens are ſtabliſhed, and all the powers or hoſte of heauen by the breath of his mouth.
                  The ſecond Heauen ſignifyeth the aire. As it is written in the ſixthe Chapiter of Saint Mathewes Goſpell. Beholde, the Foules of heauen, that is too ſay, that flye in the aire. And in the third Chapiter of Salomons Prouerbes. The way of an Eagle in the Heauen. And in the eight Chapter of the third booke of the kings. If the heauen

bée ſhut vp and it raine not.
                  Thirdly, too bée in Heauen, is too enioy the ſyght of GOD, too pleaſe GOD, and being deliuered from ſinne and Death, too enioy the wiſdome, ryghtuouſneſſe, lyfe, and ioyes of GOD, which are begonne by Faith héere on earth, and finiſhed in the euerlaſting lyfe in Heauen. As Saint Marke in the tenthe Chapter of his Goſpell wryteth. Suffer chyldren too come vntoo mée, for of ſuche is the kingdome of heauen.
                  Fourthly, Heauen ſignifieth the ſeate and dwelling place of God and of Soules and Aungels, namely where God offereth himſelfe too the bliſſed Angels and ſoules too bée ſéene face too face. As is ſayde in the hundred and thrée Pſalme of the Prophete Dauid. The Lorde hath prepared his ſeate in Heauen. And in the ſixte Chapter of Sainct Mathewes Goſpell: Dure Father which arte in Heauen. This heauen in which GOD ſheweth himſelfe too the Angels and bliſſed ſoules openly, ſome lerned men wryght too bée called the heauen of heauens, as is ſayde in the hundred and thirtéene Pſalme of the Prophet Dauid: The heauen of heauens, too the Lorde, but the earth hée hath giuen too the ſonnes of men. Alſo, the thirde heauen in the ſecond Epiſtle of Saint Paule too the Corinthians the twelfth chapter where he writeth, that he was caught vp aboue the airy heuen or Element, and aboue the ſkye, intoo the third heauen, that is too wit, the heauen of heauens, or the Chryſtall heauen, where he ſawe things vnſpeakable. They are of opiniō, y• Chriſt aſcended intoo this heauen, and that there he imparteth him ſelfe in his true bodye too bée ſeene of the bliſſed Angels and Saintes. As the Prophete Dauid ſayeth in his three ſcore and eight Pſalme. Sing vntoo GOD, who is aſcended intoo the Heauen of Heauens. Ephe. iiij. He is aſcended aboue all heauens, that he might fill all things.
                  
                     
                     The ryght hand of God, dooth in the Scriptures moſtThe right hād of God. vſually ſignifie, Gods eternall almyghtyneſſe, maieſtie, and glorie. It is written in the hundred and eightene Pſalme of Dauid: The right hand of the Lord hath doone mightie things, the Lordes right hande is exalted. And in the ſecond Chapter of the Hiſtorie of the Actes of the Apoſtles: Being exalted by the right hande of God, he poured out vppon vs the holy Ghoſte that he had promiſed. Alſo in the thrée ſcore and ſix Chapter of the prophecie of Eſai: Heauen is my ſeate, and the earth is my foteſtoole. All theſe things hath my hand made. And in the fiftenth Chapter of the ſeconde booke of Moyſes called Exodus: Thy right hand is magnifyed O Lord.
                  
                     Too ſit, ſignifieth too reigne and too execute the powerToo ſitte. and office of a King. As in the ninth Chapter of the Prophete Eſai: Vppon the throne of Dauid and vppon his kingdome ſhal he ſit. Hereupon cometh the ſeat or Sea of Rome. Therefore too ſit at the right hand of the Father almightie, is the ſame thing that too reigne in equall almightineſſe, maieſtie, and glorie with him, is. The Prophet Dauid in his hundred and tenth Pſalme ſayeth thus: The Lord ſayd vntoo my Lord, ſit thou at my right hande till I make thyne enemies thy foteſtoole. This expoundeth the bliſſed Apoſtle Saint Paule in the fiftenth Chapter of his firſt Epiſtle written too the Corinthians, in theſe woordes: Chryſte muſt reigne till he haue made his enimies his foteſtoole.
                  Sometyme alſo, but very ſeldome, the right hande of God is in the Scripture ſo termed, not in reſpect of God, but of godly men which pleaſe GOD, and are defended by God, and adorned with euerlaſting bliſſe: Like as Chriſt is ſayde too haue ſet the Shéepe on his right hande and the Gotes on his lefte. But this ſignification perteyneth not too this place.
                  
                     Textes in which the Apoſtles and Prophets ſpeake of Chryſt reigning at the ryght hand of the eternall father, and making interceſſion for vs, may bée gathered out of Pſal. cx. Rom. viij. j. Pet. iij. Eph. j. Col. iij. Heb. j. x. and .xij. Mark. xvj. Luke. xxij. &c.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the Sunday called Exaudi, or the Sunday after the Aſcenſion.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. j. Peter. iiij.
                  
                     BEe yee therefore ſober, and watche vntoo prayer. But aboue all things haue feruent loue among your ſelues: for loue shall couer the multitude of ſinnes. Bee yee harborous one too another without grudging. As euery man hath receiued the gift, euen ſo miniſter the ſame one too an other, as good miniſters of the manifolde graces of God. If any man ſpeake, let him talke as the woordes of God. If any man miniſter, let him doo it as of the habilitie which God miniſtreth to him: that God in all things may bee glorified through Ieſus Chryſt: Too whome bee prayſe and dominion for euer and euer.
                  Amen.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is altoogither inſtructiue, cōteyning precepts of good woorks. And in order it entreateth of. vj. vertues.
                  
                     1 Of ſobrietie or ſtayedneſſe.
                     2 Of watchfulneſſe.
                     3 Of praying.
                     4 Of earneſt loue.
                     5 Of hoſpitalitie.
                     6 Of diligence faithfully executing the labors of a mans vocatiō, and employing the gifts that God hath lent him, too the profit of others, or too the common welfare

of the Church and his Countrey, and ſpecially too the auauncement of Gods glory.
                  
                  And there may bée propounded too the people ſermon wiſe thrée places.
                  
                     FIrſt concerning prayer, vntoo which the vertues of ſobrietie and watchfulneſſe are very neceſſary.
                     Secondly of louing a mannes neybor, wherof hoſpitalitie is a part.
                     Thirdly, faithfulneſſe in dooing aryght the laboures of a mannes own vocation, for the glory of God and the welfare of his neybor.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt.
                  THe definition and partes of true calling vpon God, wereA commendation of prayer. reſited an eyght dayes ago: which are néedful too bee repeted and beaten intoo the héerers heads, bycauſe Prayer is the hygheſt woorſhip of God, and the chéefe and moſt acceptable Sacrifyſe too God, and the ſtrongeſt defence of the whole Church, and the well ſpring and ſtorer of the reſt of the vertues for the moſt part, and the practyſe of the whole doctrine of diuinitie.
                  And as there is néede of faith perſuading a mannes ſelf for a certeintie that he is in Gods fauor, & that his prayers are herd for ye mediator Chryſtes ſake: and alſo of patience which is not diſmayd with long tarianee in afflictions: and of hope awaiting for deliuerance or aſſuagemēt▪ So alſo is ther néed of fobrietie & watchfulneſſe, too make true calling vpon God.
                  For when the body being burthened with ye former dayesAgeinſt d
                           •
                        on
                        
                           ••••
                        eſſe. vyces, dooth alſo ouerlode the mynd, and beate downe too the ground that part of the heauenly ſpirit: there can no earneſtneſſe in Prayer, or in any thought concerning God or godly matters bée performed of men that are drunken and diſordered, whom wée fynde by experience not too bée méete too performe aryght the leſſer purpoſes and dueties of mannes lyfe. Beſides this drunkēneſſe expulſeth the ſpirit of grace & praiers

out of mennes harts, as Baſil hath truely ſayd: Drunkenneſſe expelleth the holy Ghoſt. And like as ſmoke driueth out Bées: ſo Gluttony expulſeth the gifts of the holy Ghoſt.
                  Therfore ſome define ſobrietie or ſtayedneſſe too bée a vertueSobrietie which is a ſpice of ſtay▪ edneſſe. that ruleth the deſires and the vſe of meat and drinke, ſo as wée nether hinder prayer by too much cramming, nor hinder ſléepe by too much for 
                        •
                     earing.
                  Watchfulneſſe alſo is neceſſary vntoo praying, which notWatchfulneſſe only meaſureth the ſléepe of the body in ſuche wiſe as it alloweth not more tyme too it than is requiſite too maynteine health: but alſo ſhaketh off the reſtineſſe of mynd, and drouſie ſluggiſhneſſe which neglecteth ye exerciſes of true godlyneſſe: and performeth due heede, earneſtneſſe, buſineſſe, & diligence in dayly prayer, and in ruling the reſt of the attemptes and purpoſes of a mannes lyfe. It neglecteth not, 
                        •
                     e conſumeth the time in ſléepe or idleneſſe, which is too bée employed in prayer and mynding of godlyneſſe. It bableth not the woords of the prayer with the lips alone, coldly and yauningly, and with a wandring minde, but it is ſettled and buſie occupyed. For how can he hope too bee herd of God, which héereth not himſelf when he prayeth, not conſidereth what he prayeth? The times that are moſt fit for godly and earneſt prayer, are the morning, and the tymes immediatly before dinner and ſupper, as it is ſayd in the Pſalme, Early in the morning will I cry vntoo thee, early in the morning ſhalt thou heare mée. Alſo Peter and Iohn go vp intoo the temple the nynthe houre too pray, which anſwéereth too our thrée or foure of the clocke in the after noone.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  COncerning the louing of our neybor there is ſpoke moreOf Lou
                           •
                        . largely of it vpon the .iiij. Sunday after Epiphanie, and the firſt and ſecond dayes after Trinitie. Therefore I giue but this leſſon concerning the Phraſe, Loue hydeth the
                     
                     multitude of ſinnes, it is not too bée vnderſtoode of hyding a mannes ſinnes before God (of which is ſpoken in Pſal. xxxj. and Rom. iiij. Bliſſed are they whoſe ſinnes are couered, that is too wit vnder the ſhadow of the Sonne of God our mediator) but of other mennes or of our neybors ſinnes, infirmities and blemiſhes, which are too bée forgiuen and couered with mutual louingneſſe, according to this ſaying: Loue ſuffereth all things, loue beareth all things, loue woorketh his neybor no harme. Alſo, forgiue, and yée ſhalbée forgiuen. Alſo know thy fréends conditions, but hate them not. He that hateth vyces, hatethmen. &c.
                  One ſpice of louing a mannes neybor is of hoſpitalitie,Hoſpitalitie. which hee will haue too bée vſed without grudging, that is too ſay, willingly, and with a chéerfull mynd, according too this ſaying, God loueth the chéerful giuer. And the Gréekes haue giuen the thrée graces their names of chéerfulneſſe: that is too wit Pleaſantneſſe 
                     Aglaia▪
                      
                     Gladſomues. 
                     Euphroſyne, & Merineſſe. 
                     Thalia, méening thereby that good turnes are too bée doone vntoo others with a glad heart and chéerfull countenance.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  GOd framed man in ſuch wyſe, and diſtinguiſhed mannesDoing of good 
                           •
                        urnes. lyfe intoo ſundrie degrées, dueties and giftes, that euery one hath néede of others helpe, and eche one too ſhewe his louingneſſe and liberalitie towardes other by franke and free imparting his giftes among them. And in déede, the beſt of all laboures is too help a man by ſuch meanes as he hath and can. And therfore in this place Peter willeth all men too employ the giftes which they haue, not too vainglory and pryde, but too this end that they may ſerue our neybors turne, and ſet foorth the glory of God: Like as Paule. j. Corinthians. xij. and xiiij. willeth all giftes too bée employed too edefying▪ and too the profit of the churche. If any man ſpeake, let him ſpeake as the anſwers of God. That is too ſay, he that is a Preacher,

let him teache faithfully, and let him handle the word of God aryght, and not teach Philoſophie nor the traditions of men. If any man miniſtreth, let him doo it according to the abilitie that God lendeth him. That is too ſay, let euery one that ſerueth in any other ſeruice or office, abide within the boundes of his vocatiō, which God furthereth, & let him acknowledge God to bée the efficient cauſe and end of al wholſom dooings: Let him doo all things too the glory of God.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon Whitſon Sunday.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Actes. ij.
                  
                     ANd when the fiftie dayes wer come to an end, they were all with one accord together in one place. And ſodenly there came a ſound from heauen, as it had bin the comming of a mighty winde, and it filled al the houſe where they ſate. And there appeared vntoo them clouen tongues, like as they had bin of fire, and it ſate vpon eche one of them: and they were al filled with the holy ghoſt, and began to ſpeake with other tongues, euen as the ſame ſpirit gaue thē vtterance. Then were dwelling at Ieruſalem Iewes, deuout mē out of euery nation of them that are vnder heauen. When this was noyſed about, the multitude came together and were aſtonied, bicauſe that euery man heard them ſpeake with his own language: They wondred all and maruelled, ſaying among thē ſelues: Behold, are not all theſe, which ſpeake, of Galile? And how heare wee euery man his owne tongue, wherein wee were borne? Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the inhabiters of Meſopotamia, and of Iewrie, and of Capadocia, of Pontus and Aſia, Phrigia and Pamphilia, of Egipt, and of the parties of Libia, which is beſide Syren, and ſtraungers of Rome, Iewes and Proſelites, Greekes and Arrabians, wee haue heard them ſpeake in our owne tongues the great woorkes of God.
               
               
                  
                  The Doctrine concerning the feaſt of Pentecoſt or Whitſuntide, may be included in foure places.
                  
                     1 Of the woord Pentecoſt, and the ſtories of Gods ſhewing of himſelfe, which were doone in the Church vpon Whitſun Sunday.
                     2 The Doctrine concerning the perſon of the holy Ghoſt.
                     3 Of the office and benefites of the holy Ghoſt.
                     4 Too whom the holy Ghoſt is giuen, and how he is receiued or forgone.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  PEntecoſt is a Gréeke woorde and ſignifieth the fiftith day,Pentecoſt. that is too wit from Eaſter day. For the fiftith day after the firſt paſſeouer and paſſage of the children of Iſraell out of Egipt, the lawe of God was publiſhed vppon Mount Sinai. And the ſame day a thouſand fiue hundred fortie and twoo yéeres after, (béeing the fiftith day after that our paſſeouer Chryſt was offered in ſacrifiſe vppon the altar of the croſſe) the holy Ghoſt was poured out vppon the Apoſtles. Now, from the creation of the world vntoo the firſt Pentecoſt (in which the ten commaundementes were delyuered vppon Mount Sinai,) there paſſed twoo thouſand four hundred and thrée and fiftie yéeres. From the firſt Pentecoſt or deliuerāce of the ten commaundements, vnto the Pentecoſt of the new Teſtament, in which the holy Ghoſt in the viſible ſhape of fire was ſhed vppon the Apoſtles, are. 1542. yéeres. And from the firſt Pentecoſt in which the ten commaundements wer giuen by God, vntoo the Pentecoſt or Whitſuntide of this yeere from Chryſtes birth. 1570. are paſſed. 3079. yéeres.Why Eaſter, Whitſontyde, & other feaſtes were ordeined of God.
                  
                  God ordeyned among the people of Iſraell the feaſtes of Eaſter, Pentecoſt, Tabernacles. &c. that they might mainteine the memorie of the benefites that he had beſtowed vppon

the Iſraelites in conueying them out of Egipt, and in publiſhing the lawe, & in defending them in the wilderneſſe: And too the entent the people myght bée inſtructed cōcerning the benefites of the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, for whoſe ſake they béeing deliuered out of the thraldome of ſinne and endleſſe damnation, were gouerned by the holy Ghoſte, and made heires of the euerlaſting and heauenly Tabernacle. Therefore it was Gods will that the people alſo ſhould kéepe the Feaſt of Pentecoſt chéefely for thrée cauſes.
                  Firſt that the maruelous publiſhing of Gods lawe whichWhy Whitſon tide was ordeyned too be continually kept. he had ſet foorthe that day vppon the toppe of mount Sinai with notable tokens, might the more certeinly be ſpred abrode. For although he had ſowed intoo mennes harts a perceiuerance of his lawe before from their firſt creation: yet notwithſtanding he repeated it ageine vppon mount Sinai, leaſt béeing darkned in this ſorowfull miſtineſſe which folowed mannes fall, it might haue bin vtterly quenched in vs: and too the entent wée ſhould know that this natural perceiuerance of the lawe, was ſpred intoo our hartes by God himſelf: and ſpecially that the dreadfull iudgemēt of God ageinſt ſin myght bée manifeſted too mankinde by the lawe ſhooting foorth the thunderbolts and lightenings of Gods wrath.
                  Another cauſe was, for that God would haue new loaues of bread made of the corne that grew the ſame yéere, offered too him at the feaſt of Whitſuntyde, too the entēt his preſentneſſe and goodneſſe in cheriſhing and mainteining this bodely lyfe, myght bée acknowledged alſo.
                  Thirdly, God would that the people ſhuld bée put in mind of the Whitſuntyde of the newe Teſtament which was too come, and of the ſhedding foorthe of the holy Ghoſt intoo the hartes of the beléeuers, by whoſe help the law of God (which otherwiſe were vtterly impoſſible too mans nature) is begō, & new rightuouſneſſe, comfort, & lyfe euerlaſting kindled in our harts. Of wonderful purpoſe would God haue the times

or dayes in which the law was deliuered, and which the holy Ghoſt was ſhed foorth, and the maner of the manifeſtation of bothe, too agree. For looke on what day the lawe of God was publiſhed with flames of thunder and lightning vpon moūt Sinai, the ſameday was the holy Ghoſte alſo ſheaded forth vppon the Apoſtles in the likeneſſe of flames of firy tunges. For the holy Ghoſt by firie tunges, (that is too ſay by preachinge the woorde of the lawe and the Goſpell,) gathered a Churche too God out of nacions of ſundry tunges, and is effectuall in it. And he kindleth in mennes hartes, firſt a fire or a beholding of Gods dreadfull wrath, which is a conſuming fire: and ſecondly the lyght of faith, comfort, ioy, and lyfe, promiſed for Chriſtes ſake, and the fire of burning loue towards God, and of al other vertues. Héerby alſo is ſomewhat ment concerning the perſon of the holy ghoſt, namely that he is the flame of that mutuall loue wherwith the eternal father and the ſonne embrace eche other, and wherwith they afterward ioyne the Church too them.
                  But in eſpecially, in the ſtorie of this feaſtfull day, let the compariſon of eyther of the Pentecoſtes bée conſidered. Of which the firſt dooth with darting the thunderboltes & lightning of Gods law, ſo fray the multitude of folk ſtanding by, that with quaking and aſtonyed myndes they flée from the ſight and ſpéeche of God. But at this other Pentecoſt, the holy Ghoſt is poured out vppon the Sainctes, and he moueth their harts not too flée from God, but too approche vntoo God vppon truſt of his ſonne, and too crie Abba Father. Romains the eight.
               
               
                  The ſecond place: Of the perſone of the holy Ghoſt.
                  THe holy Ghoſt began not then firſt too bée, nor was thenThe holy Ghoſt. firſt ſhed intoo the harts of the Saincts, when he ſate vpon the Apoſtles in ſhape of firy tūgs y• fiftith day after Chriſtes

Reſurrection: but he was with GOD the Father and the ſonne from euerlaſting, & created all other things of nought, and imparted lyfe and power too thryue and encreaſe too all things growing in their firſt creation. And afterward at al tymes in the Church, he kindled the light of fayth or true acknowledgement of God, and ſpirituall rightuouſneſſe, and eternall lyfe in all the elect, as is ſayd in Gen. j. The Spirit of the Lord cheriſhed the waters. Pſal. xxxiij. By the woord of the Lorde the heauens were ſtabliſhed, and all the hoſt of them by the breth of his mouth. j. Pet. j. The ſpirit of Chriſt in the Prophetes, foretold the paſſion of Chryſt. Actes xxviij. As the holy Ghoſt hath ſpoken by the Prophet Eſai. Nowe there are an eyght hundred yéeres or there abouts from Eſai too the ſheading foorth of the holy Ghoſte vppon the Apoſtles. Neyther may wée ſurmyſe that the Apoſtles did then firſt receyue the holy Ghoſt, whē (the tenth day after Chriſts aſcenſion) he was ſhed out vppon them in the viſible ſhape of firie tungs, for in the .xx. of Iohn it is ſayd expreſſely: Take yée the holy Ghoſte. And this generall rule is well knowen. Rom. viij. They that are led by the ſpirit of GOD, are the ſonnes of GOD. If any man haue not the ſpirit of Chryſt, he is none of his.
                  But there are two manner of gifts of the holy Ghoſte.Two ſortes of giuing the holy Ghoſt. One ſort is common too all the godly, of whiche is ſpoken Gal. v. The frutes of the ſpirit are fayth, ioy, peace, and loue &c. An other ſort are ſingular and as it were peculiar priuiledges of ſome certein perſones, as the ſodeine knowledge of diuerſe tungs, vnappalled courage of mynd in profeſſing and ſpreading abrode the Goſpell, the gift of healing, and of woorking other miracles.
                  Now vpon Whitſon Sūday there were poured out vpō the Apoſtles, not only thoſe common and ordinarie things, (whiche were alſo begonne in them before,) but alſo theſe wonderfull giftes of the holy ghoſt and ſuch as were graunted too fewe by ſpeciall priuiledge of God. And this maruelous

and viſible ſheading foorth of the gifts of the holy ghoſt, was then doone at that tyme, too the intent it myght bée an aſſured witneſſe, that the holy Ghoſte is at all tymes afterward by the preaching of the goſpel, (without fayle) ſheaded inuiſibly into the hartes of the beléeuers, and that he kindleth in them true inuocatiō, ioyfulneſſe, hope, and other motions pleaſing God, and tranſformeth them to the image of God. Now let this enſewing (ſuch as it is) ſuffyſe for a deſcription of the perſone of the holy Ghoſt.
                  The holy Ghoſt is the third perſone of the Godhead procéedingA deſcriptiō of the holy ghoſt from the Father and the ſonne of one ſubſtance and of one euerlaſtingneſſe with the father & the ſonne, which in the firſt creatiō togither with the father & the ſonne did cheriſh and quicken all things that bréede, and afterward at all tymes is ſent intoo the harts of thoſe that beléeue the goſpel, too kindle in them light too the true knowing of God, and too bée their Aduocate, cheriſhiug, comforting, & quickning their harts with ſpiritual rightuouſneſſe and euerlaſting lyfe.
                  This deſcription is builded out of the Textes folowing.Proofes of the godhead of the holy Ghoſt. For, that the holy ghoſt is a perſone of the Godhead, or verely and in nature God, of one ſubſtance with the father & the ſonne: the inſtitution of our Baptim dooth euidently confirme. Mat. xxviij. Baptizing them in the name of rhe father and the ſonne, and of the holy ghoſt. For in Baptim the true and almightie God is called vppon, and a record is vttered, that the baptized perſone is receyued intoo Gods fauor, and waſhed from his ſinnes, and endewed with rightuouſneſſe and euerlaſting ſaluation. And that on the other ſyde he ought too acknowledge this only true God, and too cal vppon him and woorſhip him.
                  Now ſeing that in Baptim the father, the ſonne, and the holy ghoſt are called vppon toogither, and ioyned in one ſelfeſame felowſhip of honour: the Godhead, might, maieſtie, & ſubſtance of all the thrée perſones muſt néedes bée all one: like as alſo it is ſayd. j. Iohn. v. There are thrée that beare

witneſſe in heauen, the father, the woord, and the holy ghoſt, & theſe thrée are one: that is too ſay, they are of one ſelfſame being or ſubſtance. Baſill: Wée muſt bée baptized accordingBaſill. as wée haue receiued of Chryſt, and wée muſt beléeue as we were baptized, and confeſſe as wée beléeue, the father, the ſonne, and the holy Ghoſt. Euſebius Paleſtinus: Wée cal vpponEuſebius Paleſtinus. the holy God the fountain of lyght, by our Sauiour Ieſus, toogither with the holy Ghoſt, &c. And there bée many Argumentes auouched elſe where, whiche confirme that the holy Ghoſt is verely and by nature God.
                  Act. xxviij. The holy Ghoſt ſpake by the Prophet Eſai: Go and ſpeake too this people & ſay to them, Herken, &c. But Eſai in his. vj. chapter ſayeth, he heard the voyce of the Lord God ſaying, Go & tell this people, &c. Ergo, the holy ghoſt is the Lord God, or verely and by nature God.
                  Act. v. Peter ſayeth that Ananias made a lye too the holy ghoſt: and anon after he ſayth, Thou haſt not lyed to mē but to God. Hereuppon it foloweth that the holy ghoſt is God.
                  Alſo, the holy ghoſt is euery where, yea and he dwelleth ſubſtāciallyin the harts of the godly, & filleth al the ſaints by imparting his being vnto them, & he teacheth, regenerateth, and ſancti
                        •
                     ieth them: all which things are the properties of the Godhead too doo.
                  That ye holy ghoſt procéedeth frū ye father & ye ſōne, & yet isProofes that the holy Ghoſt is a diſtinct perſone from the father and the ſonne. a distinct perſone frō ye father & ye ſōne, there be many proofs.
                  Ioh. xv. Whē the cōforter ſhalbecōme whō I wil ſend you frō ye father, ye ſpirit of truth which procéedeth from ye father.
                  Iohn. xv
                        •
                     . When that ſpirit of truthe ſhalbée come, he ſhall take of myne, bycauſe al things whiche the father hath are myne: that is too ſay, I am of the ſame ſubſtāce with the father, I haue ye ſame power, maieſtie, glorie & being, that the father hath And this my being do I cōmunicate to the holy ghoſt, who though he take of myne, that is too ſay, of my ſubſtance: yet is he a diſtinct perſone from mée, according as it is ſayd a little erſt, If he come, not I, &c.
                  
                     Roma. viij. And ofte elſwhere he is named the Spirit of Chryſt and the ſpirit of the Sonne. Therefore he is in very déed the ſpirit of the ſonne, and procéedeth from the ſonne as well as from the father, as in Iohn. xx. Chryſt breathing vppon his Diſciples, méeneth that he will impart too the Apoſtles the ſpirit procéeding out of his owne breſ
                        •
                     .
                  That in the firſt creation, the holy ghoſt cheriſhed things growing, and euer ſince hath bin preſent too the Church and gouerned all the godly: it is euident by the Textes cited in the beginning of this ſecond place. And the reſt of the members of this definition, which reherſe the operations and benefites of the holy Ghoſt, ſhall bée declared foorthwith.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  THe office and chéef benefites of the holy Ghoſt are comprehendedThe office and benefits of the holy Ghoſt. by Chryſte in twoo termes, when he nameth him the ſpirit of Truthe, and the Comforter: And therefore we will vnfold theſe two Termes ſhortly.
                  He is termed the ſpirit of truthe, firſt bycauſe he is notThe ſpirit of Truthe. only ſoothfaſt and voyd of vntruthe, but alſo is the authour and preſeruer of the true doctrine concerning God, in the publike miniſterie, and the ſhewer of the true interpretation and diſcernement of all ſectes and opinions. Iohn. xiiij. The holy Ghoſt ſhall teache you al things. j. Ioh. ij. Theſe things haue I wrytten concerning them that ſeduce you. And the anoynting which you haue receyued of God, abydeth in you, and teacheth you all things, and is true, and there is no vntruthe with him.
                  Secondly, bycauſe that in the hartes of them that beléeue the Goſpell, he kindleth the lyght of the true knowledge of Gods being and will and true acknowledgement of ſinne, and true fayth ſettled in the fatherly good will of God, promiſed for Chryſtes ſake ſake. j. Corin. ij. None knoweth the things of God, but the ſpirit of God. But God hath opened them too vs by his ſpirite. For the ſpirit ſercheth all things,

yea euèn the bottome of Gods ſecretes, concerning our redemption and ſaluation.
                  Thirdly, bycauſe he ſtirreth vp true in
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     ation in mēnes hartes. Zach. xij. I will poure out the ſpirite of Thankeſ giuing and prayer vppon the houſe of Dauid. 
                        •
                     oma. viij. Yée haue re
                        •
                     eyu
                        ••
                      the ſpirit of adoption of ſonnes, by which wée 
                        ••
                     ye 
                        •
                     bba father.
                  Fourthly, by cauſe that in the ha
                        ••
                      
                     
                        ••
                      of the godly he kindleth the fyre of true loue or louingneſſe towardes God and our neyghbour, out of which flowe all other vertues. 
                        •
                     ō. v. The loue of God is ſhed in our hartes by the holy Ghoſte, which is giuen vs. Gal. v. The frutes of the ſpirite are ioy. peace, louingneſſe. &c.
                  The Gréeke woord Paracletus ſignifieth an Aduocate orParacletus. cōforter. For like as an Aduocate in court matters is at hād with his clyent, coūſelling, hartening, and comforting him: ſo dooth the holy Ghoſt play the ſame partes in the myads of the godly. For in ſo great darkneſſe of mennes mynds, and ſo horrible falles euen of the wyſe 
                        •
                     or
                        •
                     , the holy Ghoſt hadde néede too ſtand continually too the helme, in all the intentes and dooings of this lyfe, according as Dauid prayeth pſal. lj. A pure hart create in mée O God, and renew a right ſpirits in my bowels. Giue m
                        ••
                      the comfort of thy helpe agein, and ſtabliſh mée with thy frée ſpirite. Let vs har
                        •
                     e vppon theſe requeſtes dayly. For in ſo great confuſion of doutfulneſſe, in the gréefes of conſcience, in the perilles of profeſſion, in pouertie, in contempt, in moſt bitter hatreds, and in torments of bodye. It is impoſſible that fayth and godlyneſſe ſhould ſtād ſtedye and vnmoued, if mennes mynds were not ſtrengthened by the holy Ghoſte. That Steue
                        •
                      went with ioyfull mynd too his puniſhement, and eaſed his harmes with hope. That Laurence laye vppon the gredyron broyling on the coales that were vnderneathe him, with glad and chéerefull hart, and ſcorned the Tyrant both in countenaunce & voyce. That Agatha, Agnes, and ſuch other 
                        •••
                     ie Wenches laughed

in the mids of moſt bitter tormentes, and were not ouercome with any terrours or tortures, too renounce the profeſſion of the truthe. All theſe things are the benefites and giftes of the holy Ghoſt.
                  And this benefite of the holy Ghoſt in erecuting the office of an Aduocate in the mynds of men that are afflicted, is with moſt ſingular and ſwéete lightſomneſſe both of woords and figures expreſſed in the auncient prayer directed too the holy Ghoſt, which I would wiſhe yong men too wryte, yea and dayly too vſe it in their prayers.
                  
                     Come holy Ghoſt and God of myght,
                     Send downe from heauen on euery wyght
                     The beames of thy eternall lyght.
                  
                  
                     Come Father of the poore in ſmart,
                     Come thou that all good gifts doost part,
                     Come only lyght of lyghtleſse hart.
                  
                  
                     Of comforters thou art the best,
                     Of humane ſoule the gentle guest
                     And ſweete refreſher of th'opprest.
                  
                  
                     In labour, rest and quietneſſe:
                     In ſwelting heat, coole tempratneſſe:
                     In moorning, comfortableneſse.
                  
                  
                     O lyght most bliſſed too behold
                     Fulfill with grace most manifold
                     The harts of all thy faythfull fold.
                  
                  
                     Onleſſe thy woorking it begin,
                     Man hath not aught at all within:
                     Man hath not aught but only ſin.
                  
                  
                     Waſh cleane what euer filth is found,
                     And moyst agein eche droughty ground,
                     And heale eche thing that is not ſound.
                  
                  
                     
                     Subdue the ſturdy ſtiffe and hold,
                     Releeue the things fernoo
                           ••
                        d with cold,
                     And on the ſtrayes lay ſtedfast hold.
                  
                  
                     On ſuch as by their frutes doo ſhowe
                     The trust and fayth which they thee 
                           •
                        we▪
                     
                     Thy ſacred namber ſeuen bestowe.
                  
                  
                     Giue them the hyre of rightuouſneſse,
                     Giue them the end of bliſfulneſſe,
                     And euer lasting ioyfulneſſe.
                  
                  Now whereas in this Hymne is ſayd, Thy ſacred nōber ſeuen beſtowe. And in another Hymne, Thou ſeuenfold giuer of thy gift▪ &c. Theſe woords allude to y• place of Eſai. x
                        •
                     . out of which they cōmonly recken vp ſeuen giftes of the holy Ghoſt.
                  Eſai. xj. A rod ſhall ſpring out of the ſtocke of Ieſſe, and aThe ſeuen gift
                           •
                         of the holy 
                           •
                        hoſt. braunche ſhal growe out of his roote. The ſpirit of the Lord ſhall reſt vppon him, the ſpirit of wiſdome and vnderſtanding, the ſpirit of counſell and ſtrength, the ſpirit of knowledge and godlineſſe, and the ſpirit of the feare of the Lorde ſhall fill him.
                  This place of Eſai is a propheſie concerning Chryſtes kingdome, whom he foretelleth to come of the ſtocke of Eſai or Ieſſe, or of the linage of Daui
                        •
                      nowe ſore decayed and in maner paſt hope: and that this kingdome ſhalbée ſpirituall, in which Chryſt the king and head of the Churche, ſhall beſtowe ſpiritual and euerlaſting gifts vpō his body or church, not by worldly force, but by his ſpirit and woor
                        •
                     .
                  Firſt, the ſpirit or gift of wiſdome, is the true knowledgeThe gift of 
                           •
                        iſdome. of God and of his ſ
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     e 
                        •
                     ur Lo
                        •
                     d Ieſus Chryſte, and a faith vnderſtanding and embracing all the whole doctrine concerning God, which is ſet foorth and is neceſſarie too bée knowen for the health of the ſoule.
                  Secondly, the ſpirit of Vnderſt
                        •
                     ding is that whereby w
                        ••
                     
                     
diſcerne opinions, and fynd out the true doctrine frō the falſe and from that which is ſhadowed with the ſleightes of Sophiſtrie.
                  Thirdly, the ſpirite of Counſell is that whiche in the laboursThe ſpirit of Counſell. of a mannes vocation, in daungers, in ſorowes, and aduerſities, gouerneth the godly with counſell, and ſuſteyneth them with comfort, and playeth al the other partes and duties of an Aduocate.
                  Fourthly, the ſpirit of Strength or Mālyneſſe, hartenethThe ſpirite of Strength, or Manlyneſſe. and ſtrengtheneth mennes myndes, and fenceth the godly with thoſe weapons that are deſcribed, Ephe. vj. leaſt being vanquiſhed eyther with entycements of pleaſure, or with ye traynes of the Diuell▪ or with aduerſitie, they may fal away from true godlineſſe.
                  Fifthly, the ſpirit of Knowledge doth in our co
                        ••
                     on conuerſationThe ſpirit of Kno
                           •
                        ledge. ſo marke the differences of perſones, tymes, and places, and ſo rule a mannes deuyſes and dooings too the reaſon of the circumſtances or incidentes, that he neyther offendeth others, nor withdraweth them frō the true doctrine.
                  Sixthly, the ſpirit of Godlyneſſe kindleth in our will
                        •
                     s 
                        •
                     
                     The ſpirit of Godlyneſſe. fréeharted willingneſſe too obey God, or 
                        •
                     n vniuerſall obedience according too the commaundementes of God, and dryneth all our dooings too this end, that GOD▪ may bée rightly worſhipped, gl
                        •
                     ri
                        ••
                     ed▪ a
                        •
                     d magnified at 
                        •••
                     hands.
                  Seuenthly, the ſpirit of the Feare of GOD, ruleth ourThe ſpirit of the Feare of God. ha
                        ••
                     es that they may reuerently 
                        〈◊〉
                      themſelues to god, and ſtand in awe of the Lord God as of a kyndharted fathe
                        •
                     , not with ſlauiſh feare, but with chyldly affection, being loth with all our hartes too 
                        •
                     ffend this hea
                        •
                     enly Father, or too bée caſt o
                        ••
                      of his f
                        •
                     uou
                        •
                     . 
                        ••
                     d althoughe there bée mo
                        •
                     enefites attribu
                        •••
                      
                     
                        •••
                      the holy Gho
                        ••
                      in the Seriptures, & theſe ſelf ſe
                        •
                     en gift
                        ••
                      of the holy Ghoſt 
                        •
                     ay bée drawen 
                        ••
                      fewe
                        •
                      kynds▪ yet notwithſtāding in as much as this diſtribution is accuſtomed in the church, I thought good 
                        ••
                      repete a ſhort 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                      it in this place.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth place how the holy ghoſt is receiued, and how he is forgone.
                  THe holy ghoſt imparteth vnto vs both himſelf & his giftes by two means which he hath ordeined & ſtabliſhed: yt is too wit, by ye word of the goſpel, herd, red, or thought vpon: and by the Sacraments of Baptim, and the Lords ſupper: as is ſayde in the Epiſtle of to morow. Act. x. The holy ghoſt fel vpon al that herd the woorde. And in the ſermon of Peter which he made as vpon this day at Hieruſalem, when his héerers aſked him: What ſhal wée doo yt wée may obteyn the holy ghoſt? Peter anſwered: Repent, & be baptized euery one of you in the name of Ieſus Chryſt, & yée ſhal receiue the gift of the holy ghoſt. There is no mā that can obteyn the holy ghoſt, by his owne power or deſert: but the ſpirite of God of his owne infinite goodneſſe preuenteth vs, & offreth himſelf too vs by the word of the Goſpel, and kindleth the true knowledge of God & faith in our breſts, and regenerateth & renueth our mynd and wil. Therfore being helped of the holy ghoſt, wée both can & muſt ſtir vp, noriſh & encreaſe in our ſelues the kindled ſparks of faith, & the beginnings of al other vertues: And alſo muſt deſire of God, that this ſpirite may be the directer of al our deuiſes and dooings. Hervnto perteineth that moſt ſweet promis. Luke. xj. How much more ſhal the heuenly father giue the holy ghoſt to thoſe ye aſk him. Therfore let this moſt large promiſe ſtir vs vp to ſue daily vnto God with moſt harty and erneſt entreatance that this gouerner the holy ghoſt may be ſent into our harts, & his gifts be increſed in vs. And let vs with ſo much the more héed, circumſpectneſſe, & modeſtie rule our behauior, leaſt through our offences cōmitted ageinſt cōſcience, the holy ghoſte be gréeued, and ſo taking diſpleaſure, depart out of the tēple of our hart, & vtterly forſake vs. Finally let vs cōtinually recite this prayer of Dauids. A clean hart create

in me O God, & renue a ſtedfaſt ſpirit in my bowels. Caſt mée not away from thy face, and take not thy holy ſpirit from mee. Reſtore to mée the gladneſſe of thy ſaluatino, and ſtrengthen mée with thy free ſpirite.
               
            
            
               Vppon Whitſon Monday.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Act. ij.
                  
                     BVt Peter ſtepped forth with the eleuen, and lift vp his voyce, and ſayd vnto them: Yee men of lewry, & all yee that inhabite Hieruſalem, be this known vntoo you, and with your eares heare my wordes: Theſe are not drunkē as ye ſuppoſe: for it is yet but the third houre of the day. But this is that which was ſpoken by the prophete Ioell: It shal be in the laſt days ſayeth God, of my ſpirit I will poure out vppon all fleshe. And your ſonnes and your doughters shal propheſy, and your yong men shal ſee viſions, and your old men shal dreame dreames. And on my ſeruāts and on my handmaydens I will poure out my ſpirit in thoſe days, and they shal propheſie. And I will shewe woonders in heauen aboue, and tokens in the earth beneath, bloude and fyre and the vapour of ſmoke. The Sunne shal be turned into darkneſſe, and the Moon into bloud, before that great and notable day of the Lord come. And it shal be that whoſoeuer shall call on the name of the Lorde, ſhal be ſaued. Yee men of Iſrael, heare theſe woordes: Ieſus of Nazareth, a man approued of God among you with miracles, woonders and ſignes, which God did by him in the mids of you (as yee your ſelues know) him haue ye taken by the hands of vnryghtuous perſons, after he was deliuered by the determinate counſell and fore knowledge of God, and haue crucified and ſlayne: whom God hath rayſed vp, and louſed the ſorowes of death, by cauſe it was vnpoſsible that he shoulde bee holden of it. For Dauid ſpeaketh of him. A fore hand I ſaw God alwayes before me,

for hee is on my right hande, that I ſhoulde not bee moued. Therfore did my hart reioyce, & my tongue was glad. More ouer alſo, my flesh shall reſt in hope, bicauſe thou wilte not leaue my ſoule in Hell, neyther wilte ſuffer thyne holy too ſee corruption. Thou haſte shewed mee the wayes of lyfe and shalt make mee full of ioy with thy countenaunce. Men and brethren, let me freely ſpeak vnto you of the patriark Dauid. For hee is bothe dead and buried, and his ſepulchre remaineth with vs vnto this day. Therfore ſeing he was a Prophete, and knew that God had ſworne with an othe to him, that Chryſt (as concerning the flesh) should come of the frute of his loynes, and ſit on his ſeat: he knowing this before, ſpake of the reſurrection of Chryſt, that his ſoule should not be left in hel neither his flesh shoulde ſee corruption. This Ieſus hath God raiſed vp, wherof we al are witneſſes. Since now that he by the ryght hand of God is exalted, and hath receiued of the father the promiſe of the holy ghoſt, he hath shed foorth that which, ye now ſee and heare. For Dauid is not aſcended into heauen but he ſayd: The lord ſayd to my Lord, ſyt on my right hand vntill I make thy foes thy footeſtoole. So therfore, let all the houſe of Iſraell knowe for a ſuretie that God hath made that ſame Ieſus (whom ye haue crucified) Lord and Chryſt. When they heard this they were pricked in their heartes, and ſayde vntoo Peter, and vntoo the other Apoſtles: Yee men and brethrē, what shall we do? Peter ſaid vnto them: repēt and be baptized euery one of you in the name of Ieſus Chriſt, for the remiſsiō of ſins, and ye shal receiue the gift of the holy ghoſt.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement of Peters Sermon taken out of the redings vpon the ſecond chapter of the Acts of the Apoſtles.
                  THe ſtate of Peters firſt Sermon which he made vpon Whitſon Sunday, is a doctrine concerning the holy ghoſt & of the maner how to obtein euerlaſting ſaluation.
               
               
                  
                  The parts of this Sermon are chiefly three.
                  FIrſt of the principall efficient cauſe of oure conuerſion and ſaluation, that is to wit of the holy ghoſt, by whom the eternal father kindleth in mens harts the true knowledge of himſelfe, and true fayth and Inuocation.
                  Secondly of the forcing cauſe or the deſeruing of our ſaluation: that is too wit, of the death and Reſurrection of our lord Ieſus Chryſt, by whom and for whom only, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, the holy ghoſt, rightnouſneſſe and ſaluation euerlaſting are giuen to them that bel
                        •
                     eue.
                  Thirdly of the means by which the holy ghoſt worketh and by which he offreth and applyeth vnto vs, Chryſts benefites or euerlaſting ſaluation.
                  Which are the

                        Woorde

                              Of the law, Repentance.
                              Of the Goſpell, Faith.
                           
                        
                        Sacraments

                              Of Baptim.
                              Of the Lords ſupper.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     THe enterance of his oracion though it b
                           •
                        e ſhorte, hath neuertheleſſe the two places of Beneuolence and attentiueneſſe.
                     He ſeeketh beneuolence or the fauour and good will ofBeneuolēce▪
                         his héerers, by a moſt honorable title, & ſuch a one as was wel liked of amōg thē. Yee men of Iury and ye that dwel at Ieruſalem, For like as Demoſthenes doth oftētimes ſpeak to his coūtrimē by theſe words, Ye men of Athens bicauſe they thought thēſelues farre to excell the inhabiters of all other cities of Grece for many giftes: ſo it liked well the people of Ieruſalē
                         too bée termed by the name of Iewes, as wherby was mente, that they were the profeſſers of the true God, and of the true doctrine & woorſhipping of God, and that they were better than all other nations.
                     And he procureth attentiueneſſe in theſe wordes: Let
                        
                        this bee knowen vnto you, and geue eare vnto my woordes. This doone, like as Cicero in his oration for Milo, before 
                           •
                        e entreate of the matter, dooth diſpatch certeine doutes out of the Iudges mindes, and preuenteth certeine foredéemings. So Peter firſt of all diſplaceth out of ye minds of his hearers, that brute which wandred farre abroade, & that opinion y• the Apoſtles were dronke with wine.
                     Afterward be ſteppeth too the caſe it ſelfe, and that it may bée of the more authoritie, hée vſeth the ſaying and witneſſe of the Prophete Ioel, whiche in ſingular lighteſomneſſe of woordes comprehendeth the doctrine, concerning the perſone and benefites of the holy Ghoſte. Of which doctrine for aſmuch as the chéef pointes are touched in the ſtory of Whitſun Sunday, I will now breefly declare the weight and pithineſſe of the woordes.
                     
                        I will poure out my ſpirite vppon all fleſh. Firſte and formoſt muſt bée conſidered the perſone of him that ſpeaketh, which is the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſte, for, ſo doo the wordes going next before, euidently declare. And yee shall know that in the middes of Iſraell, I, euen I the Lord your God, and none other. &c. By which wordes may bée gathered notable proofes of the two natures in Chriſt.
                     For ſéeing he ſhall dwell in the middes of Iſraell, afterProofes of Chriſtes Godhead. a farre other n
                           •
                        erer ſort, than be dwelt in the Tabernacle: he muſt néedes bée very man, 
                           〈…〉
                        is 
                           •
                        ayde Iohn. 
                           •
                        . The woorde became fleſh and dwelt among vs. Alſo, he is in the middes of you, who though 
                           •
                        e were before mée, yet came he after me. Agein, in as much as he is called Iehoua, he muſt néedes bée very God by nature, which thing is alſo gathered manifeſtely by this, that he poureth out the holy Ghoſt vppon all that call vppon the name of the Lord. For to giue the holy Ghoſt, is the propertie of the onely true God the Lord. Chriſte giueth the holy Ghoſt▪ Ioh. xx. Receyue ye the holy Ghoſt, Iohn. xv. whom I will ſend you from my Father: Ergo &c.
                     
                     
                        Secondly the poynting of the tyme muſt be vnderſtood aright. And it shal be in the later dayes not in the end of the world, but at the laſt caſt of the Iewiſh common weale, and of the lawe giuen by Moyſes. Now there are from the publiſhing of Moyſes lawe vntoo the pouring out of the holy ghoſt vpon the apoſtles, a thouſand fiue hundred and twoo and fortie yeares.
                     Thirdly is to be conſidered the pithineſſe of this word Power by which God ment to betoken great aboundance and large plentuouſneſſe of a moſte bounteous gift. For whereas before that tyme, the giftes of the holy ghoſte floriſhed only among the Iewes: in the latter dayes, not onely theſe gifts of the holy ghoſt which are common too the godly, but alſo thoſe peculiar and wonderfull giftes ſhall be poured by heapes vpon all fleſh, and vpon all nacions that beléeue the goſpell. And here withall the Prophet alludeth too the cuſtome of anoynting the préeſtes, which was a foreſhadow of the giuing of the holy ghoſt, as appeareth in. j. Iohn. ij.
                     Fourthly the teſtimonie concerning the perſon of the holy ghoſt in the pronoun My is to be obſerued. For therProofes of the Godhead of the holy ghoſt. is nothing in the godhead of the father & the ſonne, which is not diuine, euerlaſting and almightie.
                     This ſpirit which is powred out vpon all fleſh, is the ſpirite of the Lord God, and is poured out of the being of the father and the Son. Ergo he is very God by nature, of one ſelfſame ſubſtance with the father and the ſonne.
                     Although that in the Hebrew it bée written Ruhi, my ſpirite,
                         yet notwithſtanding the ſame thing altogither is in the word of Peter, I will powre out my ſpirite, whiche things agrée with the māner of ſpéeche that Chryſt vſeth in Iohn. xvj. The ſpirite of truthe ſhall take of myne. All things that my father hath, are myne. Therfore ſayd I, that he ſhal take of myne, and ſhew vnto you.
                     For as the father hath a being euerlaſting, almighty,

incomprehenſible, true, good of it ſelf, and ſtanding by it ſelfe: So alſo hath the Son the ſelf ſame things taken of the Father. And the holy Ghoſt is ſayde to take the ſame being of the father and the ſonne, that in the trinitie wée may beléeue the nature of the holy ghoſt too bée the ſame that the nature of the father and the ſonne is.
                     Fifthly is to bée obſerued the moſte ſwéete comfort ſet foorth in this vniuerſal peece vpon al fleſh, which teacheth that God is not an accepter of perſons, but vpright to all men that behaue thēſelues vprightly. For as it is his will to haue al men ſaued: ſo alſo poureth he out his ſpirite vpall that repent and beleue the Goſpell.
                     Sixtly ther is alſo ſet foorth a ſwéet cōfort in this woordFleſhe. 
                        fleſh to be ſet ageinſt the tēptatiō of vnworthines. Wherby the prophet méeneth that this heauenly gift of the holy ghoſt is poured out, not only vpon angels or holy men, and ſuch as excelled in vertue, but alſo vpon the weake & wretched, y• are ſubiect vnto deth, & defiled with ſins, how be it repenting & fleing vnto Chryſt by fayth and prayer.
                     Seuenthly in theſe woords folowing: And your ſons &No accepting of perſones vvith Chryſt. daughters, your yong men & your old men, your bondmen & your hādmayds ſhal propheſy, is declared by a diſtribution, y• vniuerſal parcel al flesh, for the differēces of ſexes, ages & eſtates are takē away: for in Chriſt Ieſu ther is no male or female, no bondmā or freeman, no Iew or Gréeke Gal. iij. but all are one in Chryſt, all become partakers a like of the benefites of Chryſtand the holy Ghoſt.
                     Eightly, theſe ſpéeches, Your ſons shal propheſy, ſee viſiōs & dream dremes, ar aſmuch to ſay in this place, as they ſhal know god aright, & alſo his ſon our lord Ieſus Chriſt, they ſhal rightly vnderſtād, & in their roome & calling teach the goſpel: they ſhall direct al their deuiſes and doings by the woord of God: & they ſhal be heires of eternal ſaluation.
                     Ioel ſpeaking of the benefites of the new teſtament, vſeth the woords that were beſt knowne in his tyme, lyke

as in an other place, the true knowledge of God, fayth, prayer, and prayſing of God, are termed by Malachie, a pure incenſe and a cleane ſacrifiſe.
                     
                     And this phraſe of Ioels is taken oute of Moyſes thePropheſying in the old Teſtament. ſchoolemaſter of all Prophetes. Num. xij. If there be any prophet of the Lord among you, too him will I appéere in viſion, or elſe I wil ſpeake vnto him by dreame. And propheſying in the olde Teſtament, ſignifieth reuelation or foretelling of things to come, or of Chryſtes kingdom, or of Empires, or of other things.
                     Theſe reuelations did God diſcloſe to the Prophetes,Diuerſities of appeerings. eyther by the miniſterie of his woorde, and the promiſes written before by Moyſes, kindlyng a cléerer lyghte in their myndes: or elſe by ſhewing himſelfe in the ſhape of mans nature, which afterwarde was too bee taken vppon him, and by talkyng with Moyſes and the fathers, as Iacob ſayeth, I haue ſéene God face too face.
                     Or elſe he caſt ſhapes, pictures, and images of thingsDreames. before the eyes of the prophets being awake: as Eſai ſaw the glorie of Chryſt. Daniel in his. vij. chapter ſéeth foure beaſtes, which paynted oute the foure monarchies of the world. Dan. vij. being awake he ſéeth a Ram and a gote, by whiche were ſignified the Monarchies of the Perſians and of Alexander. Hereafter in the .x. of the Actes, Peter ſéeth a linnen ſhéete let downe from heauen. Heereto perteyne the viſions of Ezechiell in his. j. x. and .xl. chapters, and the Apocalips of Iohn.
                     Or elſe in dreames, (eyther by himſelfe, or by his good Angelles) he imprinteth in mens myndes euident and notable betokenings or images of things to come, whervnto hée added aſſured recordes (as the giftes of interpretation and other things, whiche confirmed that thoſe dreames were ſent from God. Suche were the dreames of Ioſeph. Gen. xxxj. Of Pharao. Gen. xlj. Of Nabuchodonoſor, Dan. ij. and .iiij. Of Ioſeph the huſbande of Mary. Math. j. and .ij. &c.
                     
                        Theſe were the chéefe wayes by which God reueled to his prophetes the things that were to come. But in this ſaying of Ioels, theſe woords prophecie, viſions, and dreames, betoken the very gyft of the holy ghoſt, whereby he with a new lyght cléereth the mynds of thoſe that beleue the Goſpell, and gouerneth them.
                     And in the new Teſtament, prophecie oftentimes ſignifiethPropheſying in the nevv teſtament. nothyng elſe but a lyght ryghtly vnderſtandyng the doctrine of the Goſpell, and the gift of expounding or opening the propheticall Scriptures, as may be gathered by the texts. Rom. xij. j. Cor. xiij. &. xiiij. and in other places.
                     And if any mā now a days wil ſurmiſe himſelf to haue Propheticall dreames, or viſions, let them be compared with the woord deliuered by God. For if things ſtryuing with the doctrine of the lawe or the Goſpel be commaunded in thoſe dreames: no doute but they be fantaſticall and accurſed. And in generall let the ſaying of Salomon concerning dreames be alwayes had in ſight. Where as bée many dreames there bée many vanities. But feare thou God.
                     Ninthly the woonders which Ioell wryteth ſhal go before the greate day of the Lorde, dreadfull too the wicked, (that is to ſay, the day of Chryſtes Reſurrection or of the Reuelation of the holy ghoſt,) are thought of the learned ſorte too bée vtterly the ſelfe ſame, whiche are reported by the Euangeliſts too haue happened at the time of Chriſtes paſſion: when the ſonne in the firmament was ouer caſt with darkneſſe frō aboue, as with the lay of a ſmoke: and the earth quaked, and the ſtones claue in ſunder. And it is a likelyhod that in the moone alſo appeared ſorowful and bloudy ſpots. The fire is expoūded by Hierom, of the fyry tungs that ſat vpon the heads of the apoſtles. Other ſome are of opinion that in the time of the Eclips whiche happened at the paſſion of Chryſt, the heauen alſo flaſhed fyre, and flames lept out of the clyued ſtones.
                     
                        Tenthly, let this laſt ſentence in eſpecially bée faſtenedThe onely vvay too ſaluacion. in the innermoſt bowelles of the hart, Euery one that calleth vppon the name of the Lord shall bee ſaued. This is the onely way and meanes of obteyning remiſſion of ſinnes, the holy Ghoſt, and eternall ſaluation, namely, too aſke theſe benefites at Gods hand for Chriſtes ſake, and too apply them too a mans ſelf by faith.
                     This place dooth Paule cite. Rom. x. and addeth a moſt learned expoſition, in theſe woords: There is but one Lord of all, ritch to all that call vpon him, for euery one that calleth vppon the name of the Lorde shall bee ſaued. But how shall they call vppon him, in whome they haue not beleeued? how shall they beleeue on whome they haue not heard? how shall they heare without a preacher. &c.
                     
                     Therefore with this place, let the ſtudiouſe ſorte conferre all that Sermon of Paule, which comprehendeth a moſt large doctrine, concerning the maner of atteinyng too euerlaſting ſaluacion
                           •
                         of inuocation: of the miniſterie of the woorde by preaching, through which faith and inuocation are kindled in the hartes of the faithfull: of the workfulneſſe of the woorde: of Apoſtles: of the vniuerſall calling of all nacions, and of the cauſe of the reiecting of the wicked.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond part of Peters Sermon.
                  WHich conteyneth y• doctrine, concerning the cauſeThe cauſe of our eternall ſaluation. of eternal ſaluacion, that is to wit y• death & reſurrection of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, for whom and by whom alone, remiſſion of ſinnes, rightuouſneſſe, the holy Ghoſt, & euerlaſting ſaluacion are beſtowed vppon vs men. Afterward Peter in a ſhort abridgement cōprehendeth the chéef articles of our faith, concerning the Son of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Wheras in our Créede wée ſay: I beléeue in Ieſus Chriſt the only ſonne of God our lord, who ſuffered vnder Ponce Pylate, was crucified, dead and buried, he deſcended into hell & roſe agein the third day from

the dead, he aſcended into Heauen, & ſitteth on the right hand of God y• Father almighty, frō thence he ſhal come to iudge the quick & the dead, I beléeue in the holy ghoſt: Al theſe articles of our belefe dooth S. Peter ſet forth with ſingular light ſomnes of words in this part of his ſermō.
               
               
                  Repent.
                  THe third part of Peters Sermon conteyneth the doctrineIuſtification. concerning the maner of Iuſtification, or of the meanes wherby God offreth & applyeth vntoo vs the benefites of Chriſt. that is to ſay, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes & euerlaſting ſaluacion. For like as Chriſt in the laſt chapter of Luke, commaundeth the Apoſtles to preach repentance & forgiueneſſe of ſinnes in his name: ſo in this place Peter (when his hearers demaunded of him, by what meanes they mighte obteyne forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and euerlaſting ſaluacion) willeth them to repent & to beleue that for & by Chriſt, theyr ſinnes are releaſed, the ſeale of which releaſement is Baptime. Aſſuring them that they alſo ſhalbe partakers of the gifte of the holy Ghoſte, who purging away the dregges of their ſinnes, ſhall begin a new light, rightuouſneſſe, & life in the hartes of the beléeuers. And it is not to bée douted, but that Peter did in this place ſet out with many mo wordes, the doctrine of fayth which receyueth forgiueneſſe of ſinnes for Chriſtes ſake, who was crucified for vs, according as he ſayth hereafter in the .x. Chapter. Vnt
                        ••
                      this man do all the Prophetes beare witneſſe, that euery one which beléeueth in him, receyueth forgiueneſſe of ſinnes by his name.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon Whitſon Tuyſday.
               
                  The Epiſtle. 
                        •••
                     . x.
                  ANd he comaded vs to preach vnto the people, & teſtify that it is he that is ordeined of god, a iudge of quick and dead. To him giue al the prophets witneſſe, that thorow his name, all that beleue in him, shall receue remiſsion of ſins.
                  
                     Whyle Peter yet ſpake theſe woordes, the holy Ghoſt fell on all them whiche hard the preaching. And they of the circumciſion whiche beleeued, were aſtonied, as many as came with Peter, bycauſe that on the Gentils alſo, was shed out the gifte of the holy Ghoſte. For they harde them ſpeake with tongues, and magnifie God. Then aunſwered Peter, can any man forbidde water, that theſe should not be baptiſed, which haue receyued the holy Ghoſte aſwell as wee? And hee commaunded them to bee baptiſed in the name of the Lorde. Then prayed they him to tary a fewe dayes.
               
               
                  The places are foure.
                  
                     1 A notable ſaying, conteyning the ſumme of the doctrine of mannes Iuſtification before God.
                     2 Of the holy Ghoſt, what he is, why and too whome he is giuen, that is too wit, thoſe that heare the woorde.
                     3 Of the calling of the Heathen.
                     4 Of Baptim.
                  
                  At this time I will ſpeak of no more but the firſt place and that bréefly.
               
               
                  The firſte place.
                  THere haue bene greate diſputacions and controuerſiesDiuerſitie of opinions concerning Iuſtification. at all times, both in the Churche and among the Heathen, concerning this queſtion, which of al others is of greateſt weyght: how men may be iuſtified afore God, or by what meanes men may atteyne forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and euerlaſting ſaluation. Diuers haue dreamed that they might pacifie Gods diſpleaſure, and obteyne his fauour, and endleſſe bliſſe by certeine Ceremonies and ſacrifiſes. Many haue beléeued that they ſhould be rightuouſe and bliſſed before God, by their honeſt behauiour in

outward conuerſation, or by ſhunning outward offences, and by dooing good workes. Some againe haue imagined that they ſhould become righteouſe by vertues poured intoo them, and ſome by rauiſhements and inſpirations, and other ſome by other meanes. But Peter in ſhort ſentēce compriſeth a moſte learned diſcuſſemēt of this controuerſie, and a ſumme of all the whole doctrine concerning iuſtification, in this place when he ſayeth: All the Prophetes beare witneſſe vntoo Chriſte, that euery one which beleeueth in him, receyueth remiſsion of ſinnes by his name.
                  
                  Now, that the largeneſſe of the doctrine, conteyned in this ſhort ſentence, may in ſome ſorte bée conſidered and vnderſtood, I will expound the woordes in order.
                  Firſt of all therfore, leaſt any man might doute of the certeintie of this doctrine, Peter alledged the authoritie of the Synode, or generall determination of all the Prophetes and Apoſtles, and the conſente of the vniuerſall Church, which now alſo may bée ſet againſt our aduerſaries, when they yell out that they are the church of God, and that they follow the conſent of the Churche. And we may know that one ſelf ſame doctrine concerning rightuouſneſſe or remiſſion of ſinnes, too bée giuen fréely for Chriſt our mediatours ſake, was alwayes preached in the church of the Fathers and the Prophetes, and that for the ſame cauſe chéefly, God rayſed vp Prophetes, that they ſhould bée witneſſes & interpreters of the promiſe, according as the teſtimonies of Moyſes & the reſt of the Prophetes did ſhew. Iohn. v. If ye beléeued Moyſes, yée would beleue me, for he hath written of me. Ge. iiij. & xxij. & Heb. xj. By fayth Abel offered a better ſacrifice than Cain, by whiche he was pronounced rightuouſe by the witneſſe of God. Gen. xij. & xxij. & Gal. iij. In thy ſeede ſhall all nations bée bliſſed, not in ſéedes as in many, but in thy ſéede, as in one, whiche is Chriſte. Geneſis. xv. Abraham beleéeued God, & he was accoūted rightuous. Deut. xviij. The Lord

ſhal raiſe you vp a prophet, hear him. Pſa. xxxij. Bliſſed ar they whoſe ſins are forgiuē. Eſa. xliij. I am he that wipeth out thine iniquities, for mine own ſake, & I wil not remē
                     ber thy ſins any more. Ier. xxxij. & xxxiij. The Lord is our rightuouſneſſe. Dan. ix. Hear vs for the lords ſake. Alſo, euerlaſting rightuouſneſſe ſhal bée brought in. &c. Rom. j. The Goſpel which the Lord promiſed by his Prophets. &c.
                  Secondly, he defineth mans rightuouſneſſe before God,Ryghtuouſneſſe what it is. to be forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, giuen fréely for Chriſts ſake: and that too bee iuſtified is the ſame thing that to receyue remiſſiō of ſinnes, or too be acquit and ſet frée from ſin, as Paul ſayth. Act. xiij. Through Chriſt is remiſſion of ſinnes preched vnto vs, & by him is euery one that beléeueth, iuſtified from al things, frō which ye could not bée iuſtified by ye law of Moyſes. Alſo, Pſ. xxxj. Bliſſed are they whoſe iniquities are releaſed, & whoſe ſins are couered. Bliſſed is ye mā to whom y• Lord imputeth not ſin. Then is not ye rightuouſnes (wherby ye ſinfull mā is reputed iuſt before god) a qualitie or vertue in our ſelues, nor ye eſſētial rightuouſnes of god: but a relatiō or imputaciō, wherthrough we ar acquit & reputed rightuous for Chriſts ſake. Now let vs conſider how great a benefit is ye remiſſion of ſins, which Chriſt bringeth. For what ſhould it profite a man, though he wan the whole world, if he loſt his own ſoule.The efficiēt forcing cauſe of iuſtificacation.
                  
                  Thirdly he expreſſeth the efficient forcing cauſe of Iuſtification, when he ſayeth, yt wée receyue forgiueneſſe of ſinnes by his name, that is to ſay, not for our own ſorowfulneſſe, for our owne vertues, for moonkiſh merites, for Maſſes or other woorkes. This Antitheſis or matching of contraries, & this excluſiue or diſbarring, is to bée faſtned in mens mindes with great héede, to the intent the honorable title of redéemer & Iuſtifier (which is due only to ye ſonne of God our Lord Ieſu Chriſte) may be giuen vnto him, and that the conſciences which are throwen downe, may haue aſſured and ſtedy comfort too hold by.
                  Fourthly let the vniuerſall part of ſpéeche which teacheth

yt God in is very déede, vpright to all men, be ſet ageinſt ye tēptacion of particularitie. And let ſuch like ſayings be ioyned wt it, as ſhew y• al which repēt not, ar reiected of God togither: & yt on y• cōtrary ſide, all yt reſort vnto Chriſt, do aſſuredly obtein remiſſiō of ſins. j. Ti. ij. God wil haue al mē ſaued. Io. 3. So god loued ye world, yt he gaue his only begottē ſon, to ye intēt yt euery one which beleueth in him ſhuld not periſh, but haue life euerlaſting. He yt beleueth not in ye ſon, the wrath of God ſhal abide vpon him.The meane or Inſtrument of our ſaluation.
                  
                  Fifthly, the inſtrument or meane wherby we may acknowledge Chriſtes perſon & benefites, & both receyue & apply to our ſelues ye forgiueneſſe of ſinnes offred to vs by him, is only faith, according as Peter ſaith here, yt euerywhat it is to beleeue. one which beleeueth in him. Now, to beleue on ye ſonne of God, is, firſt to acknowledge aright the perſon & benefits of Chriſt crucified, & rayſed agein for vs, yt he is verely & by nature God, & the ſauiour promiſed by the Prophetes, pacifying God, & giuing peace, rightuouſneſſe & ſaluacion euerlaſting to thoſe yt beleue. Secondly, to aſſent to al the whole doctrine deliuered vs by Chriſt, or with a ſtedy aſſent to embrace al the articles of the Chriſten faith, & among the reſt, this alſo: I beleue remiſsion of ſins to be giuē me freely for Chriſts ſake. Thirdly, it is to reſt vpon Chriſt the Mediator, with ſtedfaſt truſt, & to aſſure a mās ſelf for a certeintie, yt his ſins are forgiuen him for Chriſtes ſake, & yt he is in Gods fauor, & that God accepteth him, heereth him, & receyueth him to euerlaſting life for Chriſts ſake, who hath ſuffered and is riſen ageine for vs, and not for our owne vertues or good workes.
                  Sixthly, let ye obiect of faith & y• ſum of y• whole Goſpel (which is lernedly & bréefly cōprehended in this ſermon of Peters) be cōſidered. For he ſaith yt God by his word hath brought tidings of peace through Chriſt, who is lord of al.
                  Firſt therefore he comprehendeth the doctrine concerning the perſon of Chriſt, in the word Lord, namely that he is Iehoua in very déede, and by nature God, the maker

and Lord of Heauen and earth, & of all thinges that are in them, as it is ſayd, I am the Lord, and this is my name, I will not giue my glorie too an other. Now the name of Iehoua is attributed too Chriſt in Iere. xxiij, & xxxiij. Dan. ix. Num. xxj. Therfore Chriſt is verely, & by nature God.
                  Againe he cōprehendeth a ſumme of the doctrine concerning theſe twoo woordes: Remiſsion of ſinnes, and peace purchaſed by Chriſt, Wherin hée méeneth not bodyly and worldly peace, but the appeaſement of Gods wrath againſt our ſinnes, attonement with God, quietneſſe and ioy of conſcience in all aduerſities and in death, and laſtly deſire too mainteyne outward concord and peace.
                  Thirdly, that faith is not only a bare knowledge of the perſone and benefites of Chriſt, but alſo a truſt ſettled in Chriſt, it appeareth openly be this phraſe, All that beleeue in him. For it is well doone in the ſchooles, that they make this diſtinction in the maner of ſpéeches folowing, that too beléeue of God, is to beléeue him too bée, to beléeue God, is to giue credit too him and to beléeue his woorde, and to beléeue in God, is to truſt in him, too ſtay vppon him, and too repoſe the whole hope of our ſaluation in him.
                  Theſe ſix places conteyned in this notable ſentence of Peter: To him doo all the Prophetes beare witneſſe. &c. Let the ſtudiouſe ſorte conſider, and ioyne thereuntoo a ſumme of the doctrine, concerning the Iuſtifying of man before God, out of the writinges that comprehended the ſubſtaunce of the Chriſten doctrine.
               
            
            
               Vppon Trinity Sunday.
               
                  The Epiſtle. Rom. xj.
                  
                     O The deepeneſſe of the riches both of the wiſedome and knowledge of God, how vnſercheable are his iudgementes, and his wayes paſt finding out? for who hath knowen the minde of the Lorde, or

who hath bin of counſell with him? Eyther who hathe giuen vntoo him firſt, and he shall bee recompenced ageine? For of him, and through him, and in him are all things. Too him bee glory for euer.
                  Amen.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement of this Sermon concerning the Trinitie.
                  THe firſt and chéefe care of all men ought too bée too knoweWhat ought too bee the cheefe care of men. God aryght, too call vpon him, and too ſet foorth his praiſe. For too that end chéefly wer they created and redéemed by the ſonne. Neither is there any other higher or greater wiſdom than the true knowledge and woorſhipping of God, which bringeth moſt aſſured cōfort in all tribulations, and gouernment of lyfe in greateſt affaires, and ſaluation & glory euerlaſting both of body and ſoule. Now foraſmuch as vpon this day, the Doctrine concerning the vnitie of the béeing of the Godhead, and the Trinitie of the perſons, is woont too bée ſet foorth in the Churches, we wil diſtribute this dayes doctrine intoo three places.
                  
                     1 What God is.
                     2 That there is but one God only.
                     3 That there are thrée perſons in the one being or in the one ſubſtance of the Godhead, the father, the ſonne, & the holy ghoſt, and of either of their properties and differences.
                  
               
               
                  Firſt, what God is.
                  GOd wil haue his béeing and wil knowne too mē this onlyHow God wil haue his being knowne. one way, according as he hath manifeſted himſelfe in his church by the certen woord, that is to wit, by the law and the goſpel, & the notable records deliuered by Chryſt, ye prophets & Apoſtles. And there is very great ods in the difference béetwéen the heatheniſh knowing of God, & the chriſten. For although the heathen by ye natural lyght ſhed into their minds, and by this moſt beautiful Theatre of natural things, doo after

a ſort know God too bée a mynd euerlaſting, wyſe, well dooing, iuſt, the beholder of things, and the iudger of mennes dooings, too whom (according too that lyght ingraffed in mens minds which diſcerneth honeſt & diſhoneſt things a ſunder,) obedience is too bée performed: yet haue they not knowne, eyther the difference of the thrée perſons, or the will of God reueled in his goſpel. Yea and contrarie too this knowledge ingraffed in them by nature, they allow the Idolatrous woorſhipping of the monſtrous multitude of Gods: and bicauſe in the confuſion of this preſent lyfe they ſée the good ofte tymes in ill caſe, & the ill in good caſe, they are ouerwhelmed eyther with Epicuriſh or wt Academiſh doutfulneſſe, wherthrough al yt religion of theirs is appalled and falleth too the ground.
                  But the ſumme of the Doctrine concerning the béeing of the Godhead which the vſuall deſcription of God compriſeth, is this.
                  God is a béeing or ſubſtance ſpirituall, vnderſtanding, euerlaſting,What God is. ſoothfaſt, good, ryghtuous, mercifull, chaſt, moſt frée, of infinite power and wiſdome, and another from the bodyes of the world. The euerlaſting Father, who begate the Sonne his image from before all worlds: and the Sonne the coeternall image of the Father and the holy Ghoſt procéeding from the Father and the Sonne: According as the Godhead hath diſcloſed it ſelfe: which toogither hath created and mainteyneth heauen and earth, and all creatures: and in mankynd gathereth too it ſelfe a Churche, too the intent that by the ſame, this one and true Godhed (which is manifeſted by aſſured teſtimonies and by the woorde deliuered too the Prophets and Apoſtles,) may bée acknowledged and called vppon, and glorifyed in the eternall lyfe.
                  This definition is compacted out of many recordes of Gods woord, which may bée plenteouſly enlarged. And it conſiſteth of foure members. Firſt it reckeneth vp in order the twelue properties peculiar too the béeing of God. Secondly, it reciteth the thrée perſons & the differences of them. Thirdly

it declareth the operations of God and his creation, & preſeruation of all things. And fourthly it ſheweth the chuſing of his eternal church, by which he wil be knowne & magnified.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  THat there is but one God, euen the ſoūder ſort of the heathen (being conuicted by demonſtrations taken of the orderlyneſſe of cauſes in nature,) haue taught. And woorthy of remembraunce are theſe ſentences. There is one God onely, and there is none other God. Alſo, there is but one God, wyſe, mightie, and there withall bliſſefull. And ageine: there muſt needes bee ſome one thing, and that immortall, whoo was the firſt mouer of all things, and which preſerueth them nowe in good gouernance. The rule of many is not good, let there bee but one gouernour.
                  
                  Notwithſtanding, contrary too this opinion knowne tooThe Gods of the Heathen. nature, the Heathen men admitted an abhominable ſorte of Gods, which (as Paul ſayth truely, an idoll is nothing in the world) are not euerlaſting Gods, but eyther ſurmyſed and vaine names, or very féendes, or elſe other things created by God. Agein in the very church alſo the Manichées imagined twoo Gods, bothe of them myghtie and eternall: the one good and the cauſe of good in nature: the other the cauſe of euil. Ageinſt theſe madneſſes let this doctrine bée moſt firmly held, that there is but one God, almightie, euerlaſting, good, ryghtuous, the iudge, the maker, and the preſeruer of all things, manifeſted in the Church by the ſōne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt ſent among vs, and by his Goſpel deliuered too vs, according too the ſayings of Eſay. xliij. xliiij. and xlv. Before mée there is no God creator, neyther ſhall there bée after mée. I am the firſt and I am the laſt, and béeſides mée there is no God: Am not I the Lord, & there is none other God ſaue I? Turne vnto me & ye ſhalbe ſafe, al the coaſts of the erth. For I am God and none other. j. Cor. viij. There is none other God but one. Deut. 4. Herken O Iſrael, the Lord thy God is but one god.

And this one true God the Scripture nameth the father, the ſonne, and the holy Ghoſt. Math. xxviij. Baptiſe them in the name of the father and of the ſonne, & of the holy ghoſt. Theſe thrée béeing in very deede of one ſubſtance, fully and perfectly endued all with one Godhed, power, glory, and maieſtie, and yet verely and really diſtinct one from another, are named in the Church the thrée perſons.
               
               
                  The third place, concerning the three perſons in the one, being or ſubſtance of the Godhead.
                  NOw although mans reaſon bée offended, and cannot vnderſtandThe vnitie and trinitie of the Godhead. how the thrée diſtinct or ſeueral perſons the father, the ſonne, and the holy ghoſt, are but only one God: yet notwithſtanding wée muſt ſo think and ſpeake of God, as he hath manifeſted himſelf in his woord, which opēly witneſſeth that there bée thrée ſeueral perſons of one ſubſtance, & of one continuance, as they are called vpon toogither in baptim, and equal power and honor is attributed to the father, the ſonne, and the holy ghoſt. And .j. Iohn .v. it is ſaid. There are thrée yt hear witneſſe in heauē, the father, the ſonne, & the holy ghoſt, & theſe thrée are one. Iohn .x. I & the father are one. But the chéefeſt cōfirmation of this article that the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chriſt is verely & by nature God, equal with God the father, is writen in the firſt & fifth chapters of Iohn, wher there be .x. proofes recited in order. Now let the godly in their prayers & in all their thoughts vpon God, haue before theyr eyes the deſcriptions and differences of the thrée perſons.
                  The father is the firſt perſon of the Godhead, which fromThe firſt perſon. euerlaſting begat the coeternall ſonne, the image of himſelf, and toogither with the ſonne and the holy Ghoſt, made all things of nothing, and preſerueth them.
                  The Sonne is the ſecond perſon of the Godhed, begottenThe ſecond perſon. of the eternall father, & is the ſubſtanciall & full image of the euerlaſting father, which ſōne became afterward ye ſpokeſmā
                     
betwéene God and the firſt men when they were falne, and béeing ordeyned mediator, toke mannes nature of the virgin Marie, and became a ſacrifyſe for vs, and by him and for him only, the father giueth remiſſion of ſinnes, ryghtuouſneſſe and euerlaſting ſaluation.
                  The holy Ghoſt is the third perſon of the Godhed, euerlaſtinglyThe third perſon. procéeding from the father and the ſonne, and is ſent intoo the harts of the beléeuers, too kindle in them the light of knowing God aryght, and true motions, loue, lyfe, and ioyfulneſſe ſettled in God, and too repayre all the powers, that they may bée conformable with God himſelfe.
                  The differences of the perſons which God hath diſcloſed in his woord, are of thrée ſortes.
                  The firſt is taken of the properties of the peculiar marks of the perſons, or of their woorkes inwardly, or their inward operations.
                  The father is the welſpring of the Godhead, hauing hisThe marke of the Father. béeing, not of any other perſon but of himſelf, and communicating his béeing vnto the ſonne his image, begotten of him, and too the holy Ghoſt procéeding from him. Iohn .v. Like as the father hath lyfe in himſelfe: So alſo hath he giuen too the ſonne, too haue lyfe in himſelfe.
                  But the ſonne hath his béeing communicated too him ofThe marke of the Sonne. the father, and is the image of the father, begotten wythout beginning. Pſal. ij. Thou art my ſonne, this day haue I begotten thée. Heb .j. He is the bryghtneſſe and expreſſe image of the fathers ſubſtance.
                  And the holy Ghoſt hath his béeing communicated of theThe marke of the holy ghoſt▪
                      father and the ſonne, and procéedeth euerlaſtingly from the father and the ſonne. Iohn .xv. He ſhall take of myne.
                  The ſecond difference is of the outward manifeſtation of them, made in the Baptim of Chryſt and at other tymes.
                  The eternal father diſcloſed himſelfe & made a difference betwéene himſelfe and the ſonne by this ſaying: This is my beloued ſonne in whom Idelyght.
                  
                     The Sonne tooke vppon him mannes nature, and dwelt among vs, and béecame a Sacrifyſe, and roſe ageyne from Death.
                  The holy Ghoſt appéered in the ſhape of a Dooue, and in the likeneſſe of firie tungs. Act. ij.
                  The third is of the office of eche perſon.
                  The father ſendeth the ſonne and the holy Ghoſt, & woorkethThe offyce of the father. effectually by their miniſterie, to the ſaluation of euery one that beléeueth. Rom. j.
                  The ſonne is ſēt by the father, too bring abrode the goſpelThe offyce of the ſonne. out of the ſecret boſom of the father, too make interceſſion for mankynd falne into ſinne, to bée made a ſacrifiſe for mennes ſinnes, and by his obediēce & bludſhed too redéeme the church, and in this lyfe too rule it and defend it, and afterwarde too raiſe it vp ageine, and too decke it with lyfe and glorie euerlaſting.
                  The holy Ghoſt is ſent of the father and the ſonne, thatThe offyce of the holy ghoſt by the goſpel he may kindle in mennes harts the lyght of the true acknowledgement of the father, of the ſonne & of himſelfe, and true rightuouſneſſe and lyfe, & that he may comfort and ſtrengthen the godly in all aduerſities and ſorowes. Ioh. xv. Whom I will ſend you from the father.
                  But foraſmuch as the whole doctrine of this feaſtful day concerning the vnitie of beeing, and the trinitie of perſons in the Godhead all of one ſubſtance and one euerlaſtingneſſe, is comprehended and ſet out with ſingular lyghtſomneſſe of woordes, in the Créede which is vſed in the Church vnder the name of Athanaſius: I exhort my héerers too learne that whole Créede by heart, and too ſet it continually before theyr eyes, as the rule of the true méening and of the Faythe of this Article.
               
               
                  The Creede of Athanaſius.
                  WHoſoeuer wil bée ſaued▪ before all things it is neceſſarie that he holde the catholike Faith.
                  
                     Which fayth except euery one doo kéepe holy and vndefiled: without doubt he ſhall periſh euerlaſtingly.
                  And the catholike fayth is this: that wée woorſhip one God in Trinitie, and Trinitie in vnitie.
                  Neyther confounding the perſons: nor deuyding the ſubſtaunce.
                  For ther is one perſon of the father, another of the ſonne: and another of the holy ghoſt.
                  But the Godhead of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſte is all one: the glory equall, the Maieſtie coeternall.
                  Such as the father is, ſuch is the ſonne: and ſuch is the holy ghoſt.
                  The father vncreate, the ſonne vncreate: and the holy ghoſt vncreate.
                  The father incomprehenſible, the ſonne incomprehēſible: and the holy ghoſt incomprehenſible.
                  The father eternall, the ſonne eternall: and the holy ghoſt eternall.
                  And yet they are not thrée eternals: but one eternall.
                  As alſo there bée not thrée incomprehēſibles, nor thrée vncreated: but one vncreated, and one incomprehenſible.
                  So likewiſe is the father almightie, the ſonne almightie: and the holy ghoſt almightie.
                  And yet they are not thrée almighties: but one almighty.
                  So the father is God, the ſonne is God: and the holye ghoſt is God.
                  And yet are they not thrée Gods: but one God.
                  So likewiſe is the father Lord, the ſonne Lord: and the holy ghoſt Lord.
                  And yet not thrée Lordes: but one Lord.
                  For lyke as wée bée compelled by the Chriſtian veritie: too acknowledge euery perſon by himſelfe, too bée God and Lorde.
                  So are wée forbidden by the Catholike religion: too ſay

there bée thrée Gods or thrée Lordes.
                  The father is made of none: neither created nor begotten.
                  The ſonne is of the father alone: not made nor created, but begotten.
                  The holy ghoſt is of the father and of the ſonne: neyther made, nor created, nor begotten, but procéeding.
                  So there is one father, not thrée fathers, one ſonne, not thrée ſonnes: one holy Ghoſt, not thrée holy Ghoſtes.
                  And in this Trinitie, none is afore or after other: none is greater nor leſſe than an other.
                  But the whole thrée perſons: bée coeternall together and coequall.
                  So that in al things as is aforſayd: the vnitie in Trinitie, and the Trinitie in vnitie, is too bée woorſhypped.
                  He therefore that wyll bée ſaued: muſt thus thinke of the Trinitie.
                  Furthermore, it is neceſſary too euerlaſting ſaluatiō: that he alſo béeléeue ryghtly in the Incarnacion of our Lord Ieſu Chryſt.
                  For the ryght Faythe is, that wée béeléeue and confeſſe: that our Lord Ieſus Chryſte, the ſonne of God, is God and man.
                  God of the ſubſtaunce of the father, béegotten béefore the worldes: and man of the ſubſtaunce of his mother, borne in the world.
                  Perfect God, and perfect man: of a reaſonable ſoule: and humaine fleſh ſubſiſting.
                  Equall too the father, as touching his Godhead: and inferiour too the father, touching his manhoode.
                  Who although hée bée God and man: yet hée is not two, but one Chryſt.
                  One, not by conuerſion of the Godhead intoo fleſh: but by taking of the manhoode intoo God.
                  One altoogither, not by confuſion of ſubſtance: but by vnitie of perſone.
                  
                     For as the reaſonable ſoule and fleſh is one man: ſo God and man is one Chryſt.
                  Who ſuffered for our ſaluation: deſcended intoo hell, roſe ageyn the third day from the dead.
                  He aſcended intoo heauen, he ſitteth on the ryght hand of the father, God almightie: from whence he ſhall come too iudge the quicke and the dead.
                  At whoſe comming all men ſhall ryſe ageyn with their bodyes: and ſhal giue accompt for their owne workes.
                  And they that haue doone good, ſhall goe intoo lyfe euerlaſting: and they that haue done euill, intoo euerlaſting fire.
                  This is the Catholike fayth: which except a man beléeue faythfully, he can not be ſaued.
               
            
            
               Vppon the firſt Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Iohn. iiij.
                  
                     DEerely beloued, let vs loue one another: for loue commeth of God. And euery one that loueth, is borne of God, and knoweth God. Hee that loueth not, knoweth not God: for God is loue. In this appeareth the loue of god too vs warde, bycauſe that God ſent his onely begotten ſonne intoo the world, that wee myght liue through him. Herein is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, and ſent his ſonne too bee the agreement for our ſinnes. Deerely beloued, if God ſo loued vs, we ought alſo one to loue another. No man hath ſeen God at any tyme. If wee loue one another, GOD dwelleth in vs, and his loue is perfect in vs. Hereby knowe we that we dwell in him and hee in vs, bycauſe he hath giuen vs of his ſpirite. And wee haue ſeen, and doo teſtifye that the Father ſent the ſonne too bee the Sauiour of the

world: whoſoeuer confeſſeth that Ieſus is the ſonne of God, in him dwelleth God, and hee in God. And wee haue knowen and beleeued the loue that God hath too vs. God is loue, and hee that dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in God▪ and God in him. Herein is the loue perfecte in vs, that wee ſhould truſt in the daye of iudgement. For as he is, euen ſo are wee in this world. There is no feare in loue, but perfect loue caſteth out feare: for feare hath paynefulneſſe. Hee that feareth, is not perfite in loue. Wee loue him, for hee loued vs firſt. If a man ſay: I loue God, and yet hate his brother, he is a lyer. For how can he that loueth not his brother whom he hath ſeen, loue GOD whom he hath not ſeen? And this commaundement haue wee of him: that he which loueth God, should loue his brother alſo.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THe ſtate of this Epiſtle is a doctrine concerning the loue of God and of our neyghbour.
                  The greateſt part of Iohns whole Epiſtle is employed vppon twoo places: In exhorting too fayth whiche is ſettled in the louingneſſe or mercie of GOD, who forgiueth ſinnes for his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chryſtes ſake, and eſcheweth corruptions of the true doctrine concerning the ſonne of god: And vntoo new obedience or loue towardes GOD and our neyghbour. For too this purpoſe chéefly did Iohn wryte this Epiſtle, too roote out this common errour out of mennes myndes, who (when they héere that wée are iuſtifyed by faith alone for Chryſtes ſake) doo gather thereuppon, that good woorkes are not néedfull, and that it ſkilles not after what ſort wée liue, Iohn therefore teacheth that wée attayne remiſſion of ſinnes and are clenzed from our ſinnes, not for our owne good woorkes, but by fayth through the frée loue & mercie of God, and the only blud of the ſonne of God: howbeit that this fayth muſt of neceſſitie woorke effectually by

loue towardes God and our neyghbour, as is ſayd more at large in the doctrine of iuſtification and good woorkes.
                  Now there are in the Epiſtle of this Sūday, thrée places too bée chéefly conſidered.
                  
                     1 Of Gods loue toowardes vs, which is the foundatiō of our rightuouſneſſe and euerlaſting ſaluation▪
                     
                     2 Of our loue towardes God and our neyghbour.
                     3 Of the childly awe and the ſlauiſh feare.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  MOſt graue and moſt woorthy too bée imprinted in the iunermoſt bowels of our hartes, is the firſt ſentēce of this Epiſtle, which ſetteth foorth a ſumme of the whole Goſpell, and a moſt ſwéete comfort in all troubles and ſorowes. God is loue, and hee that dwelleth in loue dwelleth in God, &God is loue. God in him.
                  
                  But firſt and formoſt let the Readers conſider, that this ſaying of Iohns agréeth fully with Chryſtes ſermon, Ioh. iij. God ſo loued the world that he gaue his only begottē ſonne, too the intent that al which beléeue in him ſhould not periſh, but haue lyfe euerlaſting.
                  
                     God is loue, that is too ſay, God loueth mankynde in very déed and earneſtly, and hath vttered his infinite and vnſpeakable loue toowardes vs, by this notable token, that he hath not ſpared his only begotten ſonne, but hath giuen him for vs all. Like as a little before the woordes of this dayes Epiſtle, it is ſayd, Herein is the loue, not that wée loued God, but that he loued vs, and ſent his only begotten ſonne too make agréement for our ſinnes. This excéeding great goodneſſeOur only hauē and fortreſſe. and mercie or loue of God toowardes vs, is the only fortreſſe of our ryghtuouſneſſe, & hauen of our welfare. Too whiche, who ſoeuer flée with ſtedie fayth, are reconcyled too God, or haue Gods fauour, and dwell in God, & God dwelleth in thē, beſtowing vpon them al benefits, cōfort, rightuouſneſſe, life, ioy, & heauenly lyght. Theſe are verely and earneſtly or perfectly

beloued of GOD, and at the day of iudgement haue a ſtedie truſt ſettled in his fatherly good will, & feare not that they ſhall bée condemned, but knowe themſelues too bée clothed with the rightuouſneſſe of the ſonne of God, and that they are reputed and become as rightuouſe and holy as if they thēſelues had performed the perfect loue and obedience due too the Lawe.
                  This truſt ſettled in the loue or good will of God embracingThe phiſike of our ſoules. vs for his ſonnes ſake, is the phiſike of the mynde, taking away fond thoughtfulneſſe, ridding vs of luſts, driuing away feare, and making the hart quiet and peaceable. It is not full of thought and anguiſhe, or it dooth not tremble or deſpayre in daungers whiche are bent ageinſt it, but is ſubiect too God, and perſuading it ſelfe too bee verely beloued of God, it craueth and wayteth for helpe at his hand, and obeyeth him, and is not diſcouraged with the hugeneſſe of miſeries, that it ſhould fall from God: according as S. Paule ſayeth▪ Roma. viij. Who ſhall ſeparate vs from the loue of God, ſhall affliction, or anguiſh, or perſecution, or hunger, &c? I am well aſſured, that neyther death, nor lyfe, nor any creature can plucke vs from the loue of God, wherewith he loueth vs for his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chryſtes ſake.
                  So Moyſes ſtanding at the red Sea, ſo Ezechias and EſayExamples who loueth God. being beſéeged by Sennacherib, ſo Steuen whē he was going too execution, through fayth aſſuring them that God loued them for his ſonnes ſake, did put away the fearefulneſſe, anguiſh, and torment of cōſcience, vnder which Saule, Iudas, and innumerable others did ſinke, of whiche ſorte is ſayd in the Epiſtle. But he that feareth, is not perfect in loue, that is too ſay: hée that yéeldeth too diſtruſt, too fearefulneſſe, and anguiſh, and deſpayreth in ſorow and tribulation, he beléeueth not that God loueth him in déed, neyther dwelleth he in God, nor God in him.
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond place, Of louing God and our neyghbour.
                  
                     LEt vs loue him, bycauſe he hath loued vs firſt. By wonderfullSparkes of knowledge in nature, & why they were giuē
                        ▪
                      prouidence hath God ſo framed mannes nature, that in his mynd there ſhould ſhyne certein ſparks of knowledge too bée as gouerners of all his deuiſes and dooings, and in his will and hart there ſhould bée both the reſt of affections, and alſo charitie or loue, whereby the hart dooth with a certeine gladneſſe long for, and drawe vntoo it, and endeuour to knit vntoo itſelfe the good thing which it liketh, that it may enioy it, and that as it were one thing may bée made of twoo. Like as the ſonne of God being led with excéeding great loue, vnited mannes nature too himſelfe. Too this ende then is nature created in this wyſe, that men ſhould before all things, long after God as the ſouerein good thing, and ſettle themſelues vppon him, and ioy in him: and that men being cuppled in God, ſhould alſo bée linked one vntoo another, and being ioyned toogither, ſhold bée all one, teaching all one thing, and profeſſing all one thing. For there is no bond of mānes felowſhippe more ſtrong, than the flames of loue▪ ſowen in mennes harts by the operation of God, and afterward kindled and ſtrengthened by the lykeneſſe of natures and conditions, and by conſent as touching God and other matters.
                  Loue towardes God, is a burning fyre of longing, wherewithLoue towardes God. mennes hartes (vppon knowledge of Gods hartie loue towardes vs, which he hath ſhewed by ſending his ſonne) do on their behalfe ageine embrace God, and with a certeyne gladneſſe ſettled vppon him, ſubmit themſelues too him, and obey him according too all his commaundements, as is ſayd in the chapter folowing: This is the louing of God, that wée kéepe his commaundements.
                  And there bée three cauſes recited in this Epiſtle, whereCauſes of louing God and▪ our neighbour▪
                      by all the godly ought too bée ſtirred and inflamed too the true and earneſt loue of God and our neyghbour.
                  
                     The firſt is the true, earneſt, and infinite loue of God towardesGods loue towardes vs. vs, which he hath ſhewed by ſending his onely begotten ſonne, who dyed and roſe ageine for our ſaluation. Wherefore the order of ryght, and the eternall and vnchaū
                     geable neceſſitie of det requireth at our hands, that we ſhold not bée thankleſſe too God that loueth vs ſo hartely, but that wee ſhould render loue for loue, and bée obedient too him, according as it is ſayd in the Text, let vs loue him, bycauſe he hath loued vs firſt.
                  The ſecond is the moſt ſtreigth commaundement of GodCommaundement. as it is ſayd in the Text: This commaundement haue wée of God, that he which loueth god ſhold alſo loue his neighbour.
                  The third is the moſt ample dignitie and profitableneſſe.Woorthineſſe and profit. For this is the hygheſt and chéefeſt worſhipping of GOD, wherein God is moſt ſpecially delighted, who dwelleth in the hartes of thoſe that loue one another and agrée toogither, as in a houſe or temple that he liketh well of, as is ſayde in this chapter. If we loue one another, God dwelleth in vs. On the contrarie part, he ſhaketh of God from gouerning him, whatſoeuer he is that ſoweth diſcord, or nouriſheth and confirmeth hatred, yrefulneſſe, deſire of reuenge, diſcord, and warres.
                  The loue of a mannes brother or neyghbour comprehendethWhat is comprehended in the loue of our neighbour. in a maner all the vertues of the ſecond table: as in the fourth commaundement, brotherly loue, kindhartedneſſe, duetifulneſſe towardes a mannes parentes and teachers, loue of mannes childrē, and kinſfolk, of the magiſtrats, &c. In the fifth commaundement, endeuer too kéepe concord, frendſhip, méekneſſe, mercie, vprightneſſe which hurteth not another mannes bodye or good name, but dooth good vntoo others. In the ſixth commaundement, the loue of maryed folkes, eſchewing whoredome and aduoutrie, &c. In the ſeuenth commaundement ryghtfulneſſe whiche impeacheth not anothers mannes goods nor defraudeth another man in bargayning, & liberalitie towardes the poore. In the eyght

commaundement, fréendlyneſſe, faythfulneſſe, ſoothfaſtneſſe which hurteth not another man by ſlaunders, bakbytings, raylings, &c.
                  Of all theſe vertues which are apparant too bée partes of neyghbourly loue, a man myght ſpeake in order, if this place were appoynted for the full opening of them. But as nowe it ſuffyſeth too haue poynted out the chéef poyntes of this moſt large doctrine, as they are applyed too the Text of this preſent Epiſtle.
               
            
            
               Vppon the ſecond Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Iohn. iij.
                  
                     MEruayle not my brethren, thoughe the world hate you. VVee knowe that wee are tranſlated from death vntoo lyfe, bycauſe wee loue the brethren. He that loueth not his brother, abideth in death. Whoſoeuer hateth his brother, is a manſlear. And yee knowe, that no manſlear hath eternall lyfe abyding in him. Hereby perceyue wee loue, bycauſe he gaue his lyfe for vs, and wee ought too giue our liues for the brethren. But who ſo hath this worldes good, and ſeeth his brother haue neede, and shutteth vp his compaſsion from him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him▪ My babes, let vs not loue in woorde, neyther in tong: but in deede and in veritie.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of thoſe ſort that perſuade.
                  For firſt, there is a comfort too bée ſet ageinſt the hatreds of the world.
                  Secondly, there is an Exhortation too louingneſſe and liberalitie towardes a mannes neyghbour.
               
               
                  
                  The firſt place.
                  
                     MAruell not my brethren though the world hate you.
                     The hatred of the world ageinſt the godly. Mannes reaſon iudgeth of the tooyles and troubles of the godly, and ſpecially of the contentions among ye teachers, euen for all the world after the ſame manner, as Saluſt ſayeth in his preface too the warres of Iugurth: Too labour in vayne, and too preache nothing elſe by ouertooyling a mānes ſelfe, but hatred and ſlaunder, is a poynt of vtter madneſſe.
                      For all the godly, and ſpecially the Miniſters of the Goſpel, who performe the déedes of moſt ſingular louingneſſe, and moſt earneſtly ſéeke the euerlaſting welfare of their héerers, and execute their dutie moſt faithfully: doo reape in manner none other reward, than moſt bitter hatred, and vtter vnthankfulneſſe at the hands of thoſe vppon whom they haue beſtowed greateſt benefites. Ageinſt this temptation and the bitter fordoomes, ſpyghts, and hatreds of the wyſemē of the world, whereby many are woont too bée withdrawen from the miniſterie, Iohn comforteth vs in theſe woordes: Maruell not my brethren though the world hate you, as if he had ſayd, the iudgement of God and of the godly is farre of another ſort, than is the iudgement of the wicked worlde. The greater that any man is before God, the more contemned and abiect is he before the world.
                  And ſeing that at many mennes hands there is no token of a thankfull mynd rendred too God for his excéeding great benefites which he poureth out by heapes vppon all men, but all kynd of ſpyght: Let not vs wonder if the world hate vs alſo. For the Diuell enuying vs this ſo greate felicitie, that wée are conueyed from death too euerlaſting lyfe, ſtirreth vp his inſtrumentes, and inflameth mennes hatreds ageinſt vs. Therefore ageinſt the moſt bitter hatred of the world and of the vngodly, let vs ſet Gods good will and fatherly loue towardes vs, which the ſonne of God hath ſhewed by this notable token, that he hath ſpent his lyfe for vs, and deliuering vs from death by the death of him ſelfe, hath

reſtored vs to the poſſeſſion of eternall life. Wherefore let eche of vs bee ſo diſpoſed in mynd, that they may with a true harte ſay thus: It is ſufficient for mée hauyng my full delyght in Chryſt, too doo thoſe things which are godly, and to ſpeake ſuch as are godly.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  AN exhortation too louingneſſe and liberalitie towards a mannes neybour: and the argumentes of this exhortation are three.
                  
                     Of the honeſtneſſe of it.
                     Of the profitableneſſe of it.
                     And of the example of Chryſt.
                  
                  
                     FIrſt of the honeſtneſſe or the neceſſary couplyng of theThis folowing is worth the beating away. cauſe and the effects. I knowe that we are tranſlated from death too lyfe, bycauſe wee loue the brethren, or bycauſe our fayth is effectuall by loue. For too this end are wee waſhed from our ſinnes by the bloud of Chryſte, and tranſlated from death intoo lyfe: that wee ſhoulde hereafter eſchue ſinne, and earneſtly execute loue towardes God and our neybour, which is the fountayn of all vertues. Now like as mouing in a mannes bodie is an vndouted token & effect of lyfe yet left in the body: euen ſo louingneſſe is the next effect and an vnfallible ſigne of fayth ſhyning in the hart, wherby wée are tranſlated from deathe vntoo lyfe. And like as in this Euthymeme, I knowe there is lyfe ſtill in him, bycauſe there is ſtirring yet left in his bodye: it foloweth not that ſtirring is the efficient cauſe of life, but by the effect I gather according too reſon, that the cauſe is preſent: ſo in this place of Iohns, wee know wee are tranſlated from death to life, bycauſe wee loue the brethren, this part of ſpéeche bycauſe, betokeneth not the efficient cauſe (of whiche is ſpoken in the fifth of Iohns Goſpell in this wyſe, He that beleeueth in the ſonne, is paſſed from deathe vnto lyfe,) but it betokeneth the effect, whervpon the argument

is gathered that we are verely tranſlated from deathe vntoo lyfe, like as Luke in his. vij. Chapter reaſoneth vppon the effect, that many ſinnes are forgiuen too the ſinfull woman, bycauſe ſhe loued muche. Likewiſe as if I ſhould ſay, I knowe for a certeintie that the Sunne is vp, bycauſe I ſée the ſunne beames glaring in my chamber. And in this ſelfeſame Epiſtle is ſayde, In this haue wee knowne his loue bicauſe he hath ſpent his life for vs.
                     The ſecond argument of the profitableneſſe, or of theNeceſsitie. neceſſitie of holding faſte Fayth, lyfe, and euerlaſting ſaluation.
                     For he that loueth not, hath not lyfe euerlaſting abyding in him, but he continueth in deathe, according alſo as Paule ſayth. j. Cor. vj. No whoremongers, Idolaters, abuſers of themſelues with the mankynde, pillers, &c. ſhall inherite the kingdome of God. Therefore too the intent wee loſe not the remiſſion of ſinnes receiued, the deliueraunce from Deathe, the grace of GOD, and the euerlaſting lyfe: wée muſt of neceſſitie fall to louingneſſe and new obedience agréeable with Gods will. And yet it foloweth not therevppon that oure louingneſſe or newe obedience deſerueth forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, and eternall lyfe. For this louingneſſe cannot ſo muche as bée begon, neyther pleaſeth it God, except remiſſion of ſinnes be firſt freely giuen for Chryſtes ſake, and that faith ſhyne in the hart. Bréefly, euen altoogyther after the manner of Logicke hath Iohn included this argument in the forme of reaſonyng agréeing to the moode Celarent. But in the firſt place he hath put the concluſion, in the ſecond the minor, and in the laſt the maior.
                     
                     
                        Ce Euery murderer, hath not lyfe euerlaſting abyding in him: or abydeth in death.
                     
                        la Euery one that hateth or loueth not his brother is a murtherer before God. Math. v.
                     
                        rent Ergo he that loueth not his brother, abydeth in

Death, or hath not eternall lyfe abyding in him.
                  
               
               
                  The third Argument.
                  OF the example of Chryſte, who ſpent his ſoule or hisExample of loue. lyfe for vs, as he ſayth in Iohn. xv. Greater loue than this can no man haue, than that a man ſhoulde giue hys lyfe for his freends. Paule Rom. v. GOD commendeth his owne loue towardes vs, in that when wée were his enemies Chryſt dyed for vs.
                  Vntoo theſe three arguments Iohn addeth a warnyng,Hypocryſie to be eſchued. that our loue ſhoulde not bée hypocritiſh or coloured, Neither muſt our bowels, that is too ſay, oure true and harty good will, and mercy, and well dooing whiche procéedeth from a true hart, be shut vp ageinſt our neighbor that hath neede, as the riche man did forcloſe the fountayne of his courteſie ageynſt Lazarus whome he lothed. And let vs ſhewe our louingneſſe towarde our needy neybor, not in woords and toong onely, but in very déede, with our counſell, our money, our trauel, and our true ſeruiſableneſſe. I doo not in woordes ſhew goodneſſe, and in déedes noughtyneſſe (as ſayeth Sophocles) but I ſhewe déedes like vntoo my woordes.
                  For (that I maye vſe the woordes of Plautus) hée is a fréend, that at the pinch helpeth mée in déede when I haue neede of his deede.
                  In this place may bée ſet foorth a ſumme of the doctrine concernyng Almeſdéedes and Liberalitie towardes the poore, out of the Expoſition of the .vij. commaundement, and alſo concernyng the other partes or dueties of neybourly loue, the cheefe poyntes whereof are declared already vppon the Sunday called Quinquageſima, and an eyght dayes ago.
               
            
            
               
               The third Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Peter. v.
                  
                     SVbmit your ſelues euery man one to an other: knitte youre ſelues togyther in lowlyneſſe of mynde. For God reſiſteth the proude, and giueth grace to the humble. Submit your ſelues therfore vnder the mightie hande of God, that he may exalt you when the tyme is come. Caſt all your care vpon him: for he careth for you. Bee ſober, and watche: for your aduerſery the diuel, as a roaring Lyon walketh about, ſeeking whome he may deuoure, whome reſiſte ſtedfaſt in the faythe: knowing that the ſame afflictions are appoynted vntoo your brethren, that are in the worlde. But the God of all grace whiche hath called vs vntoo his eternall glorie by Chryſte Ieſu, ſhall his owne ſelfe (after that yee haue ſuffered a little affliction) make you perfecte, ſettle, ſtrength, and ſtabliſhe you. To him be glorie and dominion for euer and euer.
                  Amen.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle perteyneth to the kinde of caſes that perſuade or diſſuade. For it is an exhortation to practiſe lowlyneſſe, and to beware of the diuels ſnares.
                  The argumentes are taken of the honeſtneſſe, of the profytableneſſe, and of the eaſyneſſe or poſſibleneſſe of the matter.
                  
                     The cheef places of doctrine are twoo.
                     1 Of lowlyneſſe wherof a part is Fayth ſettled vpon God, and beléeuing that God hath care of a man in his troubles.
                     2 Of the craftes of the diuell, which are too bée kept oft by ſobrietie and watchfulneſſe, and driuen away by ſtedfaſt fayth and prayer.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The firſt place. An exhortation too Lowlyneſſe.
                  THe pryde which the diuell breathed into our firſt parentsSel
                           •
                        e loue and ſelfvveening. in ſaying too them, yée ſhal bée as Gods, ſticketh hard too our ribbes, and is as it were tied or faſtned with nayles too the bottom of mens harts. For all of vs by nature do loue our ſelues and make muche of our ſelues, coueting to excell others, and to bée preferred afore others, and that other ſhuld be counted inferiors and vnderlings too vs. And we truſt much to our own wiſdom & ſtrength, and when God caſteth vs downe, & pincheth vs with miſeries and calamities, wée are angry and wée fret ageinſt God as if wée were put too wrong at his hand. This pride comprehendeth a great ſinke of vices. For al proud folksVyces accompaning pryde. Careleſſe. Stately. are firſt blynd, not perceiuing their owne infirmitie and filthyneſſe, nor conſidering that God is the author of thoſe gifts. They are careleſſe without feare of Gods diſpleaſure or iudgemēt. They are ſtately, ambitious, enuyers, buzy bodies, ſkornfull, impacient in trouble, quarellers, malicious, makebates, ſtirrers of ſedition and warres in the church and in realmes.Lovvlyneſſe.
                  
                  Ageinſt this vice is ſet the vertue Lowlyneſſe, or humilitie, which Peter in this place willeth vs to pitch downe into the very bottom of our harts, and too kepe it in oure mynde as it were faſt tyde with a ſure knot. And humilitie or lowlyneſſe is a vertue wherby we acknowledging our owne infirmitie in the feare of God, are not proude: but with a true hart doo ſubmit our ſelues too God, bothe in executing the duties of our vocation vpon confidēce of Gods help, and in performing obedience in puniſhments & tribulatiōs, and alſo in yeelding due honor vnto others.Vertues conteined in lovvlyneſſe.
                  
                  By this definition it is euident, that in this one woord humilitie or lowlyneſſe are cōteyned many vertues: that is to wit. j. The feare of God. ij. Modeſtie or myldneſſe. iij.

Faith ſettled vpō the good wil & help of god. iiij. Diligēce. v. Patience obeying God mekely & with a quiet mynde in bearing out aduerſities. vj. Reuerence. Of euery one of which let ye methodical or orderly expoſitiōs be fetched out of y• declaratiō of the ten cōmaūdemēts. From thēce alſo to the ſetting forth of this ſermon of Peters, let there be fetched the eyght cauſes or argumentes whiche ought to moue and inflame euery man to the earneſt embracing of true lowlyneſſe, and too the vtter eſchuing of pride. Peter vſeth in this place thrée argumentes.
                  Firſt, of honeſtneſſe, or the cōmandement of god. HaueCauſes that ſhould mo
                              •
                           e to Lowlyneſſe. lowlyneſſe faſtned in you, hūble your ſelues vnder the mighty hand of God. For ſeing that God through his wiſdom & rightuouſneſſe hath ſtabliſhed this order in mās life, ye one ſhuld ſerue an others turn & be ſubiect one to an other, as Peter ſayd a litle afore, ſubmit your ſelues al of you one to another, & ſeing y• of determinate purpoſe according to his fatherly goodneſſe, he either puniſheth vs inſtly for our deſerts, or elſe exerciſeth vs wt tribulations for our tryal: It is our dutie, not to ſtriue ageinſt God, but paciently & with a willing & quiet hart to ſubmit our ſelues to his fatherly good will, & to obey his almighty power. For Gods hand is ſtrong inough, not only to beate down the proud, but alſo too lift vp the lowly and afflicted, like as he ouerthrew the proud & ſtifnecked Pharao, & rayſed the lowly Ioſeph out of priſon to the height of ye kingdom of Egypt.
                  Of the profitableneſſe. For God giueth grace to the lowly,
                     The profit of Lowlyneſſe. y• is to ſay, he fauoreth thē, & beſtows his gifts vpō them, furthering thē, helping thē & exalting thē in time cōuenient, like as he aduāced y• lowly Mary to this moſt high honor y• ſhe was ye mother of god. He called Dauid frō yt ſhepherds fold to y• kingdome of Iury. When he had humbled Manaſſes, Nabuchodonoſor, & the depoſed Dauid, he reſtored them to their kingdoms frō which they were caſt.
                  On y• cōtrary ſide, God reſiſteth the proud, & tūbling thē
                     God reſiſteth the proude. down from the higheſt top of their power, riches & glory,

ouerthrowes them quite, like as the dredful falles of Pharao, Sennacherib, Aiax, Apryes, Pompey, Ceſar, Antonie, and others without number, ſhew. For as Chriſt ſayth in Luke. xvj. It is abhomination before God what ſoeuer is lofty in this worlde. And God delyghtes to ouerthrowe all clymbers vp on hye.
                  
                  Of the eaſyneſſe or poſſibleneſſe. For whereas in troubles & miſeries mēs harts tremble, & through thoughtfulneſſe for their deliuerance & getting out agein, & for other things y• may befal them afterward, are tormented with fearfulnes & ſorow: It is a very hard thing to be humbled vnder ye mighty hand of God wt a peaceable & quiet mynd, & to obey gods wil without grudging or repining. Peter therfore willeth vs to caſt out of our mynds this thoughtfulneſſe & trēbling of hart diſtruſting in God, & with ſtedfaſt aſſurāce of hart to ſettle our ſelues vpon gods mercifulneſſe & fauor, & without trembling or fearfulnes in perils to lean vnto ye ſound rock Chriſt wt a quiet & gladſom hart: & not to ſtep aſide frō gods cōmādemēt, & the néedful duties of our calling for vncerten hope or fear of ye falling out of things: like as Moiſes ſtāding at ye red ſea, Daniel when he ſhold be caſt to the lions, the Apoſtles preaching the goſpel, Luther in the time of the aſſembly at Auſpurge and in the whole courſe of his cauſe, did caſt their care vppon ye Lord, and went manfully through with ye works of their vocatiō. Theſame thing doth Chriſt cōmand. Math. vj. Firſt ſeke y• kingdom of God, and be not thoughtful for to morow, ſufficiēt for the day is the trauel therof. Of preſent things haue thou regarde, Let God alone with afterward.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond parte of the Epiſtle.
                  
                     YOur aduerſary the diuel goth about like a roring lion ſeekingThe Diuell. whō he may deuour, whom reſiſt you ſound in faith. The diuel kepeth cōtinual vnproclaimed, & vnrecōcilable war ageinſt ye church, & euery godly perſō, whoſe deſtructiō he practiſeth both of body & ſoul by moſt traytrous crafts

and vnmeaſurable crueltie, lyke a hungerſtaruen Lyon. Therfore euery godly mā muſt (like a good ſouldier) ſtand continually in battell ray, armed with the complet harneſſe of God, the deſcriptiō wherof muſt be borowed out of the ſixth chapter of the Epheſians to ſet out this place of Peter. There are fiue ſpecial kindes of policie wherwith Satan goeth about to aſſault men vnwares, and too driue them intoo ſinne and fallyngs, and intoo eternall deſtruction, and ſo too deuoure them.
                  Firſt, he puts intoo their mynds vngodly thoughts, asSna
                           •
                        es wherwith the dyuel intangleth folkes. Epicuriſh or Academicall doutes concerning the prouidence, the certeintie of the doctrine, and the ſoothfaſtneſſe of the promiſes, or threatnings of God: or elſe he ſtirreth falſe opinions and errors in conceit, wherby men are driuen to medle with vnneceſſary or vnryghtuous matters in which they peryſh. Like as into the head of Iulian the renegate, and of many other worldly wiſe men, he dropped in Epicuriſhe doutes and contempt of religion. And he prompted Samoſetanns, Arius and Fotinus, with colourable and falſe opinions concerning the Sonne of God.
                  Secondly, in mens willes and harts he nouriſheth and confirmeth the ſinfull inclinations and affections of corrupted nature, as careleſneſſe and neglecting of Gods wrath and iudgement, diſtruſt in God, pryde, enuyouſneſſe, lewd loue, hatred, ſlouthfulneſſe. &c. Like as in Cain and Saule he encreaſed ſpytefulneſſe and malice: In Iudas couetouſneſſe: In Paris the heats of lecherie: In Tyberius diſſimulation and cruelneſſe: In a ſcholer, loytering and lazyneſſe. &c.
                  Thirdly he trumpeth in theyr ways with enticementes & occaſions of fallings, that is too wit, agréeableneſſe of perſons, and fitneſſe of tymes and places, which ſtirre vp the ſinfull inclinations of Nature, and miniſter eaſy and ſpeedy way too offende: as vnto ſcholers he offereth lewde company, whereby they are often led away from

applying & continuing theyr ſtudies into vitteling houſes, too feaſtes, games, gaddings too & froo a nightes, and other foule diſorders. When Dauid was ydle, he ſet before him Bethſabée waſhing hirſelfe. And he egged ambitious Abſolon foreward, with hope of obteyning his Fathers kingdome.
                  Fourthly, he endéeuereth to quench the fayth of moſt men by aduerſities, as by pouertie, contempt, diffamacions, diſeaſes, baniſhmentes, tormentes of body, and all the perſecutions that Tyrauntes and the worlde can deuiſe. Of theſe kindes of policies chéefly, doth Peter make mencion in this place, & he comforteth ye godly, both by the example of all the brotherhood in the world, or of all the Church and the godly: and alſo with the ſhorte continuaunce of theyr troubles: & ſpecially with the helpe of God who vnderſhoreth, hartneth & ſtrengthneth mens minds, that they ſhould not faint, as it is ſayd, j. Cor. x. God is faithfull, who ſuffereth vs not too bée tempted aboue our power, but with the temptacion maketh a way out, that wée may endure it.
                  Fifthly, the Diuell weakeneth and ouerthroweth many mo with proſperitie, fauour of Noble men, wealthyneſſe, proinotion, ydleneſſe, pleaſures. &c. For in proſperitie by little and little the regard of Gods diſpleaſure, and the feare of his iudgement ware faint and are quenched. Wherefore when the feare of God (whiche is as it were the kéeper of all the other vertues) is remoued, mennes mindes doo eaſly giue bridle too their ſinful luſtes, and yeld to the Diuell who plyeth them with occaſions of fallings, as Dauid, Salomon, & others without nūber haue falne in ydleneſſe and proſperitie. And theſe ſayinges are well knowen: proſperitie weakeneth the mindes euen of the wiſe. Alſo ydleneſſe bréedeth ſinne. Moreouer, The ſinne of ſloth hath many a ſnare, to ſnarle in thoſe that careleſſe are. And ageyne. When men bee voyd of greef, and ſet vppon the mery
                     
                     pin. Theyr harts opē, & the feend with pleſant crafts creepesin.
                  
                  Hitherto wée haue ſpoken of the maners of the temptacionsFortification ageynſt the Diuelles traynes. or policies of Satan, as ſhortly as might be. Now let the godly thinke vppon the fortifications and armour wherewith too furniſh our ſelues that wee may bée able to beware of the force, & craftes of Satan, & to diſapoint thē.
                  The firſt of theſe is watchfulneſie which muſt ridde aWatchfulneſſe mans minde of carefulneſſe, dulneſſe, and drouzyneſſe in neglecting the pollicies and power of Sathan, & perſuade it ſelfe that the name of Diuell or feende, is not a vayne ſcarbug, or a painted viſer, but muſt aduiſedly & earneſtly looke too the ſleyghtes of him as of a moſt ſuttle and cruell enimy, & endeuer to withſtād, & cut of ye beginnings of his temptacions, like as Ioſeph with ſingular watchfulneſſe had an eye to the diuel, when he layd the bayt for his chaſtitie, & ſo withſtoode the beginnings of his allurementes.
                  So in the firſt kinde of temptacions, when the DiuellRemedyageynſt the enterance of deſpayre. putteth into mens heads heauy & blaſphemons thoughts, which tend eyther to the confirmation of Epicuriſh careleneſſe or to the ſtabliſhmét of deſpaire: the ſafeſt way is, by and by at the beginning, eyther by reading the woorde of God, or by ſome maner of communication or play with a mans fréends, whatſoeuer it bée, to driue thoſe troubleſome thoughts out of his mind, as much as may bée poſſible, before they bée ſtrengthened and take roote.
                  The ſecond. Many ſlyghtes of yt Diuell, & many ſinnesSobrietie and ſtayedenſle. and backeſlidings, ſpecially in the third kinde of temptacions, may bée eſchued by ſobrietie & ſtayedneſſe. For drū
                     ken folkes do ſoone ſlip vnwares into great offences, & by quenching theyr fayth & earneſtneſſe in prayer & in their ſtudies and affaires are euen layd like naked & vnarmed folke in daunger of theyr moſt cruell enemie the Diuell.
                  The third & chéef defence ageinſt ye ſlights of ſathan, (&Fayth. ſpecially ageinſt the firſt kind of temptacions which are moſt perilous of all) is ſound fayth, not giuing way to the

thoughts which ye deuill or our owne fleſh putteth in our heads, but faſtening moſt ſtedfaſtly the eyes both of body & mind, vpon the onely word which god hath deliuered vs: which is the onely Ancor of our life and welfare: from whiche it muſte not ſuffer it ſelfe to bee pulled by any thoughts, by any proſperitie, or by aduerſitie.
                  The fourth is, the example of brotherhoode, or of all theExample. brethren and godly men in the worlde, who ſuſteyne the ſame temptations and ſleyghts of the Diuell as well as we, and yet ouercome them, and put them to flight by the help of Gods ſonne, and by fayth ſtaying vppon the worde of God, and by the comfort of the godly brethren.
                  The fifth is, the God of all grace, who hath called vs toGods grace. his euerlaſting glorie by Ieſus Chriſt, who ſuffereth vs not to bée tempted aboue our power, but rayſeth and ſettleth, and ſtrengtheneth, and ſtabliſheth the buylding of our faith, that it ſinke not, but continue and ſtand ſtedy and vnmonable againſt all the ſtormes of temptacions, that the very true God may be truely honored.
               
            
            
               Vppon the fourth Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. viij.
                  YF we be ſonnes, we are alſo heyres, the heyres I meane of God, and heyres annexed with Chriſt: yf ſo be that wee ſuffer with him, that wee may alſo be glorified with him. For I ſuppoſe that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory which ſhalbe shewed vppon vs. For the feruent deſire of the creature, abideth loking when the ſonnes of God shall appere, becauſe the creature is ſubdued to vanitie againſt the wil therof: but for his wil which hath ſubdued it in hope. For the ſame creature, shall bee deliuered frō the bondage of corruption into the glorious libertie of the ſonnes of God.

For wee know that euery creature groneth with vs alſo, and trauayleth in payne euen vntoo this time. Not onely it, but euen wee alſo whiche haue the firſte frutes of the ſpirite mourne in our ſelues, and wayte for (the adoption) euen the deliueraunce of our bodyes. For wee are ſaued by hope. But hope that is ſeene, is no hope. For howe can a man hope for that which he ſeeth? But and yf we hope for that we ſee not: then do we with patience abide for it. Likewiſe the ſpirite alſo helpeth our infirmities. For wee know not what to deſire as we ought: but the ſprite maketh interceſſion mightily for vs with gronings, which can not be expreſſed with toong. And he that ſearcheth the heartes, knoweth what is the meaning of the ſprite: for he maketh interceſsion for the Sainctes, according too the pleaſure of God.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is perſuaſiue. For it is a comforte of the Church vnder the Croſſe in this life. The propoſition or ground of it, is. The godly muſt beare the croſſe or ſuffer tribulation paciently and quietly.
                  
               
               
                  The arguments of comfort are ſix.
                  THe firſt is vppon the efficient cauſe or the order eſtabliſhed by God, and alſo vppon the example of Gods ſonne.
                  All godly men are bound to obey Gods wiſdome, and Iuſtice méekely and reuerently.
                  But Gods wiſedom hath appoynted this order, that alGods order to be followed. the children of God and heires annexed with Chriſt ſhold bée made conformable too their patterne the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſu Chryſt, who ſuffered excéeding great miſeries, perſecution, and death before hée was glorified: Ergo all the godly muſte reuerentely obey this order of Gods wiſedome, and become lyke their pattern the Son of God, in perſecution, & patiently abide the ſmall troubles

of this lyfe, whiche are the wicket to life and glory euerlaſting.
                  Now this conditionall phraſe, If wee ſuffer with him, ſignifieth not a cauſe or deſert, but the order ſtabliſhed by God, that he whiche deſireth to come to the marke of life and glorie euerlaſting, ſhould paciently endure ye peynes and troubles of ſo ſhort and needfull a iourney. For eternall life is giuen fréely for the ſonne of Gods ſake, as it is ſayd in Ro. vj. Iohn. iij. and .vj. &c. And in this place he ſayth expreſſely, that our afflictions are not woorthy or deſerue not the glorie to come.
                  The ſecond & chéef argument is grounded vpon the endThis argument holdeth of right and equitie. of perſecution, or vpon our moſt gladſome riddance out of all miſeries. Light diſcommodities, which ſhall fall out in the end to our welfare, and bée recompenced with excéeding great and endleſſe glorie, are to bee endured with a manly and a quiet minde.
                  After the croſſe & tribulacions of the godly, there ſhall aſſuredly enſue to them a moſt ioyfull end, and eternall gladneſſe and glorie, wherwith we ſhalbe crowned after wée haue wreſtled out of all miſeries: and enioying the ſight & companie of God & his Church, we ſhal be filled we the light & wiſdome of God euerlaſtingly: For to al thoſe that exerciſe godlineſſe, the ende ſhall bée moſte ſwéete.
                  
                     Ergo wée muſt in this very ſhorte race of our lyfe, paciently and with willing mindes, endure ſome troubles of ſo needfull a iourney.
                  Paule enlargeth the minor by a compariſon of thingsA cōpariſon of vnequalitie. that are not matches, that is too wit, of the miſeries of this life, & the glorie to come. For as there is no compariſon of one little waterdrop, to the whole huge Sea, or of one ſmall grayne of duſte to the mountayne Imaus: euen ſo the light & ſhort troubles of this moſt ſhort race, are not worthy to bée compared with the great & eternall glorie of the life to come, as is ſayd. ij. Cor. iiij. The ſmall continuaunce

& lightneſſe of our afflictions procureth an excéeding & eternal weyght of glorie vnto vs, while we conſider not the thinges that are ſéene, but the things that are not ſéene. So fayeth he héere, that the glorie of the godly which is to come, is not ſeene with eyes, but that the reuelement thereof is to be wayted for, by fayth and hope.
                  The 3. argumēt is groūded vpon an exāple of the whole nature of all things, or of the frame of the whole world.
                  The harmes that are common to many are to be borneCommon harmes ought too greeue the leſſe. the more quietly, bycauſe it is ageinſte righte to couet oddes, and to refuſe ſuch burthens as other men that are much better than our ſelues, are compelled to beare.
                  All the whole world is ſubiect to the fondneſſe or abuſe of the vngodly, & to the thraldome of corruption, and carefully wayteth for deliueraunce, to the intent it may ſerue to the glorie of Gods children, for whom it was made.
                  Therefore let vs alſo ſuffer the common miſeries the quietlyer, & beare with the delay. For afterward no doute but the reuelacion of the glorie of Gods children ſhall follow, though it be put off for a while. Haue patience then a while and ſtay: great profites ſprings of ſmall delay.
                  
                  He enlargeth this minor by ye figure Expolition, & by 
                        •
                     eyning a perſon, in y• he ſayeth, yt al creatures do grone & endure throwes like women laboring of child, which creatures notwtſtāding do want ſenſe. But the feeling of the peyne commeth to ye church & ye godly, which grone for the ſorow of Ioſeph, & are ſory that ye vngodly abuſe ye creatures, & yt the godly are afflicted & murthered, as yf I ſhuld ſay, that the very walles of the church bewaile Luther, it were as much to ſay, as the godly men in the Church lament that Luther preacheth no more in that place.
                  The. 4. is grounded vpon ye exāple of the Apoſtles. TheExample of the Apoſtles. ſorowes & miſeries cōmon to men with ye chéefeſt lightes of the Church (that is to wit the Apoſtles, who had ye firſt frutes of the ſpirite, or the more excellent gifts of the holy

Ghoſt,) are to be borne patiently. The miſeries & gréefes of the godly y• moorne in thēſelues & with earneſt longing looke for the glorie that ſhall bee ſhewed openly vppon Godschildren, are but the ſame yt the Apoſtles ſuffered.
                  
                     Ergo they are too bée endured patiently.
                  The fifth argument is grounded vppon the manner ofThe maner of ſaluation. ſaluacion, or of the full deliueraunce of all troubles. The maner of ſaluacion appointed by God is this, that in this preſent lyfe, wée ſhould for Chriſt the mediators ſake receyue forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, imputacion of rightuouſnes, inheritaunce of the glorie to come, and the holy Ghoſt the comforter the earneſt penny thereof: & that in the meane ſeaſon wée ſhould in this lyfe be ſubiect too the Croſſe and to death, and paciently by hope looke for our full ſaluacion or deliueraunce from the preſent miſeries.
                  Wée are ſaued by hope, that is to wit, the full deliueraunceHow we be ſaued by hope. from ſinne, death, and all miſeries is yet too bée hoped for and looked for, but the hope that is ſéene, (that is to ſay, of thinges preſente that are ſéene with the eyes,) is no hope. Or the obiect which is ſéene before vs, is not hoped for. But the full deliueraunce or glorification of the godly is hoped for, Ergo it is too be wayted for by patience. And wheras the Papiſts argue in this wiſe▪ Saluacion is Iuſtification:
                  We are ſaued by hope, Ergo we are iuſtified by hope, and not by fayth onely: I anſwer: I deny the conſequent: bycauſe there is a guyle in the double meening of ye woord Saluation. For in the maior or firſt propoſition it ſignifieth remiſſion of ſins, or recōcilemēt to God, & the heritage of eternall lyfe. And in ye 
                     minor or ſecond propoſition, it ſignifieth ful deliuerance frō all euils or euerlaſting glorification, as with ye mouth is acknowledgmēt of ſaluacion, ye is to ſay, he that will be glorifyed, muſt néedes perſeuer.Argument of poſsibilitie.
                  
                  The vj. argumēt is groūded vppon ye efficient, or furthering cauſe or vpon poſſibilitie. For mens mindes can not

of theyr owne ſtrength onely yéeld quiet, or by any meanes willing obediēce too God, ſpecially in greate troubles. And therefore the holy Ghoſte the comforter aydeth vs wretches and weakelings, and as it were ſtretcheth out his hand to vs as wee are falling, and holdeth vs vp, and ſtayeth vs, and ſtrengtheneth vs, that wée may bée able to beare out the burthen layde vppon vs, like as hee ſtrengthened Steuen, Iohn Huſle, Laurence, & others. He kindleth our mindes to true prayer, and ruleth the ſighes and gronings of our heartes that deſire too bee ſoone diſpatched out of theſe miſeries, inclining them to theyr obedience due to God, that wée may pray too bée deliuered according too Gods fatherly good will, and not after our owne deuiſes. For wée know not what to pray as wée ought to doo. But he taketh pitie of our ignorance, (as Bernard ſayeth) and accepting our prayer gently, giueth not that thing which eyther is vtterly vnprofitable for vs, or not néedefull to be graunted ſo ſoone. But as for the prayer, it ſhall not bee vnfruteful. For eyther it ſhal obteyne that which we demaund, or els that which ſhall bée more for our profite: like as a Father or Phiſician doo gently graunt, not all things that the childe or the ſicke perſon deſire, but ſuche things as they know bée méete for them.
               
            
            
               Vppon the fifth Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Pet. iij.
                  
                     BE you all of one minde, and of one harte, loue as brethren, be pitifull, be curteous (meeke) not rendring euill for euill, or rebuke for rebuke: but contrariwiſe bleſſe, knowing that ye are therunto called, euen that ye ſhould bee heyres of the bleſsing. For he that doeth long after life, and loueth to ſee good dayes, let him refrayne his tong from euill

and his lippes that they ſpeake no guyle. Let him eſchue euill and doo good: let him ſeeke peace and enſue it. For the eyes of the Lorde are ouer the righteous, and his eares are open vntoo their prayers. Again, the face of the Lord is ouer them that do euill. Moreouer, who is he that wil harme you, if ye folow that which is good? yea, happy are yee if any trouble happen vntoo you for ryghteouſneſſe ſake. Bee yee not afrayd for any terror of them, neyther bee yee troubled, but ſanctifie the Lord God in your hearts.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is exhortatiue conteyning preceptes of good woorks, or the dueties of many vertues, of which dyuers perteyne too the fifth commaundement. From thence therefore may the orderly expoſitions of euery of them bée fetched intoo this Epiſtle.
                  The firſt is of one myndedneſſe or deſire of concord: to theOne myndedneſſe. mayntenance wherof there are thrée vertues chéefly neceſſary, of which is ſpoken Epheſ. iiij. With all lowlyneſſe, méekneſſe, longſufferance or patience, endeuering to kéep the vnitie of the ſpirit in the bond of peace. The vices that encoūter it, are quarellouſneſſe which ſoweth diſcordes and debates, & cowardneſſe which fighteth not euen for things néedful, as in defence of the truth of Gods doctrin, & the glory of god. &c.
                  The ſecond is of like affectionedneſſe, which is touchedLike affectionedneſſe. with the féeling of other folkes eſtates, reioycing in the proſperitie of good men, and lamenting their aduerſities: Or as Paule ſayth: which is mery with them that bée mery, & wéepeth with them that wéepe. But (as Pindarus ſayth) the moſt part of mē are gréeued with their own affairs, & haue no care for others. Peter therfore commaūdeth like affectionedneſſe which cōſiſteth of twoo parts. Firſt of fréendlyneſſe which noriſheth not maliciouſneſſe, ſpitefulneſſe, & enuiouſneſſe, but willeth well too the good, and is glad of their welfare. And ſecondly of pitifulneſſe which is touched with the feling of good

mennes miſeries, & is ſory that they ſhould fare amiſſe. The vices that encounter it, are diueliſhneſſe, which is too reioyce at good mennes harmes, and ſtonehartedneſſe, which is to be touched with no feeling of another mannes miſerie.
                  The third is of brotherly loue or chriſtē fréendſhip, whichBrotherly loue perteineth too the .iiij. and .v. commaundements. The vices yt encounter it, are hatred or enmitie, and counterfet good wil.
                  The fourth is mercyfulneſſe or frankhartedneſſe, whichMercifulneſſe. with a willing hart or with a redy & chéerfull mynd endeuereth to his power, to do good to others with his coūſel, trauel, mony. &c. It perteineth to the .v. and .vij. commaundements. The vices yt encoūter it are churliſhneſſe, which either dooth no good too others, or elſe doth it not with a willing hart & a chéerful coūtenance, & lauiſhneſſe, which doth aboue meſure.
                  The fifth is of gentleneſſe or courteſie, which in familiarGentleneſſe. méetings, in talking with men or in héering them, in anſwering them, & in performing all other poynts of fréendly behauior, ſheweth a good wil towardes them with a certein pleaſantneſſe in countenance & geſture, without churliſhneſſe or diſdein. It perteineth too the .v. &. viij. commaundements. The vices that encounter it are churliſhneſſe and lightneſſe.
                  The ſixth is of méekneſſe, which is a vertue yt executeth noMeekneſſe. priuate reuengement, but ſuffereth wrongs, reproches, and other diſpleaſures for gods ſake, and for the quietneſſe of the church & the common weale. And it perteineth too the .v. commaūdement. And vntoo this part of his exhortacion he addeth arguments groūded vpon honeſtneſſe & profit. Ye know how you are called to this purpoſe, that ye shuld be heirs of bliſſedneſſe: that is to ſay, ſéeing that you are bliſſed of God for the bliſſed ſéedes ſake, yt you may enioy the heritage of eternall bliſſe: It ſtandeth with honeſtie & right, or it is good right & reaſon that you alſo on your behalfe ſhuld bliſſe others, & requite other mens ſlaunderings and wrōgs, not with railing & hatefulneſſe, but with curteſie and well dooing▪ For in any wiſe it becommeth Chriſtians too ſpeake & do as Gelon king

of Syracuſe ſaith to the ambaſſador of Lacedemon in Herodotus.
                     Gelons anſwer too a rayler. Surely thy delight to rail thus in thy talk, ſhal not cauſe me to ſerue thy turn in requiting thée with reproche. The other argument grounded vppon the profitableneſſe is expoū
                     ded with the moſt ſwéet words of the .xxxiiij. Pſalm, ye which I wold wiſh yoongmen to lerne whole without booke, and to cun it by hart. Now wheras the words of the Pſalme doo in general promiſſe rewards to the godly, who in religion & in their daily conuerſation, exerciſe truthe, which eſchue lying, rayling, ſlaundering, backbyting, deceites, ſophiſtrie. &c. and practiſe ryghtfulneſſe which doth no mā any euil, but al men good, and endeuereth too maintaine peace and concord: Peter in this place reſtreyneth them too a certeine peculiar kynd of folke, and behighteth quietneſſe of lyfe, ſucceſſe of welfare, & Gods care and defence in all perils, too the méeke and milde which beare wrongs and reproches paciently. And vntoo the vnryghtuous and ſuch as are deſirous of reuenge, he threatneth the countenance (that is too ſay the wrath) of God and horrible puniſhments.
                  The ſeuenth is of patience or peaceable manlineſſe or cō
                     ſtācie,Patience. which ſhunneth not the profeſſion of the truth, nor the defence of a rightful caſe, nor any dooings that bée honeſt and helpfull vntoo others, for any fear, reuilings, threates, ſlaunders, or reproches: but with a ſtout courage ſuffereth for the ryght, and awayteth for the rewardes that are behyght the patient in heauen: according too this ſaying. Math. v. Bliſſed are they that ſuffer perſecution for ryghtuouſneſſe ſake, for theirs is the kingdom of heauen. Bliſſed are you when men reuyle you. &c. It perteyneth too the firſt and fifth commaundement. And the vyces that encounter it, are faint hartedneſſe,Faint hartedneſſe. which is ſo diſcouraged with fearefulneſſe or with reproche, that he forſaketh the profeſſion of the truth, & rightful caſes, or the dueties of his vocation that are neceſſary and behouefull vnto others: but (as Ierom ſayth) the feare of God muſt work this in vs, namely too ſet lyght by al other feares:

And wilfulneſſe or ſtiffeneſſe in defending vntrue, néedleſſe,Wilfulneſſe or ſtifneſſe of opinion. or wrongfull caſes. &c. The woordes are taken out of Eſay the eyght Chapter.
                  The eyght is of noble and ſtedfaſt profeſſion of the trueStedfaſt profeſsion of the true doctrine. doctrine concerning God. Sanctifie ye Lord god in your harts and bée redy at all tymes too rēder a reaſon too euery one that aſketh you of your faith. It perteyneth too the ſecond precept of the .x. commaundements. The vyces that encounter it, are vtter renouncing of God, or hyding of a mannes profeſſion when it is néedfull too bée ſhewed: And vngodly raſhneſſe or wilfulneſſe in maynteining errors. Theſe places of this dayes Epiſtle haue I diuided as ſhortly as I could, the full ſetting out of which at large may bée fetched out of my declarations of the vertues.
                  Firſt concerning endeuer too exercyſe concord, courteſie, and liberalitie towards others. Secondly of méekneſſe which reſtreyneth deſire of priuate reuengement. And thirdly of conſtancie in profeſſion, and in enduring the troubles that accompanie the profeſſion.
               
            
            
               Vppon the ſixth Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. vj.
                  
                     WHat shall wee ſay then? Shal wee continue in ſinne, that there may be abundance of grace? God forbid: How shall wee that are deade as touching ſinne, liue any longer therein? Remember yee not, that all wee which are baptyſed in the name of Ieſu Chryſt, are baptyſed too dye with him? VVee are buryed then with him by baptim, for too die, that likewiſe as Chriſt was rayſed vp from death by the glory of the father: euen ſo wee alſo shoulde walke in a new life. For if we be graft in death like vntoo him:

euen ſo shall wee bee (partakers) in the reſurrection: knowing this that our olde man is crucified with him alſo, that the body of ſinne might vtterly bee deſtroyed, that hencefoorthe wee should not bee ſeruaunts vntoo ſinne. For he that is dead, is iuſtified from ſinne. VVherfore, if wee bee dead with Chryſt, wee beleeue that wee shal liue alſo with him, remembring that Chryſt beeing raiſed from death, dyeth no more. Death hath no more power ouer him. For as touching that he died, he died concerning ſinne, once. And as touching that hee lyuteh, he lyueth vnto God. Likewiſe imagine yee alſo, that yee are dead concerning ſinne, but are alyue vntoo God throughe Ieſus Chryſt our Lord.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of thoſe kind of caſes that inſtruct. And the ſtate, propoſition, or matter wherof it entreateth is this: New obedience is needful: or, As many as are baptiſed Chriſtians, and iuſtified by faith for Chryſtes ſake, muſte all from henceforth eſchue ſin, and yeeld new obedience agreing with Gods will, or elſe, Thoſe that are regenerated muſt doo good woorkes. This propoſition confirmeth he with thrée arguments gathered out of the place of cauſes: and he ſetteth it foorth with as many ſimilitudes taken of the Baptim, of death, and buryall of Chryſt.
                  The firſt argument is of the finall cauſe of iuſtification.The finall cauſe of iuſtification. For when wicked men obiected vntoo Paule, if good woorkes deſerue not forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, iuſtification and ſaluatiō: there is no need why wée ſhould regard too doo wel: or it néedeth not too doo good woorks: Paule turneth this obiection vppon them, and raeſoneth thus.
                  For this cauſe dooth grace ſurmount aboue ſinne, and for this cauſe are forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and the holy Ghoſt giuē vs through frée mercy: that ſinne and death ſhould bée taken from vs, and new ryghtuouſneſſe and lyfe bée kindled in vs.
                  All Chriſtians or as many of vs as are baptiſed intoo Ieſus

Chriſt, haue obteined remiſſion of ſins through frée mercy for Chriſtes ſake: and ſin is dead & buried in vs by baptim.
                  
                     Ergo it is of neceſſitie that all Chriſtians, or all thoſe that are baptiſed, muſt no more ſin héereafter: but muſt begin a new obedience and life agréeable with the will of God.
                  The ſecond argument is of the efficient cauſe.The efficient cauſe of iuſtification.
                  
                  That which is dead dooth nothing, and ſo ſinneth not.
                  Wée are dead too ſin, that is too ſay, ſin is dead or releaſed and aboliſhed: yea and drowned & buried in baptim, that is to wit by the frée remiſſion of the ſin, and by the imputacion of Chriſtes rightuouſneſſe, & by the beginning of ſuch mortificatiō or aboliſhmēt of ſin, yt hēcefoorth although ſin be not vtterly ſuppreſſed, yet not wtſtāding, it may not reigne any more.
                  
                     Ergo ſin muſt not héerafter bée effectuall and woorkfull any more, in thſe that bée baptiſed: or thoſe that bée baptiſed muſt not ſin any more.
                  The third argument is of the efficient cauſe alſo.
                  That which liueth and reigneth is woorkfull and effectuall, that is too ſay, is alwayes dooing of ſomewhat.
                  Newneſſe of life or rightuouſneſſe is kindled by ye holy ghoſt in thoſe that bée borne a new, or iuſtifyed by fayth.
                  
                     Ergo the regenerate muſt néedes from hencefoorth walke in newneſſe of lyfe, that is too wit, in new lyght and knowledge of God, and in new ryghtuouſneſſe and obedyence, according too all the commaundements of God.
                  Then folow thrée ſimilitudes or rather arguments groū
                     ded vppon the effectualneſſe of the baptim, and of the death, buriall, and reſurrection of Chryſt.
                  Firſt of his Baptim. Like as in baptim a man is duckedA ſimilitude of baptim. intoo the water, and ducked out of the water ageine: ſo likewiſe ſin or the old man is by the effectualneſſe of baptim drowned in vs, and the new man or new lyfe and obedience ought too ryſe out, and fioriſh ageine.
                  Secondly of the death and reſurrection of Chryſt▪ Like asOf Chryſtes death and reſurrection. Chryſt béeing raiſed from death liueth vntoo God: ſo wée alſo

béeing ſet frée from ſin in true repentance or mortifying of ſin by Chryſt, or in the effectuall woorking of Chryſtes death and reſurrection, muſt héereafter not ſin any more, but liue vntoo God, that is too ſay, enter intoo a new lyfe and obediēce acceptable too God.
                  Thirdly of Chryſtes buriall.Of Chryſtes buryall.
                  
                  Like as Chryſt béeing buryed roſe ageine: ſo wée alſo béeing buryed with Chryſt, (or hauing killed and buryed ſin in our ſelues through Chryſt,) muſt ryſe agein, and yéeld vntoo him the ſeruiceableneſſe of a new life acceptable too God.
                  Theſe arguments grounded vppon the effectualneſſe of baptim, and of Chryſtes death, buryall, and reſurrection, are repeted foure times by Paule with exchaunge of woordes in this Epiſtle.
                  As many of vs as are baptiſed in Ieſus Chryſt, are baptiſedAgeinſt Libertines & carnall Goſpellers. too dye with him. Then are wée buryed with him by baptim for too dye, that like as Chryſt was raiſed vp from death: ſo wée alſo ſhould walke in newneſſe of lyfe. That is to ſay, all that bée borne ageine by baptim through fayth, or all Chriſten folke, are by the merite and operation of Chryſtes death dead and buryed vntoo ſin, or ſet frée from ſin: and by the operation of Chryſtes reſurrection, new ryghtuouſneſſe and lyfe is kindled in them. Therefore like as Chryſt roſe ageine from Death, and from his graue: So wée alſo hauing deathe killed and buryed in vs by Baptim and Fayth, that leaneth vppon the Death and Reſurrection of Chryſt, muſt walke in newneſſe of lyfe, that is too ſay, in new lyght or knowledge of God, and in new ryghtuouſneſſe and obedience acceptable too God.
                  He repeteth the ſame ſentence with exchaunge of woords in the next proceſſe folowing. For if wee bee graffed in death, or bee made partakers of death like vntoo him, wee shall bee partakers of his reſurrectiō alſo: knowing this that our old mā is crucified with him alſo, that the body of ſin might be vtterly deſtroyed: that wee shuld no more bee feruaunts vnto ſin,
                     
                     for he that is dead, is iuſtifyed from ſinne. That is too ſay, like as Chryſt hauing bin dead is riſen ageine: So alſo our nature béeing dead in Baptim and by true conuerſion from ſinne vntoo God, and ſet frée from ſinne by the merit of Chriſtes death, muſt riſe ageine and not ſinne any more, but lead a new life, ſuch a one as pleaſeth God. Our old man, or ſinne ſticking in vs, or our ſinnefull nature, is crucifyed, dead, and buryed with Chryſt, (that is too ſay, is clenſed and ſet frée frō ſinne by the merite and operation of Chryſtes death and reſurrection) and is mortifyed by true repentance, perſecution & troubles, that the body of ūnne (or our ſinfull nature) may bée put away, not ſo as it ſhould vtterly periſhe, but that it ſhould no more bée ſubiect too ſinne. For he that is dead too ſinne, is iuſtified or ſet frée from ſinne: or, ſinne which is dead and put away, and buryed with Chriſt, muſt not from hencefoorth woorke and bée effectuall any more.
                  The third tyme he repeateth the ſame ſentence in other exchaunge of woordes thus:
                  
                     For if wee bee dead with Chryſt, wee beeleue that wee shal liue with him alſo.
                  
                  And the fourth tyme he repeateth euen the ſelfe ſame ſentence in ſomwhat more euidēt woords. Knowing that Chriſt beeing rayſed from death, dyeth no more. Death hath no more power ouer him. For in that he dyed too ſinne, he dyed once, and in that he liueth, he liueth too God. So thinke you alſo your ſelues too bee dead as touching ſinne, but too bee alyue vntoo God in Chryſt Ieſu our Lord: that is too ſay, like as Chryſt hauing died once for our ſinnes and riſen ageine, dyeth no more, but liueth too God: So wée being dead vntoo ſinne, and béeing ſet frée from ſinne through the operation of Chryſtes death, by baptim and fayth: muſt not ſin any more, nor liue in ſubiection too ſinne, but vntoo God in Chriſt Ieſu, who kindleth new life and rightuouſneſſe in vs, and maketh the ſame acceptable and pleaſant vntoo God.
                  This is the diſpoſement, & as it wer a ſhort enlargement

of the text of this Epiſtle, in which wée ſée ſet foorth the doctrine concerning the new obedience, whiche of neceſſitie is too bee performed by thoſe that are borne a new. And therefore a ſumme of the whole place concerning good woorkes may bée opened too the full vntoo the people.
                  
                     Whither good woorkes bée néedfull.
                     What they bée.
                     What kyndes there bée of them.
                     What are the efficiēt cauſes of them, or in what wyſe they may bée wrought.
                     What is the formall cauſe, or, howe they become good and acceptable too God.
                     Of the finall cauſes, or, wherefore they are to be done: And of their effectes or rewardes both in this lyfe & in the lyfe too come.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the ſeuenth Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. vj.
                  
                     I Speake groſly, bycauſe of the infirmitie of your fleſlie. As yee haue gyuen your members ſeruauntes too vnclenneſſe and too iniquitie, (from iniquitie vntoo iniquitie) euen ſo nowe giue your members ſeruauntes vntoo rightuouſneſſe, that ye may bee ſanctified. For when yee were the ſeruauntes of ſinne, yee were not vnder ryghtuouſneſſe. VVhat frute had yee then in thoſe things, whereof yee are now aſshamed. For the ende of thoſe things is death. But now are yee deliuered from ſinne, and made the ſeruants of God, and haue your frute that yee should be ſanctifyed, and the ende euerlaſting lyfe. For the rewarde of ſinne is death: but eternall lyfe is the gift of God through IESVS Chryſt our Lord.
               
               
                  
                  The diſpoſement.
                  IT entreateth all of one matter with the Epiſtle which we herd vppon this day ſeuennyght.
                  The ground thereof is this: All that bée borne a new, or all that bée ſet frée from ſinne by frée giuen mercie thorough Chryſt, muſt not ſinne any more, but muſt begin a new lyfe or obedience agréeing with the will of God.
               
               
                  The principall reaſons are grounded, Firſt vppon the honeſtneſſe of the matter.
                  EVery man muſt obey him whoſe ſeruant he is. You that bée borne ageine haue renounced the ſeruice of ſinne, and are become the ſeruants of rightuouſneſſe.
                  
                     Ergo, yee muſt no more yéeld yourſelues too ſin, but muſt begin new rightuouſneſſe or obediēce agreable to gods wil.
               
               
                  A kin to this reaſon is the Argument of coincidents.
                  THe rightuouſe man dooth ryghtuouſe things. Chriſten folke are rightuouſe.
                  
                     Ergo, They muſt liue rightuouſly and not ſin any more.
               
               
                  The third is vppon the profitableneſſe.
                  ALl chriſten folkes muſt with earneſt endeuer ſeeke eternall lyfe, & by all meanes ſtryue too ſhun eternall death.
                  The reward of rightuouſneſſe or of newe obedience is eternall lyfe, and the hyre of ſinne is eternall death.
                  
                     Ergo, rightuouſeneſſe or new obedience towards al gods commaundements, is by all earneſt endeuer too bée folowed of the godly, and diſobedience or ſinne is by all earneſt endeuer too bée eſchued.
                  By theſe thrée Argumentes dooth Paule confirme his propoſition.
               
               
                  
                  The cheef places of doctrine are three.
                  FIrſt, of the the neceſſitie of weldooing or of new obediēce,Neceſsitie of weldooing. which is a ſtedie and continuall will (through a forelyght of the true knowledge of Chryſte and fayth,) too eſchue all ſinnes, and too obey GOD according too all his commaundements, too this end, that God may bée honored.
                  This definitiō may bée moſt plentuouſly enlarged, by declaring in order thorough euery of the ten cōmaundements, the ſinnes ageinſt which the godly ſtryue, & the good woorkes or vertues in which they vtter their obedience. And alſo by reckening vp the cauſes of this new obedience and of the effectes of the ſame.
                  Secondly, concerning Chriſten libertie, whiche is a ſettingChriſten libertie. frée from ſinne, from death, from the curſe of the morall Lawe, from the obedience that was too bée performed too the ceremoniall and politike lawes of Moyſes, and frō mennes traditions out of the caſe of offence giuing. And chriſten libertie is not a looſeneſſe of luſtes and wickedneſſe, or an exemption from the obedience that is due too the lawe of God or good manners. But wée are ſet frée from ſin and from the condemnation of the lawe by Chryſt, too this ende, that wée ſhold from hence foorth ſerue rightuouſneſſe, or God and our neyghbour: like as Paule ſayeth héere: Now being ſet frée from ſinne, yée are made the ſeruaunts of God. And Gal. v. Brethren, yée are called too libertie, now ſée that yée turne not your libertie intoo an occaſion of fleſhlyneſſe, but ſerue one another through mutuall louingneſſe. j. Pet. ij. Not as making your libertie a couer of maliciouſeneſſe, but as the ſeruants of God, honor yée all men, loue the brethren, feare God, and honor the King.
                  Thirdly, of this ſaying which comprehendeth a ſumme of the whole Goſpell. Eternall lyfe is the gift of God in ChryſtEternal lyfe is Gods free gift. Ieſu our Lord. For like as remiſſion of ſinnes and imputation of ryghtuouſneſſe, and the holy Ghoſt, are of frée mercie

giuen too the beléeuers for Chryſts ſake: ſo alſo euerlaſting lyfe is not due too any deſertes of our woorkes as a wages, but is the méere gift of GOD, whiche wée obteyne by onely fayth for Chryſtes ſake. Iohn iij. and .vj. Hée that beléeueth in the ſonne hath lyfe euerlaſting. Now, although eternall lyfe bée giuen fréely for Chryſtes ſake: yet is it alſo ye wages of good woorkes, not due by our deſertes, but promiſed of Gods frée mercie. For godlyneſſe hath promiſes of the lyfe preſent and too come. j. Tim. iiij.
                  The darker ſort of phraſes in the Text, may bée vnderſtood in this wyſe: I ſpeake groſſely for the weakneſſe of your flesh, that is too ſay, I will vſe a ſimilitude whiche you of the ruder ſort may vnderſtand, taken of the moſt cuſtomable vſage of mannes lyfe, by which ſeruants are cōpelled too obey their Maiſters.
                  
                     Like as you haue yeelded your members, that is too wit, the powers of your ſoule and the inſtruments of them, namely, your mynd, your will, your hartes, tungs, hands, féete, & the reſt of your limbes vnto vnryghtuouſneſſe, that is, too the committing of it. For the Gréeke woord Anomia, (which is as much too ſay as lawleſſeneſſe) ſignifieth all affections and déedes that fyght ageinſt the lawe of God.
                  
                     Seruaunts of rightuouſneſſe vnto ſanctification, that is too ſay, too the dooings of holy woorkes and vertues that pleaſe God: or, that yée may liue holyly and purely, and ſerue god in all vertues or good woorkes kindled in your hartes by the holy Ghoſt.
                  
                     Yee were free from rightuouſneſſe, that is too ſay, yée obeyed not rightuouſneſſe.
                  
                     The end of them, that is too ſay, the reward, payment, or vttermoſt wages of ſinne, is death.
                  
                     You haue your frute too holyneſſe, that is too ſay, you haue holy and acceptable woorkes vntoo God, and he will recompence them with moſt ample rewardes in the eternall lyfe.
                  
                     
                     The wages of ſinne, is death. The Gréeke woord Opſon ſignifieth properly al kynd of meate that is dreſſed with fire, ſauing bread, and ſpecially fiſh. Wée call it in ſome places of England Suwle.
                      In old tyme there was giuen vntoo ſouldiours for their pay, not only coyne of braſſe or of ſiluer, but alſo vittels, as fleſh, fiſh, horſecorne, &c. Hereuppon commeth the latin woord Obſonium, which ſignifieth, not only al kynd of foode and vittelles, but in general, the ſame thing that the woord Stipendium dooth: which is as much too ſay, as a Pay.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the eight Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. viij.
                  
                     BRethren, wee are debters, not too the fleſhe, too liue after the fleshe. For if yee liue after the fleshe, yee shall dye. But if yee through the ſpirit doo mortifye the deedes of the body, ye shal lyue. For as many as are ledde by the ſpirite of God, they are the ſonnes of God. For yee haue not receyued the ſpirit of bondage to feare any more, but ye haue receyued the ſpirit of adoption, whereby yee crye: Abba Father. The ſame ſpirite certifyeth our ſpirite, that we are the ſonnes of GOD. If wee bee ſonnes, then are wee alſo heyres, I meane of God, and heyres annexed with Chryſte, if ſo bee that wee ſuffer with him, that wee may bee alſo glorifyed togyther with him.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle perteyneth too thoſe kynd of caſes that are perſuaſiue. For it is an exhortation too new obedience. The ground thereof is, Wee are detters, not too liue after the fleshe, or new obedience is needfull, or thoſe that bée reconciled

too God by fayth, muſt néedes from hencefoorth fight ageinſt ſinne, and begin a new obedience agréeing with the will of God.
               
               
                  The arguments of his exhortation are ſeuen, drawen out of the places that are of the perſuaſiue kynd. The firſt is of the impulſiue cauſe.
                  THat which is due muſt of neceſſitie bée performed. New obedience is due vntoo God.
                  
                     Ergo, New obedience muſt néeds bée performed.
               
               
                  Or thus:
                  ALl reaſoneble creatures muſt néeds reuerently obey the euerlaſting and vnchaungeable order of Gods wiſdome and iuſtice.
                  But it is the euerlaſting and vnchaungeable order of Gods wiſdome and rightuouſneſſe, that men who are created by God, and by the ſonne of GOD redéemed, ſhould obey God their creator and redéemer, and eſchue ſinnes which fight ageinſt the will of God.
                  
                     Ergo, wée muſt néeds reuerētly obey our creator & redemer, & no more liue after the fleſh, or yéeld our ſelues too ſinne.
               
               
                  The ſecond is of the effect of ſinne, or of the vnprofitableneſſe.
                  ALl that liue according too the fleſh, (that is too wit, which willingly and wilfully folowe ſinne or wicked inclinations and affections) become giltie of Gods wrath and of endleſſe death and damnation.
                  All thoſe that bée borne a new by faith, muſt not ageine procure themſelues Gods wrath and euerlaſting death.
                  
                     Ergo, they muſt not liue any more after the fleſh, but muſt

performe newe obedience agréeable with the will of God.
               
               
                  The third is of the profitableneſſe or of the rewards of new obedience.
                  ALl that are borne a new by faith, muſt with all endeuer and diligence hold faſt and mayntein the euerlaſting life which is giuen them fréely for Chryſts ſake.
                  All that mortifie the déeds of the fleſhe by the ſpirite, (that is too ſay, which bridle and repreſſe their ſinfull inclinations and affections, and mortifie them, not only by philoſophicall diligence, but alſo by the ſpirite, or by true fayth, prayer, and héedfulneſſe ſtirred vp and furthered by the holy ghoſt, doo hold faſt Gods grace and euerlaſting life.
                  
                     Ergo, all that be borne a newe, muſt mortifie or bridle & put away the déeds of the fleſh or the ſinfull inclinations, and affections of corrupt nature, or muſt eſchue ſinne.
               
               
                  The fourth is of the efficient cauſe.
                  THe holy Ghoſte woorketh ſuch motions in them that bée borne a new, as he himſelf is.
                  The holy Ghoſt is not the ſpirit of bondage, ſinne, & death, but is the ſpirite of the adoption of Gods children, the ſpirit of true inuocation, of vertue, of loue, and of ſoberneſſe, as is ſayd, ij. Tim. j.
                  
                     Ergo, in all that be borne ageine of the holy Ghoſte, there muſt néedes bée kindled ſuch motions as he himſelfe is, that is too wit, childly obedience, inuocation, and loue of God, eſchewing all ſinnes that diſpleaſe GOD their Father.
               
               
                  The fifth is of the honeſtneſſe of the matter, or of the dutie of ſonnes.
                  CHildren doo by Gods ordinance owe honor & obediēce too their parents: Chriſten folk or thoſe that be receiued by

Chryſt and borne a new by the holy Ghoſte, are the children of God:
                  
                     Ergo, they are bound by Gods ordinance too performe obedience too God their father.
               
               
                  The ſixth is, Of the poſſibleneſſe of the matter.
                  THe holy Ghoſt confirmeth our mynds that wée may perſuade our ſelues for a certeyntie that wee are the childrē of GOD, and helpeth our weakneſſe, that wée may bée able too ſtand ſtedily ageinſt the ſleyghts of the Diuill, the aſſaultes of our ſinfull nature, and the enticements of pleaſures, and bée able too eſchue ſinne, and exerciſe vertue.
               
               
                  The ſeuenth.
                  HE repeteth the Argument of the profitableneſſe or of the rewardes by fayth and newe obedience in eternall lyfe, whereof although wée bée made heyres fréely for Chryſtes ſake: yet is it there withall a recompence or wages, which is yéelded too our woorkes, not of deſert, but of promiſe. j. Timot. iiij. Godlyneſſe hath promiſes of the lyfe preſent and too come.
                  Theſe are the chéef Argumentes wherewith Paule in this Epiſtle exhorteth all men too eſchue ſinne warely, and too doo good woorkes. And there withall are propounded many notable places of doctrine, which I wil picke out as bréefly as may bée.
                  The firſt is, of the neceſſitie of new obedience and of theNeceſsitie of obedience. endeuer too doo good woorkes, and of ſinning no more after the receyuing of remiſſion of ſinnes, and the holy Ghoſt.
                  The ſecond is, of the difference of deadly ſinne and venialDifference of deadly ſin and veniall ſinne. ſinne. There remayne in all men, (yea euen in the Sainctes that are borne a new) many euils that fight ageinſt the law of God (ageinſt which ſinnes they that bee borne a newe of the ſpirit doo notwithſtanding ſtryue, that is too wit) great

dimneſſe, and doutes concerning God and gods promiſes and thretnings, which doutes doo frō tyme to tyme breke in vpon the mind many euil inclinations, fleſhely careleſneſſe, ſelfouer wéening, ſinful flames of affections, & many defauts of ignorance & ouerſight. Paule himſelf complaineth of the remaynder of theſe euils in him, euen after he was borne a newe. Rom. vij. The good that I would doo, that doo I not, but the euil that I wold not, that doo I. I ſée another law in my membres fyghting lyke an enemie ageinſt the law of my mynd, & ſubduing mée vnto ſin. Eccl. vij. Ther is no ryghtuous man vpō ye earth ye dooth good, & ſinneth not. Agein, it is certen yt there be ſom kind of ſins wher withal if ye ſaints defile themſelues, they loſe y• holy ghoſt & eternal life, like as Saul forwent Grace: and it is ſayd of Aaron, yt the lord wold beat him into pouder. Therfore it is néedful to cōſider the difference betwéen the ſins or defaults & euil inclinations that remayn in the ſaints, and other ſins or offences ageinſt conſcience which make of ſaints no ſaints, but thralles of Gods wrath and endleſſe damnatiō: Which thing is aduouched in this ſaying: If yée liue after the fleſhe yée ſhall dye: but if yée mortifie the déedes of the fleſh by the ſpirit, yée ſhall liue.
                  The third is an euident teſtimonie concerning the holyTeſtimonie concerning the holy Ghoſt. ghoſt & the office and benefits of the holy ghoſt, wherof there bée reckened three in the leſſon of this Epiſtle. Fyrſt the holy Ghoſt leadeth and ruleth the mynds, willes, counſels, endeuers & dooings of the godly, ſo as they may pleſe God & become conformable to the wil and law of God, as it is ſayd. ij. Cor. iij. We are tranſformed into the ſame likeneſſe by the ſpirite of the Lord. Secondly he is the ſpirite of the children of adoption witneſſing in our mynds that we are the children of God, and that the euerlaſting father adopting vs for his natural & only begotten ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, loueth vs with a true & fatherly affection, and that we are heires of al Gods good benefits.

Thirdly he kindleth in our mynds fayth & prayer, by means wherof we doo not any more ſhun God through ſlauiſh feare, as though he were an angry iudge, but approch vnto him as to a kyndeharted father, and in all perils doo (through ſtedfaſt fayth) looke for ſuccor and al good things at his hand. Theſe two benefites of the holy ghoſt dooth Zacharie comprehende in twoo woords in his. xij. chapter. I will poure out the ſpirite of thankſgiuing and prayer vpon the houſe of Dauid.
                  The fourth place is a difference of ſlauiſhe fear, wherethroughDifference of ſlauiſh feare and childly avve. men that are ſlaues of ſinne and death, being diſmayde at the beholding of Gods wrath and endleſſe damnation, doo dreadfully ſhunne God, and ſpecially in trouble freat at him and hate him as a cruell tormenter, as it appéereth in Saule, Iudas, and innumerable others. And of the chyldly feare, wherethrough mens willes and hartes ſubmit them ſelues to God with a childely awe loue, preaching vnto God by faythe, and obeying him, and reſting vpō his fatherly good wil promiſed for his ſons ſake.
                  The fift place, cōcerneth the true calling vpon God.
                  The ſixth place is of the euerlaſting lyfe.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋpon the ix. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Cor. x.
                  
                     THeſe are enſamples to vs, that we ſhould not luſt after euill things as they luſted. Neyther be ye worſhippers of images as were ſome of them, according as it is written: The people ſat down to eate and drink and roſe vp agein too play. Neither let vs cōmit fornication, as ſome of them comitted fornication, and wer deſtroyed in one day xxiij. thouſand. Neither let vs tempt Chriſt as ſom of thē tempted and wer deſtroyed of ſerpents. Nether murmur ye as ſome of thē murmured, and were deſtroyed of the deſtroyer. All theſe things happened vntoo them for enſamples, and

were written too put vs in remembrance whome the ends of the world are come vpon. Wherefore let him that thinketh he ſtādeth, take heed leſt he fal. Ther hath none other temptation taken you, but ſuche as foloweth the nature of man. But God is faithfull, which ſhal not ſuffer you to be tempted aboue youre ſtrength: but shall in the mids of temptation, make a way that yee may bee able too beare it.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of thoſe ſort that are perſuaſiue. For it is a dehortation. The propoſition of this Epiſtle and of the whole. viij. and .ix. and .x. chapters to the Corinthians is this: Flée from idolatry and things dedicated too Idolls. And there withall is ſet forth a generall exhortation to ſhun backeſlydings ageinſt conſcience. The argumentes of his dehortation are taken of foure places.
                  Firſt of the examples of the Iſralits in the wilderneſſe who by defi
                        •
                     ing themſelues with worſhipping the golden calfe, & Baal Peor, and by tempting God with grudging ageinſt him, or with impacience in their troubles, were horribly plucked from god, & ouerwhelmed wt dredful puniſhments. Theſe puniſhments (ſayth Paul) are ſet before vs as figures & exāples to warne vs of Gods wrath, & to ſhun lyke ſinnes, for fear of eternall puniſhments.
                  The ſecond is of ye effects or puniſhments which light on thoſe yt defile them ſelues with idols, & ſuch like fallings.
                  The third is of poſſibleneſſe, or of gods help, who ſuffreth not thoſe yt are newly entred into true godlineſſe, & ye exerciſes of repētāce & faith, to be tēpted beyōd their ſtrēgth, but withholdeth from them the greater daungers, that is to wit, the temptations of the diuel, & aydeth them in their encounters that they may be able to withſtād the allurements of fallyng, and auoyde the ſnares of the diuell.
                  The .iiij. is of ye honeſtnes of ye matter, or of Gods cōmā
                     dement, who giueth moſt ſtreight charge to eſchue with

all diligence the infections of worſhipping idols, and of other fallings ageinſt conſcience.
               
               
                  The cheef places of doctrine are theſe.
                  THe firſt and chéefeſt is a dehortation from the infectionAgeinſt abuſe of libertie. of woorſhipping Idols, and ſpecially from eating meates offred vnto idols. The occaſion wherof is this: It was a cuſtome in ſacrifiſes too burne part of the offering vpon the Altar, and to ſet parte of it too eate before them that beſtowed the offering. Vnto theſe feaſts reſorted certein of the Corinthians that wer conuerted to the true knowledge of Chryſt: who vaunting of their lerning and wiſdome, reaſoned that Idols were nothing, and that it was laufull too vſe indifferent things as men liſted: and that it is a thing indifferent to eate fleſhe offered too idolles, or not to eate it.
                  That this is the occaſion of al this whole diſcourſe and the mark wherat it ſhooteth, it appéereth by the beginning of the .viij. chapter, & by the latter part of this tenth chapter. For Paul anſwereth that the godly ought in no wiſe to be preſent at ſuch feaſts where fleſh ſacrifiſed to idols is ſet vppon the table, bycauſe that by their example the worſhipping of Idols myght bée confirmed, and the conſciences of the weak might be offēded and wounded. For it is the moſt ſtreyght cōmaundement of God which willeth men to eſchue idolatrie & all the infectiōs of idoll ſeruice. But in this Epiſtle, Paule reaſoneth chéefly vppon the diſcōmoditie, or ye exāples of puniſhment, which lighted vpon the Iſraelites for luſting to eate of Idoloffrings & for eating & drinking at the feaſt of the Idolatrous offerings to ye golden Calf. Exo. xxxij. and when they wer bidden by ye Moabits to ye ſacrifiſes of Baal Peor. Num. xxv.
                  Idolatrie is not only the worſhipping of images, or ofIdolatry vvhat it is. the heathen Gods: but alſo of mans owne brayn & wilfulnes without gods words, either to imagin ſom thing to be

a God which yet is no God: or too yéelde to any creature which is not God, the honor and ſeruites due too the only true God, as Inuocation and other ſacrifices: or to worſhip God with the woorks of mens hands, as Paule ſpeaketh in Act. xvij. that is to ſay, with images and pictures, and to bynde God too thoſe images: or to chooſe and ſet vp ſeruices and ceremonies at a mans owne pleſure, and to imagin that God is therby appeaſed and made fauorable too vs: or to confirme other idolaters by his example, and by obſeruation of outward ceremonies. A larger opening of this deſcription may bée taken oute of the expoſition of the vertues of the firſt cōmaundement, & out of the .xxxv. chapter of Exodus. The vertue that encoūtreth IdolatryTrue godlyneſſe. is true Godlyneſſe, or, the true worſhipping of God, or chriſtian religion, which is to acknowledge the one true God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghoſt, the maker of heuen and earth, aryght: and to call vpon him, and to worſhip him with true fayth & obediēce, according as hée hath ſhewed himſelf in his own word of the law & the Goſpel.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  OF whoordom, which alwayes is ioyned with miſwoorſhipping,Whordome. & oftentymes in the prophetes is put for idolatry it ſelf. The vertue contrary too whoordom, is chaſtitie, the orderly expoſition whereof may be repeted out of the ſixt comandement. Now Paule alludeth to the ſtory of the Iſraelites, who béeing called to the ſacrifiſes and feaſtes of the Idoll Peor, did eate of the Idolofferings, and committed fornication with the Idoll Peor, and with the daughters of Moab. Num. xxv.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  OF tempting God, whiche is, not to obey God pacientlyOf tempting God. in ſuffring calamities and troubles, like as the Iſraelites grudged at the trouble ſomneſſe of their iourney, and wer therfore ſlain by fyry ſerpents, Num. xxj. and not to ſtay a

mans ſelf vpō gods word & ordinance, but eyther to deny God and his works, which notwithſtanding we know to be done by God. As the Phariſies Luke. xj. attributed vnto Belzebub the miracles wrought by Chryſt, and the Iſraelites Exod. xvij. deny that the Lord God brought them out of Egypt: or to correct Gods cōmaundments and ordinances, vpon a mans own raſhneſſe & vpon truſt of his own wiſedom and ſtrength, as if a man would go ouer a greate riuer a foote, wheras god hath appoynted this order, that it ſhould be paſſed by bridge or by bote. The Enthuſiaſtes leauing Gods word by which only he imparteth his light and benefits vntoo vs, ſeeke new enlightnings. The Iſralites in Num. xiiij. and xxj. deſpiſing Gods ordinaunce and commaundement determine too make them ſelues a newe Capteine too conuey them ageyne intoo Aegipte. When Chryſte was willed to caſt himſelfe downe from the pinacle of the Temple, hée aunſwerd that God was not too bée tempted, who appoynted this order that men ſhould go downe by gréeces. The whole expoſition of the ſtorie concerning the firy ſerpentes, & the brazen ſerpent ſet vp by Moyſes in the wilderneſſe (which Paul citeth in this place,) may be fetched out of my expoſition of the one and twentith chapter of Num. & of this ſaying, Iohn iij. Like as Moyſes lifted vp the ſerpent in ye wilderneſſe.
               
               
                  The fourth place.
                  OF grudging or repining which is a fretting & chafingMurmuring or grudging & a diſobediēce ageinſt God in troubles & puniſhmēts, as the Iſralites in Num. xj. and xiiij. murmured and grudged, taking the labor and paynfulneſſe of their iorney impaciently, & lyke thankleſſe perſons forgetting all ye benefits and promiſes of God, diſtruſting him, & as it were reprouing him of vntruth for not performing ye foode & defēce which he had promiſed, 
                        •
                     othing his preſēt benefits, & luſting after fleſhe and other 
                        •
                     iner fare. Of which luſting

Paul but euē a litle afore, ſayd: Luſt not after euil things as they did. And in general, the doctrine concerning luſt & cōcupiſcence, or the hedyneſſe of al our inclinatiōs, affections & powers, to which right well agréeth this verſe of Crates, Foule lustfulneſſe is euen the ground, of euils al that may bee found.
                      And alſo the doctrine of pacience and ryghtfulneſſe which lotheth not good things preſent, & beareth diſcommodities incident: may bée repeted in this place. Cō
                     cerning which, theſe ſayings are vſual. Sufficient for the day is the trauel therof. Alſo, content thy ſelf with things that come too hand. And agein, An Aſſe is he in deede whom hard miſchaunce can make an Aſſe: But wyſe is he that paciently hard ſtormes can ouerpaſse. But proprely Grudgyng fighteth ageynſt the firſt commaundement, and the countervertue vntoo it is pacience.
               
               
                  The fifth place.
                  IT is a generall leſſon concerning puniſhmentes or miſeries,Puniſhments and miſeries. that they bée examples whiche warne men to ſhun Gods diſpleſure and ſuch other penalties. For wheras the Iſraelits were deſtroyed in the wilderneſſe by the deſtroying Aungell, or by the miniſter and executer of Gods wrath & puniſhments: all theſe things befel them, that they myght bee as patterns and examples vntoo vs, vpon whom the ends of the world are come, too put vs in mynde of Gods dreadfull wrath ageynſt ſinne, and of eſchuing ſuche like fallings whiche procure Gods diſpleaſure & of the endleſſe punniſhemēts that ſhal enſue without dout. Therefore who ſo thinketh himſelfe too ſtande, (and ſpecially which déemeth it lawfull for him to eate of Idolofferings,) let him looke to it, that he fall not into Idolatry & dreadfull punniſhments, lyke as the children of Iſraell & Aaron himſelf and Salomon alſo did. Therfore we had néed to vſe ſingular wakerneſſe and heede, and earneſt prayer, leaſt through fond perſuaſion of oure owne

knowledge, through the craft of the diuell laying ſnares for vs in our owne infirmitie, wée bee throwneheadlong intoo Idolatry and other horrible calamities. For euenThis place would be red with diſcretiō. thoſe that bée borne a newe and are in very déede godly, may ſlide, and by loſing grace & the holy ghoſte, may fall intoo euerlaſting deſtruction, like as Saule, Iudas, and others periſhed.
               
               
                  The ſixt place
                  COncerning temptations, and the manner how to put them away, and ouercome them, I haue giuen ſome incling vpon the .iiij. chapter of Mathew.
                  Temptation is a prouocation or motion to ſynne andTemptation what it is. wretchedneſſe, riſing of mans infirmitie, that is to wit, of doutings and miſwéenings of the mynd, and of ſinfull inclinatiōs and affections of the hart, or of outward inticements & occaſiōs, which ſtir vp thoſe ſinful inclinations, as, Dauid by lighting vpon ye beautiful ſhape of Berſabée, is tempted of his owne concupiſcence, and yet is not driuen by the diuel vtterly to deſpiſe and hate God, as Nero, Saul and Iudas were. But vnto thoſe that haue the firſt beginnings of true godlyneſſe, true feare of God, & true faith, there is a moſt ſwéete comfort ſet forth in this ſaying: God is faithful who ſuffereth vs not to bée tempted aboue our ſtrength, as if he ſhoulde ſay, God louing vs hartily, and with ſtedfaſt good will embracing all ſuch as haue the beginning of true godlyneſſe, ſuffreth vs not too bée ouercome and too ſinke vnder the allurementes of ſin, neither wil he lay greater burthens vpon vs, than we bée able to beare through, but diſtributeth troubles by geometrical proportion. Vpon the ſtout and manly ſaincts, (ſuch as Iacob and Dauid were) he layeth a ſorer weight: and vpō them that be weaker he layeth a lighter weight and ſtrengthneth and confirmeth our harts with the holy ghoſt, that they may be able to endure out the payne.
                  
                     And he ruleth the fallings out, that they may bée too the welfare both of our ſelues and of others: according as it is ſayd, to the godly all things worke too the beſte. Alſo, To thoſe that follow godlyneſſe, The ende brings alwayes ſweete ſucceſſe.
                  
               
            
            
               Vppon the tenth Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Cor. xij.
                  
                     COncerning ſpirituall things (Brethren) I would not haue you ignoraunt. Ye knowe that ye were Gentiles, and went your wayes vnto dumbe ymages, euen as yee were led. VVherfore, I declare vnto you, that no man ſpeaking in the ſpirite of God, defieth Ieſus. Alſo no man can ſay that Ieſus is the Lorde, but by the holy Ghoſte. There are diuerſities of giftes verely, yet but one ſpirite. And there are differences of adminiſtrations, and yet but one Lord. And there are diuers maners of operations, and yet but one God, which worketh all in all. The gifte of the ſpirite is giuen to euery man to edifie withall. For to one is giuen thorow the ſpirite, the vtteraunce of wiſedome. To an other is giuen the vtteraunce of knowledge by the ſame ſpirite. To another the gifte of healing, by the ſame ſpirite. To another power to do miracles. To another propheſie. To another iudgement to diſcerne ſpirites. To another diuers tongues. To another the interpretation of tongues. But theſe all worketh the ſelfe ſame ſpirite, deuiding to euery man a ſeuerall gift euen as he will.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THe Epiſtle is of thoſe ſort of caces that inſtruct. For it is a doctrine concerning the giftes of the holy Ghoſt in the Church.
                  
                     
                     The cheefe places are foure.
                     1 A definition of the giftes of the holy Ghoſt, conſiſling of a reckening vp of ten ſortes of them.
                     2 Of the efficient cauſe of the giftes, all which are diſtributed by one ſelf ſame ſpirite, who diuideth them to euery man according as he liſteth.
                     3 Of the finall cauſe, or of the vſe of gifts, which muſt bée imployed not too boaſting, or to nouriſhment of drawings aſide, and of ſectes, but too the common profite of the whole Church.
                     4 A teſtimonie concerning the thrée perſons of the Godhead, and in eſpecially concerning the perſon, office, and benefites of the holy Ghoſt.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  THere is one firſt and principall gift of the holy Ghoſt,True godlineſſe, or true Religion. which muſt néedes ſhine foorth in all the ſainctes without fayle, namely true acknowledgement and profeſſion of our Lord Ieſus Chriſte the ſonne of God, or true fayth beléeuing that Ieſus is the Lord, or in very déede, and by nature, God, and that he is Chriſt our onely redéemer and Sauiour, and diſliking and eſchewing the worſhipping of Idoles. Of this firſt and principall gift, which is common to all ſainctes, ſpeaketh Paule in this place: No man ſpeaking by the ſpirite of God, ſayeth that Ieſus is accurſed, that is to ſay, all that curſe Chriſt as a miſcheuous plage condemned of God, and as a thing too bée taken out of the world, (as the Iewes in theſe dayes, the Turkes, and the Heathen men doo,) or which blaſphemouſly ſlaunder and corrupte the true doctrine concerning the perſon and benefites of Chriſt, (as the Arians and Papiſtes doo) are no members of the true Church, or are not gouerned by the holy Ghoſt. And no man can ſay that Ieſus is the Lorde, but by the holy Ghoſte, that is too ſay, no man can rightly acknowledge

and with ſtedye fayth embrace, and conſtantly (euen to the laſt gaſpe of his lyfe) confeſſe Ieſus Chriſt too bee the onely and true redéemer, and giuer of eternall lyfe, except he bée gouerned and ſtayed by the holy Ghoſt. For he méeneth not of the bare profeſſion of the name Ieſus, but of the whole doctrine and the continuall ſticking too the fayth of Chriſte, whiche Iohn expoundeth in his. x. Chapter, theſe things are written too the intent you ſhould beleue that Ieſus is that Chriſt the ſonne of God, & that by beléeuing you may haue lyfe in his name. This fayth is the firſte and principall gifte of the holy Ghoſte, which muſt ſhine forth and appeare in all the godly.
                  Beſides this, there bée ſeuerall gifts of the holy Ghoſt,Diuerſitie of the giftes of the holy Ghoſt. which are not diſtributed too all the mēbers of the church togither, nor are behouefull too bée in all a lyke, but are giuen to ſome ſeuerall perſones by the frée will of God, that they may vſe them, not to vaunting or too ſtirre vp debate and enuying. But to the comon edifying and welfare of the church. And therfore Paule ſayeth héere. There are diuerſities of giftes, that is to ſay, the giftes are diuerſe or ſundry, which bée diſtributed fréely by the holy Ghoſt. And there bee differences of adminiſtrations, like as the duties of the members of a mans body are diuers and ſeuerall one from another. And there bée diuers maners of operacions of the holy Ghoſt in vs, or diuers executing of adminiſtracions. And yet there is but one Ghoſt the holy Ghoſt, who diſtributeth the gifts not to eche man all, but to euery man ſome. But vnto euery man is giuen a manifeſtacion of the ſpirite, that is to ſay, the giftes of the holy Ghoſt do vtter and ſhew themſelues apparantly in euery man, according as is to the behoof, both of the party him ſelf, and of the whole Church and of the common weale.
                  
                     
                        Homer in his vij. booke of Vliſſes.
                     
                     God giueth not all good gifts too all men.
                  
                  
                     
                     And in the xij. booke of his Iliades.
                     
                     To ſome God giueth warlike workes, to other he giueth a wiſe minde, which gifte manie men enioy: and he ſaueth Cities.
                  
                  Paule in this place reckeneth vp nyne kindes of ſeueuallVtteraunce of vviſdome. giftes of the holy Ghoſt. Of which the firſt is, the vtraunce of wiſedome, or wiſedome, that is to ſay, a perceyueraunce of all the Articles of the Chriſtian doctrine, ioyned with true and earneſte godlineſſe, or with the true feare of God and fayth, & with the framing of all a mans deuiſes and dooings agréeably to the will of God. For all mans wiſdome (as ſayeth Lactantius) conſiſteth in this one point, that he acknowledge God aright and worſhip him aright, now beſides the true knowledge of God, and honeſt behauiour, which bée common to all the members of the Churche, VViſdome, in this place comprehendeth alſo a peculiar and more perfecte light, whiche not onely vnderſtandeth the true doctrine aright, but alſo knoweth and cunningly diſcerneth errors and falſe opinions. And ſuch a kinde of ſpirituall wiſdome ſhone forth in Paule, Auſtin and Luther, kindled by the holy Ghoſt, and confirmed by exerciſe of temptacions, and encounters, and terrours and comfortes.
                  ij. The vtteraunce of knowledge, or cunning too vnderſtandVtteraunce of knovvledge. & diſcerne what thing, what time, before whom and in what wiſe, is too bée chéefly doone and folowed, what is méet and behouefull too bée doone in conſideracion of the place, time, and other circumſtances: where conſideracion is too bée had of ye weake in bearing with things indifferent, and where a man may vſe libertie. &c.
                  iij. Fayth or an aſſured truſte ſettled in God, andFayth. woorking greate and wonderfull things, with a mighty and inuincible courage, and obteyning deliueraunce out of great daungers, which too put away, ſeemeth no leſſe difficulte to mans reaſon, than to remoue mountaynes

out of theyr places. Of this fayth he ſpeaketh thus in the chapter folowing: If I haue neuer ſo greate fayth, yea that I can remoue mountaynes out of their places. Such fayth was in the Apoſtles, and in our dayes with Luther, who with a ſtout and vnabaſhed courage of hart did ſpred abroade the doctrine of the Goſpell when all the worlde was ageinſt him.
                  iiij. The gifte of healing, as the Apoſtles healed theThe gifte of healing. diſeaſed, and S. Pantaleon reſtored health to many that were ſicke in Maximilians Court.
                  v. Operations, of power or mightie operacions, orWorking of miracles. working of miracles and wonderfull deliueraunces, as Eſay deliuered Hieruſalem from beſéeging: or of the dueties of a mans owne calling, like as Paule is paynfull and labourſome in his vocation, and ſpréedeth the Goſpel further abroade, than the reſt of the Apoſtles.
                  vj. Propheſying, that is to wit, the gift of foretellingPropheſying things too come, ſuche as was in Agabus, Act. xj. and .xxj. and in the daughters of Philip the Goſpeller. Act. xxj. or els a ſingular aptneſſe and fitneſſe in expounding the propheſies of the ſcriptures, and ſuch a ſingular aptneſſe was there in Luther, euen by the witneſſe of Eraſmus.
                  
                  vij. Iudgement to diſcerne ſpirites, or diſcernement ofIudgement to diſcerne ſpirites. opinions whiche are decked with a counterfet colour of truth, like as Malchion was the firſte that diſcouered the ſlightes of Samoſetane, Alexander ſpyed out, that Arius taught falſe doctrine, and Hilarius found fault with the crafty conueyaunce of Auxentius.
                  
                  viij. Diuerſitie of tongues, as Ierome was ſéene in diuersTongues. tongues, as in the Latin, Gréeke, Hebrew, Slauoniſh, and the Chaldey tongues.
                  ix. The interpretacion of tongues, or the ableneſſe tooInterpretation of tongues. tranſlate forreyne languages, properly, and expreſſely intoo a mans owne toong, as Luther with a ſingular cléerneſſe turned the Pſalmes and the Prophetes intoo the

Dutch toong: or generally it is an eloquence, or gifte of vtteraunce, and handſome expounding of entangled opinions in controuerſie, whereof many ryſe onely of the ignoraunce of the toong and of the phraſes of the ſame. Hitherto I haue reckened vp a beadroll of the cheef giftes of the holy Ghoſt.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  THe efficient cauſe or author and giuer of all ſpirituallThe efficient cauſe of all giftes. gifts, is the one and ſelf ſame holy Ghoſt, which diſtributeth ſeuerally to eche mā according as he liſteth. Then it is the greateſt foly in the world too bee proude of an other mans goods, whiche neyther are in our power, nor can bee gotten by our owne cunning, and too vaunt ones ſelf aboue other men for them, and too kindle harteburning, and cheriſh hatred for them, as it happened in the Church of Corinth, and in other places at all times.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  IF God of his goodneſſe haue beſtowed any gifts vpō vs,How Gods giftes are too be vſed. they are to be vſed reuerently, not to boaſting, or to the diſdeyne and contempt of other folkes, & the nurriſhment of ſuch like fond affections, but too the common profite & welfare of the whole Church: like the members of mans body, which though they bee one vnlike another, and ſome haue more excellent offices than the reſt, yet ſtriue they not ambitiouſly among themſelues, but employ all theyr workings to the common welfare of the whole body. And hereuntoo may this moſt honeſt ſentence of Euripides bée referred. If euery man taking the benefite or good gift of God beſtowed vppon him, would regard it and employ it too the common profite of his countrey, then ſhould Cities bée afflicted with fewer inconueniences, and become happy hereafter.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth place.
                  LEt the notable teſtimonie concerning the perſon and benefites of the holy Ghoſte ſet foorth in this Epiſtle bée conſidered. For by expreſſe woordes the title of Lord and God, and the peculiar woorkes of the diuine and almightie nature are attributed vnto him, which do conuince that the holy Ghoſt is God in very déede and by nature, and that he is of one ſubſtaunce and of one continuaunce with God the Father and the ſonne. But a more plenteous and full declaracion of this doctrine, may bée fetched out of the place that concerneth the holy Ghoſt.
               
            
            
               Vppon the .xj. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. j. Cor. xv.
                  
                     BRethren, as perteyning to the Goſpell which I preached vnto you, whiche ye haue alſo accepted, and in the which ye continue, by the which ye are alſo ſaued: I do you to wit after what maner I preached vnto you, yf ye kepe it, except ye haue beleeued in vaine. For firſt of all I deliuered vnto you that which I receyued, how that Chriſt died for our ſinnes, agreeing to the ſcriptures: and that he was buryed, and that he roſe ageyne the thirde day according to the ſcriptures: And that he was ſeene of Cephas, then of the twelue. After that he was ſeene of moe than fiue hundreth brethren at once, of whiche many remayne vnto this day, and many are fallen a ſleepe. After that appeared he too Iames, then to all the Apoſtles. And laſte of all he was ſeene of me, as of one that was borne out of due time. For I am the leaſt of the Apoſtles, whiche am not worthy to bee called an Apoſtle, bycauſe I haue perſecuted the cōgregacion of God.

But by the grace of God, I am that I am. And his grace which is in me, was not in vayne. But I laboured more aboundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace of God whiche is with me. Therfore, whether it were I or they, ſo wee preached, and ſo ye haue beleeued.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  ALl the whole xv. Chapter of the firſte Epiſtle too the Corinthians, perteyneth too thoſe kinde of caſes that inſtructe. For it is a doctrine concerning the reſurrection of the dead. And the partes of the whole diſcourſe are thrée.
                  
                     1. Whither there ſhall bée any ryſing ageyn of the dead.
                     2. What manner of ryſing that ſhall bée, or what maner a bodyes they ſhall riſe withall.
                     3. What is the cauſe of the riſing ageyne of our bodies, that is to wit, the death and reſurrection of Chriſte, whereby he hath ſwalowed vp our ſinne and death, & reſtored lyfe and glorie euerlaſting to his Church.
                  
                  The firſte parte of this diſcourſe, (namely that there ſhall bée a riſing ageyn of the dead) is confirmed by Paule with foure reaſons, of the whiche the firſte in this dayes Epiſtle is taken of the efficient cauſe.
                  
                     Chriſt hauing bin dead is riſen ageyn,
                     
                        Ergo wée alſo ſhall ryſe ageyn.
                  
                  He proueth the antecedent, firſt by the holy ſcripture,Textes that prooue Chriſtes reſurrection. as Pſal. xv. Eſa. liij. Oſe. vj. and alſo by the ſtory of Ionas. And ſecondly by the record of many that with theyr eyes ſaw Chriſt riſen from death.
                  For Chriſte the ſame day that he roſe ageyne to lyfe, appeared firſt too Marie Mawdline alone. Iohn. xx. Mar. xvj. Secondly to the reſt of ye womē togither. Mat. xxviij.

Thirdly too the twoo men that were going intoo the féeldes, whom the Apoſtles beléeued not. Mar. xvj. Fourthly too Simon Peter or Cephas. Luk. xxiiij. j. Cor. xv. And ſixthly to all the Apoſtles at once as they were gathered toogither ſauing Thomas. Iohn. xx. Luk. xxiiij. and .j. Corinthians. xv. And all theſe diſcoueries were made in one day, on which day Ierom ſuppoſeth that Chriſt ſhewed himſelf to Iames the leſſe alſo.
                  Afterward he ſhewed himſelfe certeine times too the Apoſtles when Thomas was with them, and at the ſea of Tyberias, Iohn. xx. and .xxj. Alſo in Galilée too mo than fiue hundred brethren at once. Mat. xxviij. j. Cor. xv. Alſo hée appéered too all the Apoſtles or Diſciples. And this is the proofe of the Antecedent.
                  And the conſequent of this argument is euidently confirmed by this Syllogiſme.
                  
                     Whatſoeuer Chryſt bothe will and can bring too paſſe, ſhall out of all dout take effect.
                     Chryſt bothe will call the dead too lyfe ageine as the ſayings of Iohn doo witneſſe. Iohn. v. vj. and .xj. And alſo he can reſtore lyfe too the dead: for by his death he hath ſwalowed death intoo victorie, and by his Reſurrection be reſtoreth lyfe euerlaſting too vs when wée bée dead.
                     
                        Ergo wée alſo ſhall out of all dout bée called too lyfe ageine.
                  
               
               
                  The cheefe places.
                  THe firſt and moſt principall place is the doctrine concerningThe cheefe comfort of Chriſtians in all caſes. the ryſing agein of the dead, which perteyneth to the Article of our Créede, I beléeue the reſurrection of this fleſh, and the life euerlaſting. This is the end & mark of the whole lyfe and fayth of chriſten folke, and the chéefeſt and moſt ſtayed comfort in all the tribulations of this moſt miſerable and flyghtfull lyfe, yea and in death alſo: that wée for a certeintie perſuade our ſelues & beléeue, that wée are not created too the miſeries of this troubleſome and mortall lyfe only,

but that after the death of this bodie, there remaineth aſſuredly a bliſſed and euerlaſting lyfe, in which receyuing ageine the ſame bodyes, (howbéeit renued) and the ſame fleſh which wée now beare about vs, and that béeing ſet vtterly frée from all ſinne, labor, and ſorow, wee ſhall face to face enioy the ſight of the whole Godhead, and ſo béeing filled with heauenly lyght, rightuouſneſſe, life and gladneſſe, ſhal praiſe God for euermore.
                  The doctrine of this Article is moſt euidently confirmed by many Sermons of Chryſt, of the Prophets, and of the Apoſtles, and moſt bryghtly ſet foorth in this fiftene ChapterTextes confirming the ſayd comfort. of the firſt too the Corinthians. Too the intent therefore that wée may ſurely faſten in the inward bowels of our hartes this wholſom and moſt effectuall comfort in all miſeryes: Let the chéefeſt textes bée alwayes in our ſight. As theſe Iob. xix. I knowe that my redéemer liueth, and I ſhall ryſe out of the earth in the latter day, and ſhall bée compaſſed agein with my ſkin, and in my fleſh ſhall I ſée my God: whom I ſhall beehold, euen I my ſelfe, and myne eyes ſhall behold him, and none other for mée. This hope is layd vp in my boſome. Iohn. v. The houre ſhall come that all which are in their graues. &c. Iohn. vj. This is the will of the father yt ſent mée, that euery one which ſéeth the ſonne, & beléeueth in him, ſhould not periſh but haue lyfe euerlaſting, and I will rayſe him vp at the laſt day. Ioh. xj. I know that he ſhall ryſe agein at the laſt day.
                  The foundacion and cauſe of the ryſing ageine of our bodyes,The cauſe of our reſurrection. and of lyfe and ſaluation euerlaſting, is the Reſurrection of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt the ſonne of God, whereby he hath ſwallowed vp ſinne, death, hell, and the diuell intoo victorie, and conueyeth all thoſe that flée vntoo him, from death, vntoo a bliſſed and endleſſe lyfe. And this is the cauſe why Paul in this Epiſtle confirmeth this ſentence with ſo many woordes: that Chryſt is riſen from death in déede. I doo you too wit of the Goſpell.
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond place.
                  THe enterance intoo this Epiſtle dooth vs too vnderſtand,Good things cannot bee repeted to often. that the true, wholſome, and neceſſary Doctrine concerning the chéef Articles of the chriſten faith, ought oftentimes and continually too bée repeated, yea and the ſelf ſame things too bee beaten intoo the héerers eares in the ſelf ſame woords, that they may déepely ſinke and ſtedfaſtly ſticke in their mindes, as Paule ſayth. Phil. iij. It is no paine vnto mée, but it is for your welfare that I wryte one thing oftentymes: béeware of dogges which chaunge and marre the doctrine of the Goſpell which I deliuered you. Therefore let thoſe that teache faythfully, repete oft times one doctrine that is profitable and neceſſary, as that wyſe man ſayd, that he ſpeaketh the ſelfe ſame things too the ſelfe ſame perſons. And this moſt profitable rule of ſtudyes, giuē by Epictetus is wel knowne. Knowe thou that it is not eaſie for a man too bée lerned, vnleſſe yt he doo euery day either heare or read ſuche things as he would be grounded in, and likewiſe vſe them in this lyfe. So Paule in this place ſayeth: that he deliuereth not a new Doctrine too them, but that he putteth them in mynd of the Goſpel by the ſame woordes that he had preached it too them before.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  OF the effectualneſſe of the Goſpell, or of the liuely woordThe effectualneſſe of preaching. ſounding in the mouth of the miniſters, by which woord only and not otherwyſe, God imparteth the true knowledge of himſelfe, true faith, the holy Ghoſt, and euerlaſting welfare too thoſe that beléeue. Therefore ſayth Paule in this place, by the Goſpell which I haue preached vntoo you, which you haue embraced, and by which you are ſaued, if yée hold it faſt by fayth, onleſſe perchaunce (which God forbid)

yée haue now ſhaken of the faith, and beléeued héeretoofore in vaine. And it agréeth fully with this ſentence. Rom. j. The Goſpel is the power of God too the ſaluation of euery one yt beléeueth, & Act. xj. Peter ſhal ſpeake woords too thée, by which thou and thy houſe ſhalt bée ſaued. Such other texts as theſe, wée ſhall héere in the Epiſtle of the next Sunday which are too bée ſet ageinſt the Enthuſiastes, who imbrace the woorking of the woord & ſacraments, and looke for new enlightenings and heauenly traunces without the woord.
               
               
                  The fourth place.
                  OF the paſſion, death, and reſurrection of Chriſt, and of the witneſſings of the Prophets in the ſcripture, as Eſa. liij. Dan. ix. Pſal. xxij. Zach. xiij. in which places Chryſtes death and paſſion is foretold: and of the cauſes & benefites of Chryſtes death, which things wée haue made mencion of alreadie vppon good Friday laſt.
               
               
                  The fifth place.
                  OF Paules modeſtie in boaſting, who termeth himſelfe the leaſt of the Apoſtles, and vnwoorthy the name of an Apoſtle, & yet declareth of himſelf that he hath labored more than the reſt of the Apoſtles. Modeſtie or mildneſſe, and true glory, are couſin vertues, like as ſparingneſſe and liberality, vprightneſſe & ſtreightneſſe true, dealing and ſtreight iuſtice.
                  Modeſtie acknowledging a mans owne weakeneſſe andWhat modeſty or mildneſſe is filthineſſe, is not proud, ne exalteth himſelf either in conceit, or in talke, or in dooings aboue that he is able too performe: but vppon truſt of Gods help, diligently executeth the neceſſary dueties of his vocation, and ruleth all his ſayings and behauiours by graue iudgement.
                  True glorying or boaſting, is (as Paule defineth it) theTrue boſting. witneſſe of our owne conſcience, too acknowledge and mainteine the rightuouſneſſe of a good conſcience, and Gods gifts, and the vertues & wel doings and ſucceſſes giuen vs of God,

and too ſet our ſelues ageinſt the leſings of ſlaunderers, that God may bée glorified, and other folkes may not bée withdrawne from the miniſterie by our miſreport & diſhoneſtie, but rather, may bée allured too the knowledge of the goſpell, and too true godlyneſſe by the auouchment of our good name and our good examples. Paule therefore ſayeth that he is vnwoorthy the name of an Apoſtle, that is too wit, as in reſpect of his owne deſert, or as perteyning too his owne infirmitie and ſinnes: And agein he gloryeth that he hath labored more than they all, that is too wit, as in reſpect of the giftes and good ſucceſſe of his vocation, giuen vntoo him by the frée fauor and ayd of God.
               
               
                  The ſixth place.
                  COncerning the frée fauor and help of God néedfull too the ryght and proſperous performance of all the woorkes of our vocation. And alſo concerning the difference of Gods grace woorking in vs and with vs, (which the ſchooles haue taken out of this place of Paules) is ſpoken in the .xxv. and xxvj. diſtinctions of the ſecond booke of ſentences.
               
            
            
               Vppon the twelfth Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. ij. Cor. iij.
                  
                     SVch truſt haue wee thorowe Chryſt too Godward, not that we are ſufficient of our ſelues to thinke any thing as it were of our ſelues, but our ableneſſe commeth of God, which hath made vs able too miniſter the new Teſtament, not of the letter but of the ſprite. For the letter killeth, but the ſprite gyueth life. If the miniſtration of death thorowe the letters figured in ſtones was glorious, ſo that the children of Iſrael could not beholde the face of Moſes for the

glory of his countenance (which glory is done away) why shal not the miniſtration of the ſprite be much more glorious? For if the miniſtring of condemnation bee glorious: much more doth the miniſtration of ryghteouſneſſe exceede in glory. For no dout that vvhich vvas there glorifyed, is not once glorifyed in reſpecte of thys exceedyng glorye. For if that vvhich is deſtroyed vvas gloryous: muche more shall that which remaineth bee glorious. Seeing then that wee haue ſuch truſt, wee vſe great boldneſſe, and do not as Moiſes, which put a vaile ouer his face, that the children of Iſraell should not ſee for what purpoſe that ſerued which is put away. But theyr mindes wer blinded. For vntil this day remaineth the ſame couering vntaken away in the olde teſtament when they read it, which vaile in Chryſtis put away. But euen vntoo this day when Moſes is read, that vaile hangeth before their harts. Neuertheleſſe, when they turne to the Lord, the vaile shall bee takē away. The Lord no doubt is a ſpryte. And where the ſprite of the Lord is, there is libertie. But wee all beehold in a myrror the glory of the Lord, with his face open, and are changed vntoo the ſame ſimilitude, from glory to glory, euen of the ſprite of the Lord.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of thoſe kynd that inſtruct, for it is a Doctrine concerning the miniſterie of the Goſpell.
                  
                     The cheefe places are three.
                     1 Of the effectualneſſe of the miniſtration of the goſpell, by which there is a new light or knowledge of God, new ryghtuouſneſſe, and lyfe kindled in the harts of the héerers.
                     2 Of the efficient cauſe of conuerſion or quickening, and of all ſpirituall dooings, that are ſtirred vp in vs by the Goſpell.
                     3 Of the letter and the ſpirite, or the difference of the miniſtracion

of the old teſtament and the new, or of the law and the goſpell.
                  
                  Now foraſmuche as the manner of ſpéeche and phraſe in this whole third Chapter of the ſecond Epiſtle too the Corinthians, is ſomewhat darke and vneaſie: I wil (toogither with the expoſition of the places) declare the full text of the whole chapter in a bréefe paraphraſis.
               
               
                  The firſt place, concerning the effectualneſſe of the miniſtration of the Goſpell.
                  THe moſt part of the ſecond Epiſtle too the Corinthians is ſpent in this auouchment which Paul ſetteth ageinſt the ſlaunders of the falſe Apoſtles. I auouch that I Paule am not a deceyuer or a huckſter, that corrupteth the truthe for ambition or gaines ſake: but a faythfull miniſter, and that I haue faythfully deliuered too you the ſincere and pure Doctrine of the Goſpell vvythout corrupting it. Concerning this auouchment, he appealeth too the Corinthians themſelues for record in the béeginning of this Chapter. You are our Epiſtle vvritten in our hart, vvhich is knowne and red of all men, in that yee are manifeſted too bee the Epiſtle of Chryſt, miniſtred by vs, and vvritten, not vvith inke, but vvith the ſpirite of the liuing God, not in tables of ſtone, but in fleshly Tables of the hart. As if a man ſhould ſay, I confirme not myne auouchment with forreine and farre fet teſtimonials or letters of commendation in behalfe of my miniſterie. But you your ſelues beare witneſſe with mée in my harte, that I haue deliuered vntoo you the vncorrupted woorde of ye Goſpell faithfully, as long as all men know and ſee, that you hauing forſaken vngodlyneſſe and heatheniſh Idolles, are turned too the true knowledge of Chryſt by my miniſtration: and as long as you your ſelues ſhew that your harts are Chryſtes Epiſtle or the tables wherin Chryſt himſelf is imprinted, dwelling in you, and woorking in you, & that there is

kindled in you true knowledge of God, new ryghtuouſneſſe, and lyfe, by the ſpirit of the liuing God who is effectuall by my miniſterie. And ſo the liuely law and obedience agréeing with Gods law, is not grauē in tables of ſtone, or in the tables of Moyſes, wherin were grauen the letters or words of the law written with the finger of God, but in your fleſhly or obedient hartes, with the finger or ſpirite of the liuing God: as is ſaid Ier. xxxj. I will put my law in their mindes, and in their harts will I wryte it. This effectualneſſe of my miniſterie is an euident token, that I am a faithful miniſter of the goſpel: and that the woord of the goſpel ſounding in the mouth of mée and of all faithfull miniſters is not a fond tale, or emptie woords, and a fable as good as a ſick mans dreame, but a thing effectual that worketh ſaluation in déede too euery one that beléeueth, as is ſayd Rom. j. Let ſuch like teſtimonies full of cōfort bée alwayes in ſight, which auouche yt the church is verely gathered too God by the voyce of the goſpel, and that by this miniſterie God woorketh in déede, and imparteth the true knowledge of himſelf, ryghtuouſneſſe & lyfe euerlaſting too thoſe that beléeue. j. Theſſ. ij. Yée haue receiued, not the woord of man, but (as it was in déede) the woord of God, which is woorkfull in you that beléeue. ij. Cor. v. God hath reconciled vs too himſelfe by Ieſus Chryſt, and hath béetaken vnto vs the office of preaching the attonement. Therfore are wée meſſengers in the roume of Chryſt, euen as though God did exhort you by vs. j. Cor. j. It pleaſed GOD through fooliſhneſſe of preaching, too ſaue them that beléeue. Act. xj. Peter ſhall ſpeake woordes vntoo thée, by which thou ſhalt bée ſaued, bothe thou and thy houſholde. Eſay. lv. The woord that paſſeth out of my mouthe, ſhall not returne emptie vntoo mée, but ſhall woorke all things that I haue ſent it vntoo. Rom. x. Faith commeth by heering, and héering by the woord of God. Rom. xv. Whatſoeuer things bee written. &c. Iohn. xvij. I pray not for the Apoſtles. &c. Iohn. xv. You are made cleane by the woord.
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond place, Of the efficient cauſe of the woorkfulneſſe of the miniſterie and of all good and healthfull deedes.
                  NOt by mannes power dooth the preaching of the Goſpel woorke ſaluation too euery one that beléeueth: neyther is true knowledge of God, and rightuouſneſſe and eternall lyfe wrought in the hartes of the héerers by the woord of the Goſpell, for the woorthineſſe and vertues of the miniſters or preachers: but by the woorking of God himſelfe who thorough the miniſterie and preaching of his woord kindleth godly thoughts, or the light of the true knowledge of Chryſt which is faith, and quickeneth or trāſformeth our harts and mynds intoo the ſame likeneſſe, that they may bée made partakers of the light and lyfe of GOD. And therefore Paule ſayeth, Such truſt haue wee through Chryſt to Godward, not that wee are ſufficient of our ſelues too think any thing as of our ſelues, but all our ableneſſe commeth of God: As though Paule ſhould ſay, Whereas I auouche that you Corinthians being conuerted by my preaching, doo beare witneſſe of my faithfulneſſe, and diſproue the ſlaūders of the falſe Apoſtles: I ſay ſo, not truſting too myne owne ſtrength, but onely vntoo God, who wrought mightily by my preaching. And herewithall, this ſentence of Paules concerning the weakneſſe of frée will or of mannes owne power, dooth vs too vnderſtand, that it is ſo poyſoned, weakened, and fordoone with the venim of ſinne, that of it owne ſtrength it can neither woork the rightuouſneſſe that liketh God, nor atteyne forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and ſaluation, nor think any thing that pleaſeth God or may bée helpfull too it ſelfe in the conuerſion or iuſtifying of it ſelfe: and much leſſe can woork toward it: like as alſo he ſayeth. j. Corin. ij. The naturall man perceyueth not the things that are of Gods ſpirite. For vntoo him they are fooliſhneſſe, and he can not vnderſtand them, bicauſe they are too bée weyed ſpiritually▪ Thirdly alſo he dooth vs too

wit in generall, that nothing can bée doone, eyther in the ſpirituall lyfe to ſoule health, or in the ciuill lyfe rightly and fortunatly, but by the helpe and gift God: as it is ſayd Iohn iij. A man can not take aught too himſelf, except it bee giuen him from heauen. And Nazianzene: Onleſſe God giue, labour auayleth nothing.
               
               
                  The third place, Of the Letter and the Spirit, or the difference betweene the miniſterie of the old Teſtament & of the new, which is taken of the effects or formall cauſe.
                  
                     THe new Teſtament dooth moſt properly betoken the ſameThe new Teſtament. thing that dooth the Goſpell or the promiſe that concerneth the ſonne of God, our Lord and redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, and Gods grace, remiſſion of ſinnes and euerlaſting ſaluation too bée giuen fréely for Chryſts ſake onely, too thoſe that beléeue: by the miniſterie of which promiſe, the holy Ghoſt woorketh, and kindleth new light, new rightuouſneſſe, and euerlaſting lyfe in our harts.
                  
                     The Letter ſignifieth the lawe of Moyſes both ceremoniallThe Letter. and morall, written with letters in tables of ſtone: and all obedience or indeuer of dooing the ceremoniall or moral woorks of the Law, without the holy ghoſt or without true faith kindled by the holy Ghoſt.
                  
                     The Spirit ſignifieth Chryſt himſelfe, or the holy ſpirit ofThe Spirit. Chryſt, who by the preaching of ye goſpell kindleth true light of the knowledge of God, true comfortableneſſe, rightuouſneſſe, and lyfe in mennes hartes, as is ſayd. j. Iohn. v. This is the witneſſe of the Goſpell, that God giueth vs eternall lyfe of frée gifte, and this lyfe is in his ſonne. Hée that hath the ſonne, hath lyfe, and hée that hath not the ſonne of God, hath not lyfe. Therefore the Spirit and lyfe of the whole

doctrine deliuered by GOD in eche of the Teſtamentes, yea and of all good woorkes, ceremonies, and good intentes, is all only Chryſt. And therefore ſayeth Paule, that God made him a Miniſter of the new Teſtament, or of the Goſpell, and not of the Letter, or of the Lawe onely, or of figures and woorkes what ſoeuer, &c. But of Chryſtes Spirit which woorketh by the Goſpell. For the Letter, that is too ſay, Gods Lawe, and all manner of doctrine or imitation and obedience and good intent of dooing the Lawe without the holy Ghoſt, killeth, that is too ſay, bringeth not lyfe and true comfort too mennes myndes. And in eſpeciall the morall Lawe by ſhewing, accuſing, and condemning ſinne, and by reueling Gods diſpleaſure, dooth onely kill and caſt away all men intoo euerlaſting damnation. And therefore it is called the miniſtration of death, as it is ſayd. j. Corinthi. xv. The ſting of death is ſinne, and the power of ſin is the lawe. And Auſtin expoundeth this ſaying lernedly and godlily in his booke Of the ſpirit and the letter, Cap. iiij. and in the chapters folowing. And Roma. vij. At the comming of the commaundement, ſinne reuiued, and I was dead. But Chryſts Spirite is effectuall by the Goſpell, and lighteneth, and quickeneth mennes hartes, and ſtirreth vp in their myndes, not onely the ſhadowes of outward woorkes, or imitations and geſtures or vayne conceytes and good intentes: but a true and new light, rightuouſneſſe, and lyfe: and alſo kindleth and inflameth them with a burning fayth and loue toowardes GOD, and other motions conformable too the wil of Chryſt.
                  Vntoo this auouchement of the effectualneſſe of the Goſpel,A compariſon betweene the law of Moyſes and the Goſpell. Paule addeth a compariſon of the miniſtration of Moyſes Lawe, with the miniſterie of the Goſpell, and by the figure of Rhetorike called Expolition, repeteth the ſelfſame ſentence well néere foure tymes in exchaunge of woordes. The pubishing of Moyſes Lawe was doone with great miracles, and was exceeding glorious: Ergo, much more ſhall the
                     
                     publiſhing of Chryſtes Goſpell bee glorious and mightie in woorking, and in déed bring eternall lyfe and lyght, conſidering how all that ordināce of Moyſes miniſtration was appoynted, and all the figures, ceremonies, and lawes of Moyſes were ſet out for Chryſt. Now if the miniſtration of death through the letters written in ſtones was glorious, that is too ſay, if the miniſtration of Moyſes Lawe written with letters in Tables of ſtone, whiche killeth all men and condemneth them too endleſſe death, were glorious, beautifull, and cléere, in ſo much as the maieſtie & brightneſſe of the countenance of Moyſes the Lawe giuer was ſo great, that the children of Iſrael, by reaſon of the glorie or gliſtering cléerneſſe of his face, were not able too hold their eyes ageinſt it. How ſhould not the miniſtration of Chryſtes ſpirit which giueth lyfe, or the miniſtration of the Goſpell, bée much more glorious and effectuall? For if the miniſtering of condemnation bee glorious, that is too ſay, if the miniſtering of the Lawe whiche condemneth all men, and ſoundeth out this voyce, Curſed is euery one that abydeth not in all the things that are written in the booke of the Law, bée glorious: how much more dooth the miniſtration of rightuouſneſſe exceede in glorie? That is too ſay, in how much greater glorie excelleth the miniſtration of Chryſtes Goſpell, by which wée are deliuered from the condemnation of the Lawe, and made heires of rightuouſneſſe and euerlaſting lyfe? For no dout, that which was there glorifyed, is not once glorifyed in reſpecte of this exceeding glorie, that is too ſay, the miniſtration of Moyſes or of the Lawe, which was inſtituted and glorified with ſo many ſignes and woonders, is not too bée counted glorious, in reſpect of the excellent glorie of the miniſtration of ye Goſpell. For if that whiche is put away was glorious, much more shall that which continueth bee glorious, that is too ſay, If the miniſtration of Moyſes Lawe whiche was too bée doone away, & the ordinance of a ſtate of gouernemēt which afterward ſhould decay, was ſet vp with ſo glorious miracles:

how much more ſhall the miniſtration of the Goſpell, (which bringeth not the decaying and flightfull benefites of this lyfe, nor vayne ſhadowes: but the true euerlaſting and continuall benefites of rightuouſneſſe, lyfe, and light in heauen) bée glorious and mightie of operation in all thoſe that embrace the Goſpell. Therefore hauing ſuch hope, that is too wit, of the true and euerlaſting lyfe and glorie ſet foorth in the Goſpell, wee vſe great aſſurance and libertie in our miniſtration, and neglecting the figures and ſhadowes of Moyſes lawe, preache Chryſtes Goſpell openly, boldely, and fréely. And not as Moyſes did put a veyle before his face, that is too ſay, wée doo not hyde, ouerwrap, or darken Chriſts Goſpell, ſo as Chriſtes face can not bée knowen and ſéene, like as Moyſes when he put the veyle afore his face, ment that he ſhould kéepe many from looking intoo the ende of the lawe which is abolished, that is too ſay, from looking vntoo Chryſt who is the end of the lawe whiche was too bée aboliſhed. For the ende of the lawe is Chryſte too iuſtifye euery one that beléeueth. Rom. x. And Chryſt him ſelf ſayeth: If yée beléeued Moyſes, yée would alſo beléeue mée: for of mée Chryſt hath Moyſes written peinting out Chriſtes ſacrifiſe and redemption in the promiſes of the ſeede that was too come, and in the figure of the Eaſter Lamb, and in all the ſacrifiſes. But their ſenſes are blinded, Eſai. vj. For vntoo this preſent day, the ſame veyle, that is too ſay, the ſame miſt and blindneſſe of hart in not acknowledging Chryſt the end and ſpirit of the lawe, continueth in the reading of the old Teſtament, neyther is this veyle taken away, whiche is abolished by Chryſtes ſpirit. For Chryſt hath reueled him ſelfe too vs by his ſpirit. j Cor. ij. But aſſoone as the Iſraelites shall bee conuerted vntoo the Lord, that is too wit vntoo Chryſt, the veyle shall be takē away, that is too wit, ye blindneſſe of mynd which kéepeth them frō knowing Chryſt: and they ſhal rightly acknowledge Chryſt the ende of the lawe, whom only GOD hath made our wiſdome, rightuouſneſſe, holyneſſe, and redemption,

that he whiche glorieth may glorie in the Lorde. The Lord is that quickening ſpirit, or Chriſt is the ſpirit and lyfe of the Lawe, too whom thoſe that bée conuerted doo vnderſtand that the ceremonies and figures of Moyſes Lawe were but ſhadowes of the good things too come, and that the bodye of them was Chryſt. Coloſ. ij. Ebr. x. and that the morall law is the letter that killeth, or which pronounceth the ſentence of death and eternall damnation ageinſt this corrupt nature: and that wée bée not able too begin obedience of the lawe ſo as it may pleaſe God, but if Chryſtes ſpirite or God himſelfe ſhyne in vs, and make our hartes comfortable too him. Now where ſoeuer the ſpirit of the Lorde, that is too ſay, of Chryſt dwelleth and woorketh, there is freedome, from the Lawe, from ſinne, from Gods wrath, and from euerlaſting curſedneſſe: and there is kindled new ryghtuouſneſſe and lyfe acceptable too God, which ſhall cōtinue world without end. But all wee, (that is too wit, as many as are cōuerted vntoo Chryſt, and embrace his Goſpell by fayth,) beholding (& in our harts as it were in a myrrour receyuing by faith) doo rightly acknowledge, the glorie of the Lorde, that is too ſay, Chriſt, (for ſo is Chriſt named Exo. xxxiij. Eſai. lx. Ebr. j. Iohn. j. and in other places) or the true light and glorie of Chryſt, with his face open, that is too ſay, cléerely, and manifeſtly without any veyle, without any miſtineſſe, & without any comberance: and being ſet frée by the ſpirit of the Lord, or by Chryſt himſelf, are chaunged intoo the ſame likeneſſe, that the like new light or true knowledge of God, true rightuouſneſſe, holyneſſe, and lyfe, as ſhyneth in Chryſt, may bée kindled and framed in vs alſo, from glorie too glorie, that is too ſay, with encreaſement and augmentation of new light, rightuouſneſſe and lyfe from time to time, by the light of the Lordes ſpirit ſhyning in vs. The terme of glorie or glorification, whiche Paule vſeth in this Sermon, is taken out of Exod. xxxiiij. where it is written of Moyſes departing from communication with the Lord, Cicaran or panau, that is too

ſay, that his face gliſtered like vntoo a horne. This haue the threeſcore and ten interpreters tranſlated thus, that the beautie of the ſkin of his face was glorifyed, that is too ſay, that the ſkin of his face was become cléere, gliſtering, and bright, like the ſhyning Sunne. Of this tranſlation of the threeſcore and ten Interpreters, did Paule borow the woord glorie, in this compariſon of his: which thing it is good for the reader too beare in mynd.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the .xiij. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. Gal. iij.
                  
                     BRethren, I will ſpeake after the manner of men. Though it bee but a mannes Teſtament, yet no man deſpiſeth it, or addeth any thing thereto, when it is once alowed. To Abraham and his ſeede were the promiſes made. He ſayeth not in the ſeedes, as many: but in thy ſeede, as in one, which is Chryſte. This I ſay, that the law which began afterward, beyond foure hundred and thirtie yeeres, doth not diſanull the teſtament that was confirmed afore of God vnto Chriſtward, to make the promiſe of none effect. For if the inheritaunce come of the lawe, it commeth not then of promiſe. But God gaue it vntoo Abraham by promiſe. VVherefore then ſerueth the Lawe? The lawe was added bycauſe of tranſgreſsion (till the ſeede came too which the promiſe was made) and it was ordeyned by Aungels in the hande of a Mediatour. A Mediatour is not a mediatour of one But GOD is one. Is the Lawe then ageynſt the promiſe of God? God forbyd. Howbeit, if there had bin a Lawe giuen which could haue giuen lyfe: thē no dout rightuouſneſſe shold haue come by the law.

But the Scripture concluded all things vnder ſinne, that the promiſe by the fayth of Ieſus Chryſte, should bee giuen too them that beleeue.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THe Epiſtle is of thoſe ſort that inſtruct. For the doctrine therof concerneth mannes iuſtification before God. The propoſition that conteyneth the ſumme of the Epiſtle is: Wee are iuſtified before God for Chryſts ſake only, freely by faith, and not for our own good woorkes.
                  
               
               
                  The Arguments wherewith he confirmeth this propoſition are three.
                  FIrſt, of the weightyneſſe of the woords. The Teſtament or promiſe of God, is out of all dout, true, certein, vnchaū
                     geable, and too bée vnderſtood ſimply as the woords ſound.
                  Gods Teſtament or promiſe deliuered vntoo Abraham, In thy ſeede shall all nations bee bliſſed, affirmeth by expreſſe woords, that Bliſsing, that is too wit, remiſſion of ſinnes and euerlaſting ſaluatiō is giuen, not in ſeedes as in many, that is too wit, not partly for Chryſtes ſake and partly for our owne good woorkes: but onely for the one ſéede, whiche is Chryſt.
                  
                     Ergo, it is a true, certein and vnchaungeable ground, that wée are iuſtified or accepted as rightuouſe before GOD, for Chryſtes ſake onely, by faith onely, and not partly by faith for Chryſtes ſake, and partly for our owne good woorkes.
                  Paule amplifieth the firſt propoſition, by a matter of leſſe likelyhod, or force, thus:
                  If it bée not lawfull too alter the Teſtament or laſt will of a man: much leſſe is it lawfull too alter the Teſtament or will of God.
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond argument is of things that hang not togither.
                  FOr yf the inheritaunce come by the law, then is it not by promis, but God graūted it to Abraham by promis.
                  This argument may bée included in this Syllogiſme.
                  
                     Whatſoeuer is giuen by the law as a wages, eyther for our own obedience to the law, or for our own workes and deſertes, is not giuen fréely by the promis taken hold vppon by fayth onely.
                     The heritage of rightuouſneſſe and eternall lyfe, is giuen fréely vnto Abraham by promis.
                     
                        Ergo the inheritaunce of rightuouſneſſe and eternall lyfe befalleth not by the law, or is not giuen for our own woorkes or our obedience towardes the law.
                  
                  This argument dooth Paule amplifye with two preuentions.Obiection ageynſt Iuſtification by fayth onely. Of which the firſte is this: The Teſtament or promis that was made to Abraham concerning Chriſte, was ratified and approued by God foure hundred &. xxx. yéeres before the publiſhing of the law. Ergo after the deliueraunce of the law our obedience towards the law, or our good works alſo, muſt néedes mete to iuſtification.
                  To this obiection Paule aunſwereth thus: that the teſtamētAunſwer to the ſayd obiection. which was ratified before by God through Chriſt or the promis of frée reconcilement, is not made voyde or diſanulled by the lawe, but that it continueth alwayes ſtedfaſt & vnmouable, without putting any thing to it, or taking aught away from it by the publiſhing of the law.
                  Hereuppon riſeth the ſecond obiection. To what purpoſeAn other obiection. is the law then? why was it made by God yf it iuſtifie not, ne bée néedfull to ſaluation? Paule aunſwereth: it was added bycauſe of tranſgreſsion, that is to ſay, for this cauſe was the law made that it ſhould ſhew, accuſe, and condemne the ſinne that ſticketh in vs, and driue vs too ſeeke the ſéede Chriſt, who was made ſinne for vs, that we

might bée made the rightuouſneſſe of God in him. Out of this aunſwer is buylded the third argument, of the effects hanging vppon it.
                  If the law coulde deliuer from death, and reſtore lyfeAnſwer of the ſayd obiection. and effectuall comfort, then might wée bée iuſtified alſo by the law.
                  But the law can not deliuer men from ſinne & death, and reſtore lyfe.
                  
                     Ergo it is impoſſible for vs too bée iuſtified by the lawe.
                  He proueth the minor or ſecond propoſition thus. The law promiſeth or giueth eternal life to all thoſe that yeld perfect obedience without any ſinne.
                  But the ſcripture hath cloſed all things vnder ſinne, that is to ſay, the woord or law of God, conuinceth, accuſeth, and condemneth all men, that they are defiled with ſinne, and giltie of Gods wrath and endleſſe damnacion.
                  
                     Ergo the law deliuereth no man from eternall death, neyther can it giue lyfe: but the promiſed rightuouſneſſe and life is giuen fréely through fayth in Ieſus Chriſte, too them that beléeue.
                  This is the diſpoſement of this Epiſtle, in which there appeare chéefly two places of doctrine, which are alſo the cheef places throughout all the Chriſten doctrine.
                  The one is the glad tydings, or promis of remiſſion ofThe Goſpel. ſinnes, rightuouſneſſe, and lyfe euerlaſting, too bée fréely beſtowed vppon them that beléeue for the onely one ſéede of Abraham our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
                  The other is, the law giuen of God, to ſhew, accuſe, andThe Law. condemne ſinne, and to driue men to true repentaunce or ſoryneſſe for theyr ſinnes committed, and the ſéeking of help at the ſonne of God the Mediator ſhewed in the promis.
                  Therfore the definitions of the law and the Goſpell, and the foure differences of the law and of the Goſpell, taken of the forme of vnderſtanding, of the forme of the promiſes,

of the effectes, and of the obiectes, and alſo a declaracion of the cauſes and effectes of the law & the Goſpell, may be repeted in this place out of the Catechiſme.
                  The promis concerning Chriſte made vnto AbrahamWhat things are conteyned in the promis made to Abraham, concerning Chriſt. in theſe woordes, In thy ſeede ſhall all nacions bee bliſſed. Gen. xij. is bréefly declared alredy, where wée haue harde that the cheef places of the Goſpell are conteyned in it. Firſt concerning Chriſtes perſon, in whiche the twoo natures of man (borne of the ſéede of Abraham & Dauid, as touching the fleſh,) and of God (enduing the churche with heauenly bliſſing and taking away ſinne and death, are verely & perſonally vnited togither. Secondly of Chriſtes office & benefites, which are compriſed in that one worde bliſsing. For bliſſing ſignifieth deliueraunce from curſe,Bliſſing. from Gods wrath, from ſinne, & from eternall death: and the frée giuing of lyfe and rightuouſneſſe euerlaſting. For ſo dooth Paule himſelf interprete the word. Galat. iij. and Ephe. j. and Peter alſo. Act. iij. Thirdly of the difference of the law and the Goſpell. The law is a doctrine that curſeth,The Law. as it is written, Curſed is euery one that cōtinueth not in all the things that are written in the booke of the law. But the Goſpell bringeth heauenly and euerlaſtingThe Goſpel. Iuſtification. bliſſing, promiſed fréely for Chriſtes ſake. Fourthly of Iuſtification or remiſſion of ſinnes and eternall ſaluacion which may befall vs for the one onely ſéede of Abraham, which is Chriſt, or by fayth only: and not in many ſéedes, that is to ſay, partly for Chriſtes ſake through fayth, and partly for our owne good workes. Fifthly Paule in expoundingFayth. the promis made to Abrahā, ſheweth in this chapter, the applyment of Chriſtes benefits in theſe words. They that are of fayth, y• is to ſay, they y• beléeue, are bliſſed, asThe ealling of the Gentiles. Originall ſinne. faythful Abrahā was. Sixthly of the calling of y• Gentiles. Seuenthly, of original ſin. For all y• promiſes & commaūdementes of God are to be vnderſtood with a certeine contrarietie, as thus: God promiſeth his bleſſing too all men

for Chriſtes ſake: Ergo all men are curſed for ſinne before. And eyghtly, the Article of our Créede concerningChriſtes incarnation. Chriſtes conception and birth of the virgin Marie may bée buylded out of this promis. For ſeeing it was of neceſſitie that the promiſed deliuerer, who beyng bliſſed himſelf ſhould bliſſe others, muſt be voyd of al ſinne: & that al which are cōceyued of mans ſeede, are borne defiled with ſin: It foloweth that Chriſt was not conceyued & borne of mans ſéede.
               
               
                  Concerning the law there be foure admoniſhments or leſſons in this Epiſtle.
                  THe firſt is of the time of the publiſhing of the law vpponThe time of the publiſhing of the law. mount Sinay, that is to wit, the foure hundred & thirtith yeare after that the ſéede Chriſte was promiſed to Abraham. Now, the firſt promis concerning the ſéede was reueled to Abraham. Gen. xij. in the thouſand &. xxiij. yeare of the world, the thrée hundred thréeſcore & ſeuenth yeare after the floud, the thréeſcore and fiftéenth yeare of Abrahams age, & a thouſand nyne hundred & fortye yéeres before Chriſt was borne. Now from the deliueraunce of the promis concerning the ſéede, which was the .lxxx. yéere of Abrahams age. Gen. xij. vnto the byrth of Iſaac, were xxv. yéeres. Gen. xxj. from Iſaac to the birth of Iacob, thréeſcore yéeres. Gen. xxv. from the birth of Iacob, vnto the goyng down into Egipt (which was the .xxxix. yéere of the age of Ioſeph,) are a hundred & thirty yéeres. Gen. xlvij. From the going down into Egipt, to the death of Ioſeph are thréeſcore and eleuen yeares. Gen. l. From the death of Ioſeph, to the birth of Moyſes, are thréeſcore and foure yéeres. From the birth of Moyſes, to the departure out of Egipt, & the publiſhing of the law, are. lxxx. yeares. And ſo the whole number is foure hundred and thirtie yeares.The vſe and effect of the moral Law.
                  
                  The ſecond admoniſhement, is concerning the propre. vſe and effect of the morall law, which was added, bycauſe of
                     
                     tranſgreſsion, and not to iuſtifie men▪ & bring them to lyfe and ſaluacion euerlaſting: neyther alonly to reſtreyne mens miſdooings and offences, and to repreſſe them and hold them ſhort with commaundementes and penalties, nor too bée a chaſtiſement of wilfull and vnwilfull offences, as Demoſthenes defineth it: but to augmente mens tranſgreſſions or ſinnes, and to make them greater, by ſhewing vs the hugeneſſe & horribleneſſe of our ſinnes, and of Gods wrath ageynſt ſinne, whiche things wée knew not of before, and by horrible accuſing, fraying▪ and condemning men for ſinne, and to worke moſt ſorowfull diſmayedneſſe and deſpayre in our harts, vntill the promiſed ſeede do come, and that the comfort of fayth bée kindled in the hart. As for example, the voyce of Gods law bewrayed, accuſed, and encreaſed the tranſgreſſion of Adam and Eue, and ſtrake them with horrible dreadfulneſſe and feare, vntill the promis of the ſéede that ſhould come, was vttered, by truſt wherof they were deliuered out of the dread of ſinne, death, & the curſe of the law. Of this ſpirituall & chéef vſe of Gods law, Paule ſpeaketh in this Epiſtle, & he enlighteneth it with many woords in the Epiſtle to the Rom. the v. vij. &. viij. chapters. The law entered in, y• ſinne might abound. Alſo, what ſhal wée ſay? Is the law ſin. God forbid. But I had not knowen what ſinment, yf it had not bin for y• law▪ For I wiſt not that luſt was ſinne, yf the law had not ſayd. Thou ſhalt not luſt. For without the law, ſinne is dead. Alſo, by the law ſinne becommeth out of meaſure ſinfull. And ageyn, the law is the power of ſinne.
                  The third admoniſhment is of the efficient cauſe orThe Author of the law. the author of the law that is publiſhed. The law was ordeyned by Angelles, or deliuered by the miniſterie of Angels vpon mount Sinay, as it is ſayd. Act. vij. Moyſes was in the church in the wilderneſſe, wt the Angell ſpeaking too him vpon mount Sinay, who receyued the worde of lyfe

that was too bee giuen to vs, but your fathers would not obey him. Alſo▪ Ebr. ij. For yf the woord that was ſpoken by Angelles was ſtedfaſt, and that all tranſgreſſion and diſobedience hath receyued iuſt rewarde, howe ſhall wée eſcape, yf wée neglect ſo great ſaluacion vttered by ye lord the very ſonne of God: The ſame ſetting togither of contraries dooth Paule vſe in this place.
                  The promis was ſpoken vntoo Abraham immediatly from God himſelf: but the lawe was vttered by his ſeruaunts the aungels, and that, in the hand of a mediator, which was Moyſes, who in Deut. v. ſayeth thus: I was a meane & went betwixt you & God at that time, & brought you woord what he ſayd: for you were afrayd of the fyre, & went not vp into the mount. Now ſéeing that the people was not able to abyde ſo much as to heare the voyce of the law, & much leſſe the thunder & lightning of Gods wrath darted forth by the law: It is an euidēt matter that theyThe Mediator of the law. are not iuſtified by the lawe: but that they haue neede of the true Mediator (of whom Moyſes was a figure) too go betwéene the two parties, that is to wit betwéene God, who beyng wroth with ſin, beateth mens hartes a péeces with the curſe of the law as it were with a peſtle or with thunder, and men, (who are giltie of ſin & ſubiect to Gods diſpleaſure: to thintent yt he participating both ye natures of Godhead & manhood, may vndertake Gods diſpleaſure for vs, & by his intreatance & merite ſatiſfie Gods iuſtice, & ſet vs in his good fauour & grace. For a mediator is not of one, but goeth betwixt two parties, (namely God & man) that were at debate, whiche debate the law diſcouereth, nouriſheth, encreaſeth & confirmeth by be wraying, accuſing, & condēning ſin. But God is one, who of his excéeding great & frée goodneſſe hath made a promis of the ſéede, and ſent his beloued ſon, that he by taking mans nature vppon him, ſhould take away ye debate, & the curſe of ye law, & giue to ye beléeuers ye bliſſing or rightuouſneſſe & lyfe that

was promiſed to Abraham. Héere may the whole doctrine concerning the mediator▪ & concerning the office and benefites of the Mediator Chriſt, and of the cauſes why it behooued the twoo natures too bée vnited in the Mediator, bée repeted.
                  Fourthly, Paule anſwereth to this queſtion, whitherThe law a leader to the Goſpell. the law ſtriue ageinſt ye promis of ye Goſpell, bycauſe wée are iuſtified not by ye law, but by ye promis. And he aduoucheth, yt the law is not only nothing ageynſt ye teſtament or promis concerning Chriſt: but alſo that it confirmeth it, yea & moſt manifeſtly proueth, that men muſt of neceſſitie be iuſtified by ye frée mercy of God, onely for Chriſtes ſake. For in aſmuch as gods law and the whole ſcripture conuinceth all men to be vnrightuous, & defiled with ſin, & ſubiect to Gods wrath & endleſſe damnacion: It is euident that ye law it ſelf beareth witneſſe, that no man can be iuſtified before God, for his own worthineſſe & clenneſſe. Therfore let no man vpon truſt of his own ſtrēgth, his own vertues, or his own deſeruings, hope to obteyne rightuouſneſſe & euerlaſting lyfe, in any other thing than in the onely free promis, or in Chriſt onely.
               
            
            
               Vpon the .xiiij. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Galat. v.
                  
                     I Say, walke in the ſpirite, and fulfill not the luſt of the fleſh. For the fleſh luſteth contrary to the ſpirite, and the ſpirite contrary to the fleſh: theſe are contrary one to the other, ſo that ye can not doo whatſoeuer yee woulde. But and yf yee bee ledde of the ſpirite, then are yee not vnder the lawe. The deedes of the flesh are manifeſte, whiche are theſe: adultrye, fornicacion, vnclenneſſe, wantonneſſe, worshipping of Images, witchcraft, hatred, variaunce, zele, wrath, ſtrife, ſedicions, ſectes, enuying, murder, dronkenneſſe, gluttonye, and ſuche like.

Of the which I tell you before, as I haue tolde you in times paſt, that they which committe ſuch things, shall not be inheritors of the kingdome of God. Contrarily, the fruyte of the ſpirite is loue, ioy, peace, long ſuffering, gentilneſſe, goodneſſe, faythfulneſſe, meekeneſſe, temperaunce. Ageynſt ſuch there is no law. They truely that are Chriſtes, haue crucified the flesh with the affections and luſtes.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of thoſe ſortes of caſes that perſuade. For it is an exhortacion to good workes or new obedience agréeing with Gods will: amplyfied with two figures, Antitheſis and Diſtribution. And the ſtate or propoſition of the Epiſtle enlightned with the Antitheſis, is this ſentence. VValke in the ſpirite, and fulfil not the luſtes of the flesh, that is to ſay, obey the holy Ghoſt, which ruleth youre intentes, endeuers and dooings, that they may agrée with the will or lawe of God, and welter not in ſinne, or the lewde inclinacions and affections of nature corrupted and vnrenewed by the holy Ghoſte, or too ſpeake ſhortly, do good woorkes and eſchue ſinne.
                  
                  Eyther member of this propoſition, Paule declareth & enlargeth with a diſtribution of the generalitie into his particulars. Now let the termes be vnderſtood aright.
                  
                     The ſpirite ſignifieth God the holy Ghoſte, and all newThe ſpirite. motions of true feare, fayth, and loue of God, and of all other vertues ſtirred vp by the holy Ghoſte. For to this end is the holy Ghoſte poured out into the hartes of the beléeuers, that he ſhould do away ſinne, and kindle new rightuouſneſſe & conuerſation agréeing with Gods will. To walke, is the ſame thing that to liue, or to rule the purpoſesTo walke. Fleſh and déedes of the whole lyfe. Flesh ſignifieth the whole nature of man vnrenewed by fayth and the holy Ghoſte. Luſt of the flesh, ſignifieth not onely the inordinate deſires of the ſenſes or of the affections in the hart,Luſt of the fleſh.
                     
as vnlawefull loues, hatredes, yrefulneſſe, and the flames of ſenſualitie: but alſo it ſignifieth in the will, the turning from God, diſtruſt, careleſneſſe in neglecting the diſpleaſure and iudgement of god, and ſtanding in a mās owne conceyt: and in the mynd, ignorance, & doutfulneſſe concerning the béeing and will of God &c. All this whole confuſed heape of original and inward actual miſchéeues, the Scripture comprehendeth vnder the terme of luſt or concupiſcence, of which the verſe of Crates may moſt truly bée verified: Of euils all that may bee founde, Concupiſcence or lust is grounde. But to good purpoſe and méening ſayeth Paule, fulfil not the luſtes of the flesh, For euen in all the Saincts there remayneth concupiſcence of the fleſh, that is too wit, many ſinful inclinations and deſires: darkneſſe in the mynde: and doutfulneſſe, diſtruſt, carnall careleſneſſe, and ſtanding in a mans owne conceyte, in the wil, and a great 
                        •
                     able of ſinful pangs and affectiōs in the hart. Theſe miſchéefs like deadly foes kéepe warre in our mindes ageinſt the ſpirite and ageinſt the good motions that are ſtirred vp by the holy Ghoſt, as in Rom. vij. Paule deſcribeth this fyght of the fleſh ageinſt the ſpirit, with many words: and alſo they prouoke and enforce vs to outward ſinnes. Howbeit theſe workings of the fleſhe muſt not bée fulfilled, but muſt be kept down and mortified by the holy Ghoſt (who ruleth the mynd, will, and hart) that they may willingly and with a true intent exerciſe the dedes or vertues agréeing with the will or law of God. For they that are led by the ſpirite, are no longer vnder the lawe, or vnder ſinne, which is accuſed & condemned by the law, neyther perfourme they their obedience too God by compulſion and conſtraynt of the law, but of a frank and freeharted willingneſſe of their owne.
                  Paul diſtributeth the woorks of the fleſh and of the ſpirite, or ſinnes and good woorkes into certeine particulars, which may bée referred too agréeable precepts of the Ten

commaundementes. The manifeſt deeds of the flesh he namethThe deedes of the fleſh. ſinnes or wickedneſſes which men cōmit wittingly and willingly, or which the dooer knoweth to bée ſinne, and ſinneth wilfully. For he putteth a difference between their ſynnes that are doone ageynſt conſcience (whiche dwell not in the ſaintes) and the ſins of ignorance, naturall infirmitie, darkneſſe, and the ſinfull heates which oftentymes happen ageinſt mens wills. The firſt four kindesWhordome. 
                     Aduoutry, fornication, vncleneneſſe, and wantonneſſe, doo fight ageinſt the ſixt commandement, and the vertue contrary to them is chaſtitie. The fifth kynd of the works of the fleſh Idolatrie, comprehendeth all ſinnes ageinſt theIdolatrie. firſt table, as falſe opinions concerning God, hereſies, ſuperſtitions, and al worſhippings and ſeruings of God choſen without the warrant of Gods word, as Maſſes, Moonkiſhe toyes. &c. The contrary vertue is true godlineſſe, or fayth and true woorſhipping of God. The ten termes orTen other ſinnes or deeds of the fleſh and their cōtraries. ſinnes folowing. 1. Witchcraft, 2. hatred, 3. variance, 4. ſpitefulneſſe, 5. wrath, 6. ſtrife, 7. ſeditions, 8. ſects, 9. enuying, 10. and murther, fyght all ageynſt the fyfth commaundment. And the contrary vertues are, Ryghtfulneſſe, whiche hurteth not an other mans lyfe, body, or good name: fréendſhip, deſire of cōcord & méekneſſe. The expoſition of euery of theſe woords & their differences may be taken out of the expoſition of the ten cōmandements or out of my rules of lyfe. The laſt two kindes, Drunkenneſſe and gluttonie, may inDrunkenneſſe and gluttonie. likewiſe bée referred to the ſixt commaundement, and the contrary vertue is Stayedneſſe or ſobrietie.
                  In the ende he addeth an argumente of diſcommoditie or of euerlaſting paynes. They that giue themſelues too theſe ſinnes ſhall not receiue the heritage of Gods kingdome, but ſhall bée caſt into endleſſe torments.
                  
                     The frutes of the ſpirit, or the vertues that pleaſe God,The frutes of the ſpirite which are kindled in the godly by the holyghoſt, are Loue.
                     1. The loue of God and our neighbor, which comprehendeth moſt

of the vertues of the firſt and ſecōd table. For Loue is the fulfilling of the law. Rom. xiij. and j. Cor. xiij. 2. and. 3. Ioy and peace, or quietneſſe and gladneſſe of the hart ſetled inIoy and peace. God, and perſuading a man aſſuredly, that God is at one with him, and at hand with hym, helping him, and giuing hym lyfe and gladneſſe euerlaſting for Chryſtes ſake. 4.Long ſufferaunce. 
                     Long ſufferance or pacience, beareth with other folks infirmities, and with wrongs doone, and is not diſcouraged with myſdealings or other ouerthwarte things, that it ſhould doo ageynſt any of Gods commaundements, and it perteyneth too the firſt and the fifth commaundement. 5.Gentleneſſe. 
                     Gentleneſſe or curteſie yéelding it ſelfe willingly to other folks to vſe, and willingly dooing good to others, perteyneth to the ſeuenth and fifth commaundements. 6. Goodneſſe
                     Goodneſſe or vprightneſſe. or vprightneſſe, hurting no man & endeuering too doo good and to profit all men, is of as greate force as vniuerſall ryghtuouſneſſe, whereof men are called good. And it comprehendeth chéefly liberalitie and courteſie. 7. Faith orFaith. true knowledge of god & truſt ſettled in Chriſt the mediator, or faythfulneſſe performing cōſtācie in woord & deed, and in true mutuall good will and all dutifull poyntes of Fréendſhyp, and déemyng fréendly of other mennes willes and meenyngs, perteyneth to the fifth commaundement. 8. Meekneſſe, bryd
                        •
                     yng wrath & deſire of reuengeMeekeneſſe. perteyneth lykewyſe too the fyfth commaundement. 9. diſcreteneſſe, ſoberneſſe, ſtayedneſſe, temperaunce or chaſtitie,Diſcreetneſſe. perteyneth to the ſixth commaundement. From thence therefore may a more plentyfull expoſition of the vertues bée fetched.
                  
                     Ageinſte ſuche there is no lawe, that is too ſay, the LaweWho be vnder the law, and who be not. prohibiteth not theſe woorkes, or there is no Lawe appaynted for the ryghtuous, whiche are guyded by the holy Ghoſte: That is too ſay, the Lawe dooth not accuſe or condemne the ryghtuous, neyther dooth it holde ſhorte or conſtreyne thoſe that are obediente. But as for

thoſe that fulfill the luſtes of the fleſhe, or forbeare outward offences ageynſt their willes, thoſe dooth the Lawe reſtreyne, accuſe, and condemne.
                  
                     They truly that are Chryſtes, haue crucified the fleſh with the affections and luſtes therof, that is too ſay, thoſe that bée godly in déede or that beléeue in Chryſt, fulfil not the luſts of the fleſh or their ſinfull inclinations and affections, but doo keepe them vnder and reſtreine them, and mortify thē with the ſpirite as is ſayd Rom. viij. If ye mortifie the déedes of the fleſh by the ſpirite, yée ſhall liue.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the .xv. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. Gal. v.
                  
                     IF yee liue in the ſpirit, let vs walk in the ſpirit. Let vs not bee vaineglorious, prouoking one another, and enuying one another. Brethren, if any man be fallen by chance into any fault, ye which are ſpirituall, help to amend him in the ſpirit of meekneſſe, conſidering thy ſelfe leſt thou alſo be tempted. Beare ye one anothers burthen, and ſo fulfil the law of Chriſt. For if any man ſeme to himſelf that he is ſomwhat, when he in dede is nothing: the ſame deceiueth himſelfe in his imagination. Let euery man proue his owne worke, and then shall he haue reioycing in his owne ſelfe, and not in another. For euery man shall beare his owne burthen. Let him that is taught in the woord, myniſter vnto him that teacheth him in all good things. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked. For whatſoeuer a mā ſoweth that shall he reape. For he that ſoweth in the flesh, shal of the flesh reape corruption. But he that ſoweth in the ſpirite, shall of the ſpirite reape life euerlaſting.
               
               
                  
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle perteineth to the kind of caſes that is perſuaſiue. For it conteyneth precepts & exhortations too good works, and namely too modeſtie and new obedience.
                  
                     The parts or cheef places are two.
                     1 Of modeſtie and lowlyneſſe which reſtreineth pride, and beareth with the infirmities and blemiſhes of the brethren, and performeth faythfulneſſe and diligence in executing aryght the duties of a mans calling, which true glorie (that is too ſay, the witneſſe or allowment of a mannes own conſcience iudging aryght) dooth always accompany of it owne accord.
                     2 Of thankfulneſſe and courteſy too bée vſed towardes all the godly, and ſpecially towards ſchoolemaſters, and miniſters of the Goſpell.
                  
                  
                     IN the beginning of the Epiſtle is ſet a general exhortation vntoo new obediēce, If we liue in the ſpirit, let vs walk in the ſpirite, that is too ſay, ſéeing wée be deliuered from euerlaſting death by the ſonne of God and the holy ghoſt, and that new lyfe is kindled in our hartes, let vs alſo reuerently obey the holy ghoſt dwelling in our hartes, and directing oure intentes and the dooings of our lyfe according to the rule of Gods lawe.
                     
                        Let vs not be deſirous of vaynglorie prouoking one an other, and enuying one an other.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of lowlyneſſe or modeſtie.
                  MOdeſtie or lowlyneſſe, and the deſire of true prayſeModeſtie or myldneſſe, and how glorie is to be coueted and obteyned. fyght not one ageynſt an other, but are neybour vertues, lyke as are liberalitie and ſparyngneſſe, Grauitie and courteſie or gentleneſſe, iuſtice and mercy or pitifulneſſe. For the deſire of true glory and of a good name, is a vertue commaunded by God, which liking wel of a mans owne worke, (that is too ſay, faythfully executing the duties

of a mannes vocation, and endeuering to doo well too the church and the common weale in their place) obteyneth the allowment of God and his owne conſcience déemyng aright: which is continually accompanyed with the commendation of other good men, iudging aright alſo: as Ionathas. j. Reg. xviij. Ioſeph. Gen. xxxix. and Paule, who though they bée mylde and lowly, do not withſtāding like well of their owne worke, and buzyly and faythfully execute the labors of their vocation. And therfore they obteined the allowment of God and their own conſcience, and the commendation of all godly menne, and of the whole church. This vertue doth God cōmand. Philip. iiij. What ſoeuerthings are of honeſt report, if there bée any vertuous thing, if there bée any cōmendable thing, thoſe ſame haue yée in mynd which yée haue both lerned & ſéen in mée, thoſe things doo yée. Alſo Math. 
                        •
                     . Let your lyght ſo ſhine before men, that they may ſée your good works and glorifie your father which is in heauen. Good name thereforeGood name is to be ſought. muſt of neceſſitie bée ſoughte, euen for this cauſe, that others may by good exāples bée allured to the true acknowledgement of God and the felowſhip of the Churche. But good name cannot bée ſoughte, onleſſe wée alſo earneſtly ſéeke after vertue or true godlyneſſe to Godwarde, and all good woorkes and labours wherby wée may in our vocation deſerue wel of the church and the common weale. For the foundation of true glorye, is excellent vertue:The foundation of trew glory. which is always accompanied with the glorie or cōmendation of good men, and with the enuie of euill men according as one ſayth: Glory accompanieth vertue as the ſhadow doth the body, wherefore too ſéeke glorie, is too ſéeke vertue. And contrarywiſe, by the contempt of good report or glorie, vertue muſt nedes be contemned alſo. And therfore Paule in this place forbiddeth not ſimply the deſyre of Glorie, but the deſire of vayneglorie. For many doo ſéeke after the naked commendation, and the emptie ſhadowe

of glory and prerogatiue, without true vertue. SecondlyFacers and braggers. either they chalenge and face their betters, or elſe deface them, to the intent too ſeeme greater themſelues, by fyndyng fault with them: like as Zoilus defaced Homere, the Tribunes Scipio, and Minutius the maiſter of the horſemen defaced the dictator Fabius. Thirdly they repyneFighters or enuiers. and are ſorie that any other excel them, or are counted better than themſelues, and thereuppon endeuour too put them too a foyle or to ridde them out of the waye, that they themſelues only may bée a flote: as Saule enuyed Dauids glorie, & Pompey enuyed Iulius Ceſars preferment.Preciſians. 4. Or they bée too ſtreyghtlaſed and vnappeaſable towardes ſuch as bée falne or diſteyned with ſome blemiſhes of doctrine or maners, to the entent they themſelues may be counted the better & the holier: as the Nouatians, who vtterly denyed forgiueneſſe too ſuch as fel after baptim.Selfeweners. 5. Or otherwiſe being puft vp with an ouerwéening of their own wiſedom, rightuouſnes & ſtrēgth, ſtand highly in their owne conceyt, & ſet great brags or commendations vppon themſelues: as the Phariſie Luk. xviij. And Pyrgopolinices in Plautus, and Thraſo in Terence. 6. OrBuzybodies. elſe not trying their own worke, they take in hand vnneceſſary and vnrightful dooings out of their vocation, vpon truſte of their owne ſtrength, lyke as Antonie, Pompey, Antiochus the greate, and others haue moued néedeleſſe warres: And in the Church Valentine, Arius, and others haue ſowed ſtraunge opinyons. Theſe ſyxe ſortes of vayne and falſe glorye doothe Saincte Paule forbydde in this place, and willeth men too trye theyr intentes and dooings, and diligently too wey & examin them that they may agrée with the ſquire and rule of Gods wil and commaundement: So ſhall wée haue true glory in our ſelues, that is the recorde and allowment of God and our owne conſcience iudging aright: and wée ſhall not hang vppon the reprofe of other▪ men, or vpon the liking or diſliking of

the vnſkilful multitude. For as Plutark ſaith in the life ofPlutarkes ſaying. 
                     Tmoleon, The action muſt not only be good and iuſt, but the glorie which is ſought therby muſt be ſure and ſtable, that in doing we may be allowed.
                  And Cicero in the ſame méening ſayth: Thou muſt vſeCiceros ſaying concerning glorie. thyne owne iudgment. If thou like thy ſelfe in allowing of right things, then ſhalt thou not only ouercom, but thou ſhalt ouercome all men and all things. Therefore determine vppon this poynt, that honeſtie and nobleneſſe of mynd is alone the beautifulleſt of all things, and ſo much more beautiful, if it paſſe not for the multitude, nor hunt foropen prayſe, but delyght only in it ſelfe. Yea and in myne opinion, all things ſéeme the more commednable, that are doone without vaunting, and without calling of the people too witneſſe. Not for that it is vtterly to be eſchued, (for al weldooings deſyre too bée ſhewed in the open lyght) but for that there is no ſtage more noble for vertue than a mans owne conſcience.
                  This is the chéefe place of the firſte parte of this Epiſtle. And herewithall let conſideracion be had of notable ſentences that concerne the louing and ſofte admoniſhment of ſuche as erre or fall in doctrine or miſbehauior of manners, (according too the proceſſe. Math. xviij.) and the gentle inſtructing and receyuing them ageine: and which concern mildneſſe in bearing with y• blemiſhes and infirmities of other folks, for Gods ſake & the cōmon quietneſſe: and finally which concerne the brydling of ſtatelyneſſe and pride, which fight ageinſt the firſt commandement. Let him which is inſtructed, communicate all good things to him that inſtructeth.
               
               
                  Of thankfulneſſe & wel doing towards al the godly, & ſpecially towards the techers.The expoſition of this word Catachiſme.
                  
                  THe Gréeke woorde Catecheim, ſignifieth proprely too teach or inſtruct by woord of mouth, ſo as ye things giuē
                     
out may be required agein of the lerners. Of echeo to ſound▪ comes Catecheo too herken, or too receiue the ſounde of any man. Thereof commeth Catecheſis which is ſuche a manner of inſtruction, wherein the Doctrine is deliuered too the héerers by woord of mouthe, and the héerers on the other ſide are made too recite and render what they haue herd. Now foraſmuch as this trade of teaching which is doon by examinatiō, is the beſt and moſt profitable: In olde tyme the ſum of the Chriſten doctrine was woont too bée taught after this maner in the Churche too nouices béefore they were baptiſed. And héereuppon remaineth yet the name of Cathechiſme which is vſed for a bréef ſumme of the chriſten doctrine comprehended in a certeine order.
                  Paule in this place willeth his ſcholer or héerer that learnethWhat the lerners ought to render to their teachers. the true Doctrine concerning God, too communicate all good things too his teacher, that is too wit, too render too him ageine true reuerence, foode, cloth, and all duetifulneſſe of a thankfull mynd. And hee addeth arguments of honeſtie and profit, amplyfied with a ſimilitude taken of ſeede tyme and harueſt. God commaūdeth thankfulneſſe toward ſcholemaſters, and looketh vppon our hartes and abilities, & dreadfully puniſheth the choorles, but recompenſeth the liberalitie and other good déedes of the godly, with bounteous rewards. And like as huſbandmen, the more ſéede they ſowe, the greater encreaſe of corne they receiue at harueſt tyme: Euen ſo the bountifuller ſtypend the ſchollers giue too their teachers, ſo muche the greater rewardes (bothe Ghoſtly and bodely) ſhal they bée adorned withal agein at Gods hand. Alſo Paul addeth a generall ſentence concerning the rewardes of liberalitie and other good woorkes. He that ſoweth in the flesh,
                     Sowing in the fleſhe. Reping of corruption. that is too ſay, hée that doothe the déedes of the fleſh, or he that giueth himſelfe too ſinnefull luſtes and wickedneſſe, shall reape corruption, that is too ſay, he ſhall periſhe, and bée caſt intoo euerlaſting Death. But hee that ſovveth in ſpirit, or obeyethSowing in the ſpirit. the holy Ghoſt, ſhall bée rewarded with euerlaſting

rewardes. And therefore euen in this reſpect, let vs endeuer too benefite others with more foreward mindes, and not ſuffer our ſelues too bée diſcouraged with ſome mens vnthankfulneſſe, ſlaunders, and other ouerthwart matters. Héere may bée repeted the whole Doctrine concerning benefiting, out of the ſeuenth of the ten commaundements, and concerning thankfulneſſe out of the expoſition of the fourthe commaundement.
               
            
            
               Vppon the .xvj. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Epheſ. iij.
                  
                     I Deſire that you faint not bicauſe of my tribulatiōs that I ſuffer for your ſakes, which is your praiſe. For this cauſe I bowe my knees vntoo the father of our Lord Ieſus Chryſte, which is father of all that is called father in heauen and in earth, that hee would graunt you, according too the riches of his glory, that yee may bee ſtrengthned with might by his ſpirit in the inner man, that Chryſt may dwel in your hearts by faith, that yee beeing rooted and grounded in loue, might bee able too comprehend with all ſainctes, what is the bredth, length, depth, and height, and too know the excellent loue of the knowledge of Chriſt, that ye might bee fulfilled with all fulneſſe, which commeth of God. Vntoo him that is able too doo exceding aboundantly aboue all that wee aske or thinke, according too the power that woorketh in vs, bee praiſe in the congregation by Chriſt Ieſus, throughout all generations from time too time.
                  Amen.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of that ſorte that is perſuaſiue. For it is an encouragement that they ſhould ſtedfaſtly reteine the

Doctrine of the Goſpell that they had receyued, and not faint for offence of perſecution. And it is a prayer that God will preſerue, confirme, and ſtrēgthen true faith and ſtedfaſt loue among them.
                  
                     The cheefe places of Doctrine therfore are theſe.
                     1 Of conſtancie or continuance.
                     2 Of true Inuocation.
                     3 Of faith which embraceth Chryſt, (that he may dwel in our harts,) & acknowledgeth the largeneſſe of Chriſtes mercy and excéeding great loue towardes vs.
                     4 Of thankes giuing or prayſing God, concerning whoſe almyghtineſſe not tyed too ſecond cauſes, héere is put in a notable teſtimonie, méete too be ſet ageinſt Stoicall madneſſe.
                  
               
               
                  Of the firſt place.
                  
                     I Beſeeche you that you faint not in my tribulations for you,The iudgemēt of the vvorlde concerning ſuch as are afflicted. which is your glory.
                  
                  Like as Cicero in his Oration for Flaccus, giueth his opinion concerning the miſeries of the Iewes, ſaying: this nation hath well ſhewed how déere it was too the God immortall, in that it is ſubdued, in that it is let out too ferme, in that it is reſerued too bondage: So alſo doo the wiſe men in the world iudge of the Church and of euery godly member of the ſame that are oppreſſed with the houge heape of miſeries. Namely that God regardeth not, and much leſſe loueth and receyueth too the felowſhip of eternall lyfe and ioy, men ſo miſerable, néedie, fewe in number, drawne aſunder with inward debates, and laid open to the moſt bitter hatred of the world, and too moſt cruell tormentes, ſuche as in Paules tyme he himſelfe and the reſt of the Apoſtles were, and ſuche as our congregations are in theſe dayes, & the wretched ſoules that are put too deathe for the pure Doctrine of the Goſpell in

Fraunce, in Spaine, and in the kingdome of Naples, like as nowe of late at Montola in the kingdome of Naples, foure ſcore godly men like ſhéepe in a ſlaughterhouſe had their throtes cutte by the hangman at the commaundement of the Romiſhe Biſhop. In this ſorowfull ſhew of the fewneſſe, miſeries, and infirmities of the profeſſers of the goſpel, all men perceyue this encouragement and entreatance of Paules too bée néedfull, leaſt the weaker ſort taking offence at the miſeries, impriſonments, and tortures of themſelues and of other godly folke, ſhould reiect Chryſtes true doctrine. But let them turn away their eyes from the proſperitie, power,What is to bee looked vppon in aduerſitie. authoritie and multitude of the perſecutors, and from the fewneſſe and the miſeries of the godly, & let them ſettle themſelues only vppon the word and the truthe deliuered by God: Like as Noe in tyme of the flud, Loth in Sodom, the Machabées in the time of Antiochus, and Paule and the reſt of the Apoſtles in the time of Nero, held faſt the profeſſion of the true doctrine, though they had neuer ſo many wyſe men and mightie enemies ageinſt them.
                  Conſtancie or continuance is a vertue which abideth firmConſtancie. and ſtable in the true knowledge of Chryſt, and in faith, and in profeſſion of the true doctrine, and cannot be quailed with any proſperities or aduerſities, that it ſhould faynt from the truthe and giue ouer. Now foraſmuch as this ſtoutneſſe of courage and ſtrēgth that yéeldeth not too terrors & torments farre ſurmounteth the power of man: Paule beſéecheth God with moſt earneſt deſire, too ſtrengthen the myndes of the Epheſians with his holy ſpirit, and too ſtabliſh and vpholde their inward man or their fayth in Chriſt. Like as he armed the Apoſtles at that tyme, & now in our dayes Luther with ſtoutneſſe and ſtrength of haultie and inuincible hart, ſo as no threainings and terrors could make them faint, but that they ſpred abrode the true doctrine of the goſpell, though the wiſdome and power of the whole world fretted and fought ageinſt it neuer ſo much.
                  
                     Now Paul in this Epiſtle addeth two reaſons why theyReaſons vvhy vvee ſhould not take offence at perſecution or troubles. ſhould not take offence at his troubles and afflictions, or bée moued too fall away from the true Doctrine. For firſt, I ſuffer theſe afflictions for you or for your ſake: not for any offence of myne, but bycauſe I haue (by preaching the Goſpel) called you Gentyles too the felowſhip of the Churche, and eternall ſaluation too bée giuen fréely for Chryſtes ſake. And by theſe my troubles and bandes, I beare recorde that I doo in very déede and in good earneſt thinke, that the Doctrine of the Goſpell is not a fond fable, but true, aſſured, and taught by God, in the behalfe whereof I endure ſo great miſeries, empriſonment, yea and death alſo. And ſo by mine example I confirme your faith.
                  
                     Ageine, my afflictions are your glorie. That is too ſay, they are not ſlaunderous and ſhamefull too mée or you, they are not ſignes of Gods wrathe and caſting of mée away: But they are things that bée good, healthfull, honourable, and too the glory of Gods Churche, as in the fifth of the Actes, the Apoſtles reioyce that they were counted woorthy too bée put too rebuke for the name of Chryſt. And Romaines the fifth, Paule ſayth, wée glory in afflictions, bycauſe affliction bréedeth patience: patience bréedeth triall: triall hope: and hope of eternall lyfe maketh not a man aſhamed, or diſappointeth not him that hopeth. And the lyghtneſſe of afflictions for the turning of a hand, procureth an ineſtimable weight of glory for euer and euer. j. Cor. iiij.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  
                     I Bowe my knees, muche more weake and féeble is mannesPrayer the refuge in trouble. nature, than that it can of it owne power continue ſtedfaſtly in the true acknowledgement of God and in Faith, and deſpiſe and ouercome the terroures, hatred, impriſonments, and other perils that accompanie the profeſſion of the Goſpell. Therefore let euery one of vs daily make our

hartie and earneſt Prayer vntoo God the father of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, that he wil ſtabliſh and ſtrengthen our hartes with his holy ſpirit, that wée may hold faſt the true acknowment of Chryſt & true faith, euen too our laſt gaſp, according as he hath promiſed: I haue praied for thée that thy faith may not faile. And, my ſhéepe héere my voyce, & I giue them eternall life, & no man ſhal pul them out of my hands. Alſo, God is faithful who ſuffereth vs not to be tēpted aboue our power, but with the temptation maketh a way out, y• we may bée able too endure it. And héer withall let the whole doctrine concerningToo whome and how wee ought to pray. the true calling vppon God bée repeted in this place, which muſt not roue douting too what God a man ſpeaketh, (as Hecuba prayeth in Euripides, O Iupiter who ſo euer thou art, right hard too bée knowne:) nor bée directed too ſurmyſed Gods, or dead men: but muſt ſpeake vntoo the one true God the father of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, who hath diſcloſed himſelfe in his Church by his aſſured woord, by recorde of miracles, and by ſending his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, which was crucifyed and raiſed ageine for vs, that he myght ſet vs at one with the eternall father, and make our requeſtes and prayers welcome and acceptable too him. Of this true GodWhat wee ought to pray for the father of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, and of vs all, (of whom as of their father and creator all Angels and men, and all things viſible and inuiſible in heauē and in earth haue their béeing and preſeruacion:) let vs requeſt not only the ordinarie and flyghtfull commodities of this preſent life: but in eſpecially the ſouereine and moſt néedfull gifts, that according too his rich glorie, and excéeding great goodneſſe, he will giue vs his holy ſpirite, too ſtrengthen vs with faith and ſtedfaſtneſſe in the true acknowledgement of Ieſus Chryſt as touching the inward man, which béeing borne a new by the woord of the Goſpell, and the woorking of the holy Ghoſte, may no more liue after the fleſh, but after the ſprite, that Chryſt may dwell and bée effectuall in vs, in ſuch wyſe that through the feruent and incomprehenſible kyndneſſe or loue

of God towardes vs, (which he hath ſhewed by ſending his ſonne. j. Iohn. iiij. Rom. v.) wée béeing grounded in ſteadie fayth, and faſtened with déepe rootes, may bée able to comprehend what is the bredth, and length, and depth, and heigth of gods excéeding great goodneſſe and mercy towards vs, which he hath ſhewed by ſending his ſonne, whereof is ſpoken in Pſal. Cij. As far as the Eaſt is from the Weſt, ſo farre hath he ſet our iniquities from vs. As high as the heauen is aboue the earth, ſo hyghly is the Lords mercy ſtabliſhed vpon them that feare him. That wee may after ſome ſort know the great and woonderfull loue of Chryſte towardes vs, which is farre more excellent and greater than that man can attaine too it and vnderſtand it. And that wee may bee filled with all fulneſſe of God. That is too ſay, that wée may bée filled too the full with heauenly lyght, wiſdome, ryghtuouſneſſe and lyfe, by God, who ſhall bée all in all, and that God himſelfe dwelling in vs euerlaſtingly, may euermore ſhine in vs, and lyghten and fulfill our hartes with the flames of all vertues.
               
               
                  The fourth place.
                  IN thankes giuing wherewith he cloſeth vp this Epyſtle,Ageinſt Stoical deſtinie. there is a notable text too bée conſidered for men too ſet ageinſt Stoicall deſtinie. For the Stoikes ſurmyſe, that God is bound too ſecond cauſes, or too the order of nature, ſo as he cānot doo otherwyſe thā as the ſecond cauſes doo ſuffer. This imagination which is ſlaunderous to God and hindereth the true calling vpon God in daungers that are vnauoydable by mannes wit, is cléerely confuted by this ſentence of Paules, God is able aboue all things and abundantly too help, beyond all that wee can aske or conceyue. Like as hée helped Moyſes ſtanding at the red ſea, Ezechias beſeeged of Sennacherib, and the thrée Iſraelites in the burning Ouen at Babylon, what tyme they were deſtitute of all mannes ayd and counſel,

and of all ſecond cauſes,) altering the vſuall and accuſtomed order of nature. And this is the peculiar and chéeſe wiſdome of Gods Churche, too ſettle our ſelues in God and his woord by faith, and with quiet mindes ſtedfaſtly too wait for the promiſed deliuerance, euen when wée were vtterly deſtitute of all ſecond cauſes.
               
            
            
               Vppon the .xvij. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Ephe. iiij.
                  
                     I VVhich am a priſoner of the Lordes, exhorte you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherwith ye are called, with al lowlineſſe and mekeneſſe, with humbleneſſe of minde, forbearing one another through loue, and bee diligent too keepe the vnitie of the ſpirit, through the bond of peace, beeing one body and one ſpirite, euen as ye are called in one hope of your calling. Let there bee but one Lorde, one faith, one baptiſme, one God and father of all, which is aboue all, and through all, and in you all.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of that ſort of caſes that perſuade. And the ſtate of it is this. Bee yee one minded. It perteineth to the fifth commaundement of the ten. Moſt weightie ſurely and neceſſarie in all trades of lyfe, is the doctrine that concerneth the cunning too mainteine concord with ones companyons. Which thing is ſet out more lernedly in this Epiſtle than any where elſe. I will therfore tell
                  
                     1 What vertues are chéefly néedfull too the maintenance of concorde.
                     2 Of the cauſes that ought too moue and kindle euery mā too the endeuer of mainteining concorde.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Firſt, Of the vertues that are needfull to the mayntenance of concord.
                  PAule exhorteth the Epheſians and all godly folk, too walkeThe ends of al vocations or callings. woorthye the vocation too which they are called, that is to ſay, too rule all the intentes, endeuers, and dooings of their lyfe in ſuch wyſe, as they may agrée with their calling and the woord of GOD, whereby they are called too the ſetting foorth of Gods glorie, and too mutuall loue and concord. For of all mennes deuyſes and dooings, theſe muſt bée the twoo chéef endes. Firſt, that Gods glorie and the true doctrine cō
                     cerning God, may bée ſpred farre abrode: and ſecondly, that the fellowſhip and concord of the Church may bée cheriſhed, j. Corint. x. Doo all things too the glorie of God, and bée not a ſtumbling blocke too the Church.
                  But the foundation or head and welſpring of all chriſtenThe welſpring of concord. concord, is the agréement in doctrine concerning GOD, like as the ſonne of God prayeth Iohn. xvij. Father, I pray that they may bée one in vs. And héere Paule counſelleth them to endeuer too keepe the vnitie of the ſpirit, that is too ſay, to kéepe a conſent in the one true doctrine which the holy ghoſt hath deliuered too the church. And he reherſeth in order three vertues whereof wee haue neede to the mayntenance of concord with our fellowes. The vnderſtanding of whiche will bée the cléerer, if wée adde notable examples.
                  The firſt is Lowlyneſſe which repreſſeth pryde that pickethLowlyneſſe. quarelles without a cauſe, whereof there are flames in euery man by nature. For eche one coueteth by nature too ſéeme better than others, and too bée reuerenced as Gods among men, and too kéepe downe and darken others, that are thought too ſhadowe their excellencie. Out of this fountayne ſpring moſt or rather all debates in all kindes of lyfe. Therfore ſuch as bée of our companie haue néede of ſuch a lowlyneſſe of mynde, that they may abaſe them ſelues beneath others. Like as Abraham Gen. xiij. although he excelled Loth

his brothers ſonne both in age, wiſdome, vertue, and authoritie, yet giueth he place too him, adding this moſt ſage ſaying, I pray thée lette there bée no quarell betwéene thée and mée: for wée are brothers. Behold, the whole land is before thée, If thou chooſe the right hand, I will take the lefte: or if thou go to ye left hand, I wil goo too the right. So Iacob humbled himſelf too his brother Eſau Gen. xxxiij. So Chryſt the welſpring of vnitie and mutuall loue, abaſed himſelfe beneath all men. Phil. ij. Through humilitie or lowlyneſſe, let eche man think an other better than himſelfe. And let the ſame mynd bée in you, that was in Chryſt Ieſu, &c. Oftentymes alſo there ryſe debats and quarels vpon caſting foorth of reprochefull termes, of witleſſeneſſe, fooliſhneſſe, beggerlineſſe, and raſcalneſſe. But like as the obiecting of ſuch woordes ſpringeth of pryde, ſo dooth the cléering of a mannes ſelfe of them alſo. Therefore they muſt bée vtterly vnregarded, ſet light▪ by, and quietly put vp for the common peace ſake.
                  The ſecond is Meekneſſe, which repreſſeth yrefulneſſeMeekneſſe. and deſirouſeneſſe of reuenge, euen when wée are able too defend our ſelues and too maynteyne ſute: As for example, If thy companion haue vppon ſpyght ſought too diffame thée or too heaue thée out of thy place, and gone about too hurte thée, thou muſt paſſe it ouer, like as Moyſes for putting vp the wrong that Aaron and Marie did him, Numer. xij. is reported too haue bin the méekeſt man that euer was. And Chryſt ſayeth of himſelf: Lerne of mée, for I am méeke and lowly of hart. Dauid is not inflamed with wrathfulneſſe ageinſt Saule, leaſt he ſhould ſtirre vp greater troubles. Ioſeph is not deſirous too bée auenged of his brothers. But Arius burneth as whot as fire with anger and deſire of reuenge ageinſt Alexander, who was preferred before him in ſute for the Biſhoprike, ſo as he troubled the whole Churche with his noyſome doctrine concerning the ſonne of God.
                  
                     The third is Longſufferance or Patience, whereby wéePatience. beare one with another through Charitie. For there ſticke many blemiſhes in all men: As for Example: Some man is more wayward and teſtye, ſome is more deſirous of vayn glorie, ſome is more curiouſe, ſome hath leſſe ſtaye of himſelfe, an other is more giuen too ouerearneſtneſſe, and an other is more yreſome and haſtie. Theſe common fraylties of men muſt wée hyde and beare with, if wée will haue true concord too growe ſtrong and continue. Paule therefore like a moſt wyſe Gouernour, hath put toogither the chéefe ſinewes and limbes of Concorde, and the vertues that are néedfull too the knitting of mennes fellowſhippes in the band of peace. There myght bée made a larger diſcourſe of euery of theſe vertues. And the laying of their contraries too them, and the Examples of things that maynteyne ſocietie, will make the matter both more pleaſaunt, and more large.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  THe cauſes or reaſons whereby the héerers are too bée inReaſons mouing to cōcord flamed too the deſire of cōcord. Now, all men are too bée inflamed too the maintenance of concord with their fellowe cōpanyons and with other men: Firſt, by the moſt ſtreightGods cōmaundement. commaundements of God, which enioyne mutuall loue. Iohn. xiij. and .xv. My cōmaundement I giue vntoo you, that you loue one another. Philip ij. Bée of like affection one too an other, hauing one loue, being of one mynde and of one opinion. j. Corinthians. j. Let there bée no diuiſions among you. Secondly, by the moſt large rewardes which GODRewards that bee promiſed. hath promiſed too ſuch as maynteyne concord. Mathew. v. Bliſſed bée the peace makers, for they ſhall bée called the children of GOD. Thirdly, by the great commodities ofThe commodities and diſcommodities. concord and the vnmeaſurable huge heape of miſeries which diſcord bringeth, bothe in the church, in the common weale,

in houſeholdes, in vniuerſities, and in all the whole lyfe. And fourthly before al things let the ſix reaſons bée conſidered which Paule vſeth in this Epiſtle.
                  
                     Firſt, one bodye and one ſpirit. Like as in mannes bodyeVoitie of body and ſpirit. there bee diuerſe members differing in dignitie and offices, and yet agréeing among them ſelues and too the common vſe of the whole bodye, which doutleſſe are gouerned and moued all by one ſpirit or ſoule: So in the Church there bée diuers members differing in giftes, and yet but one holy Ghoſt the author of this doctrine ſet foorth by the Prophetes and Apoſtles. Therefore let there be concord in your doctrine & wils. This compariſon is handled at length in. j. Cor. xij.
                     2 Likewyſe alſo as you bee called in one hope. All are calledOne hope. too one hope of euerlaſting lyfe. Therefore let there bée vnitie of ſpirit and doctrine and conſent of wils.
                     3 There is one Lord. There is one Lord Chryſt, whomOne Lord. only and alonly the eternall Father hath commaunded vs too héere. Therefore lette vs all embrace this one doctrine taught by Chryſt, and let vs bée one mynded, like as the ſeruauntes of one Maiſter ought too agrée in willes and purpoſes.
                     4 One Faith. There is but one faith of all the godly inOne Faith. all tymes. Therefore let there bée vnitie and conſent in the doctrine of the Goſpell concerning Chryſte, whom faith embraceth. Héere may the whole doctrine of faith bée ſet out, and ſpecially this warning, that the faith and manner of iuſtification and ſaluation of all the Saints from the beginning of the world is euermore al one. Act. xv. Wée beléeue that wée are ſaued by the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, like as our Fathers alſo were ſaued.
                     5 One Baptim. The ſtrength and effectualneſſe of theOne Baptim. Sacraments in the Church of all ages, is alwayes one, and wée haue all bound our ſelues by one Baptim too yéeld faith and obedience too the one Chryſt. Therfore let vs all bée but as one among our ſelues, let vs teache all one thing, and

let vs all profeſſe one thing.
                     6 One God and Father of all. Therefore let vs all bée asOne God. children of one father, of one mynd, and louing one an other like brothers.
                  
                  
                     Who is aboue al. God, who is aboue all things, and whoſe being dooth infinitely differ from the creatures, is preſent euery where, loueth, defendeth and gouerneth all godly folke and all ſuch as are deſirous of concord, and dwelleth in them as in a temple or houſe that he liketh well off.
               
            
            
               Vppon the .xviij. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Cor. j.
                  
                     I Thanke my God alwayes on your behalfe, for the grace of God, which is giuen you by Ieſus Chryſt, that in all things yee are made rich by him, in all vtteraunce, and in all knowledge: by the which things the teſtimony of Ieſus Chriſt was confirmed in you: ſo that yee are behynd in no gift, wayting for the appearing of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt whiche shall alſo ſtrength you too the end, that you may bee blameleſſe in the day of the comming of our Lord IESVS Chryſt.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of thoſe caſes that are demonſtratiue.
                  The ſtate or propoſition of it is. I am glad that it hath bin your good lucke too haue the full and riche knowledge of the Goſpell, whereby you are made parteners of ſaluation and euerlaſting lyfe with Chryſte. It may bée referred too the firſt and ſecond of the ten commaundements.
                  
                     
                     The cheefe places are foure.
                     1 Of mannes ſouerein good, which is the true knowledge of GOD and of his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, according too the Goſpell.
                     2 Of Perſeuerance.
                     3 Of the laſt iudgement.
                     4 Of fréendlyneſſe whiche hath a will too doo other mē good, & reioyceth alwayes in their good ſucceſſes.
                  
               
               
                  Firſt. Of the ſouerein good.
                  SOuerein good, Bliſſedneſſe, Bliſſe, or Bliſfulneſſe (whichesouerein good. is the enioying of the ſouerein good, and the end too whiche man tendeth) are almoſt of one ſignificatiō. Howbéeit, there is great diſagréement not only among the common and vnſkilfull ſort, but alſo euen among the wyſe, What is the ſouerein good of man, which man ought chéefly too ſéeke after, and too the atteynement whereof he ought too employe all his intentes, deuyſes and dooings, and wherein he ought too ſettle.
                  The common ſort, the Country folk, the Noble men, CitizensThe ſouerein bliſſe of worldlings. and Marchant men, déeme monye to bée the ſouerein good, and thoughe they now and then ſpeake ſomewhat diſcretly: yet moſt of them thinke in their hartes, as the Cyclops did in Euripides. Riches are vnto the wiſe men a god, O man, as for other things, they are but fables and pleaſant tales.
                  The Ambitiouſe doo chéefly couet honour and promotion. The Epicures (of whom there is the greateſt number among men,) employe all their endeuer too enioy the pleaſures of the bodye.
                  The ſounder ſort of Philoſophers, ſay that mannes bliſſePhiloſophicall bliſſedneſſe. cōſiſteth in vertue. But yet neyther Ariſtotle in his Ethikes, nor Cicero in his Offices, where they purpoſely make diſcourſe of vertue, doo make any mention of God or of godlyneſſe too Godward, of the feare of God, of faith, of the loue of

God, of prayer, or of thankeſgiuing.
                  
                     Plato teacheth ſomwhat more diuinely, that all mē oughtPlatos doctrine of bliſſedneſſe. too trauell chéefly in this behalf, that they may ſpeake things acceptable to God, and doo things acceptable too God. And he defineth vertue too bée a framing of a mannes ſelf like vntoo God, as much as is poſſible. This is the true end of man according too the Lawe, which teacheth that mānes ſouereine good, is full agréeableneſſe with Gods wil, that is too wit, the true knowledge and glorifying of God, and hartye loue and perfect obedience, as is ſayd in this dayes Goſpel, that the ſouerein cōmaundement of the Lawe is, Thou shalt loue thy Lord God with all thy hart. &c.
                  
                  Now like as if a mā ſhold ſhewe a néedye bodye a wedgeThe law pointeth out true bliſſe, but furthereth not the certainment of it. of gold vppon the toppe of a high Toure, & yet not lend him a ladder wherwithal he might climb vp to the toppe and fetch downe the wedge. So dooth Gods law only poynt men to the ſouerein good without ſhewing vs how wée may come by it, ſith that no man fulfilleth the Lawe.
                  But the Goſpell ſetteth before vs both the ende and the meanes wherby wée may attayn too it, namely Ieſus Chriſt the mediator, who is the way, the truthe, and lyfe, & the doore at which we enter, & ye ladder by which we climb into heauē.
                  Therefore the ſouerein good, is the true knowledge of godThe true ſouerein good. and of his ſonne our Lord Ieſu Chryſt, according to the goſpell. The knowledge of God cōprehendeth (by the figure Synecdoche) all the effects folowing: that is too wit, faith, loue, prayer, prayſegiuing, fruition of light, wiſdome, lyfe, & ioy euerlaſting. For all theſe things dooth. Chryſte comprehend, Iohn. xvij. This is eternall lyfe, that they may acknowledge thée the true God, and Ieſus Chryſte whom thou haſt ſent.
                  For this ſouerein good, dooth Paule reioyce on the behalfe of the Corinthians in this Epiſtle, and he affirmeth them too bée enryched not with the tranſitorie riches of this lyfe, but with the true and euerlaſting riches, that is, with true and

plentuous knowledge of the doctrine of the goſpell, and with ſtedfaſt faith, and with all good things neceſſarie too ſaluation.The cheefeſt richeſſe. For in deed as it is ſayd. j. Tim. vj. The chéefeſt riches that can bée, is Godlyneſſe ioyned with contentation. And in this place: Hée is true, by whom you are called too the fellowſhip of Ieſu Chryſt, that is too wit, that yée might bée the children of God by adoption, and brethren and coheires with Chryſt, of all good things in heauen. Certeinly therefore yée ſhall bée glorified with Chryſt and ſhall bée like vnto him.
               
               
                  The ſecond, Of Perſeuerance.
                  PErſeuerance, is a ſtedfaſt and continuall abyding in thePerſeuerance. true acknowledgement of Chryſt and in fayth euen vnto the laſt gaſpe. Now whereas Chryſte ſayeth: Hée that holdeth out too the end ſhal bée ſaued: and wée in ſo great weakneſſe of nature, in ſo great perilles and through the flyghtes of the Diuell, may eaſly ſlyde and fall away: The godly mynds that are diſtreſſed, demaund how they may continue in true knowledge of God and in faith vntoo the end. Saule fell, whereas erſt he had bin well liked of God, and had bin the dwelling place of the holy Ghoſt. Iudas the Apoſtle fel: Our firſt parents who were created too the Image of God, fell: and finally, there bée examples innumerable in all our lyfe. Therefore, that wée may ſtand ſtedfaſt in the faith, let vs haue theſe moſt ſwéete comfortes alwayes before our eyes. j. Cor. j. Chryſt ſhall ſtrengthen you vntoo the end, that yée may bée blameleſſe in the day of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt. Luc. xxij. I haue prayed for thée Peter, that thy fayth may not fayle. But Chryſt prayeth, not onely for Peter and the Apoſtles, but for all that beléeue their preaching. j. Corint. x. God is faithfull who ſuffereth vs not too bée tempted aboue our ſtrength, but with the temptation maketh a way out, that wée may bée able too endure it. Iohn. xvj. I will pray my Father and he ſhall ſend you an other comforter, which ſhal

fary with you for euer. Let the myndes of the godly (being ſtrengthned with theſe moſte ſwéete promiſes) fight ageynſt wauering and wanhope, and performe diligence in harty prayer, and bée circumſpect and watchfull in eſchuing occaſions of fallyng, and the diuels ſnares & dangers. Let Fayth bee their buckler, prayer their percing dart, and Gods woorde their ſwoorde, and let Chryſte alone with the reſt. He wil ſtrenghthen vs too the end, that though ſinne be ſtil remayning in vs, yet wée may be blameleſſe in the day of our Lorde Ieſus Chryſte, who was made ſin and curſe for vs, that we might be ſet frée from cōdemnation of the law, and bée made the ryghtuouſneſſe of God in him. Rom. viij. There is no damnation too thoſe that walke in Ieſu Chryſt.
               
               
                  The third.
                  COncerning the laſt iudgement, or the day of our LordThe laſte iudgement. Ieſus Chriſt, there is a notable teſtimonie in this Epiſtle, perteyning to this article, From thence he shal come to iudge the quick and the deade. Now the doctrine concerning the laſt iudgemēt may be compriſed in theſe ſix places. 1. Whither there ſhal come any laſt iugement. 2. who ſhall bée the iudge, and howe and when he ſhall come. 3. What ſhall bée the manner and order of the iudgement. 4. Of the rewardes of the ryghtuous. 5. Of the endleſſe pains of the wicked. 6. Of the tyme and of the reſt of the circumſtances of the iudgement.
               
               
                  The fourth. Of Freendlyneſſe.
                  LIke as Paul reioyced vnfeynedly, and from his hart, that the Corinthians were brought to the true knowledge of God, & the felowſhip of the euerlaſting and bliſſed churche. So muſt euery man reioyce in the proſperitie of other men (ſpecially of good men) and bée ſory for their miſchaunces, and wiſhe them wel from the bottom of their harte. This vertue is called Fréendlyneſſe. And

the vices that encounter it, are diueliſhneſſe, ſpyghtefulneſſe, and maliciouſneſſe, of which wée haue ſpoken already in the Expoſition of the vertues of the fifth commaundment.
               
            
            
               Vppon the .xix. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. Epheſ. iiij.
                  
                     BE yee renued in the ſpirit of youre mynd, and put on that new mā which after God is ſhapen in rightuouſeneſſe and true holyneſſe. Wherefore put away lying, and ſpeake euery man truthe to his neighbour foraſmuch as we are members one of another. Bee angrye and ſin not. Let not the Sun go downe vppon your anger, neither giue place too the backbyter. Let him that ſtole, ſteale no more. But let him rather labour with his hands the thing that is good that he may haue to giue vnto him that needeth.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  IT is of thoſe ſort of caſes that are perſuaſiue or exhortatiue. For it is wholly occupied in exhortation vntoo good woorks, concerning which the cuſtomable doctrin included in ſixe places may bee recited. Firſt, whither newe obedience bée néedful. Secondly, which are the works that bée good in déede, that is to wit, not Munkiſh ceremonies, or ſuch lyke ceremonies deuyſed by men: but the works that be commaunded of God, as truth, méekeneſſe, liberalitie, and diligence. Thirdly, what are the efficient cauſes of good woorkes or how they may be performed by vs, ſith we are ſo weake and the Diuell ſo ſtrong. Fourthly, how good works pleaſe God, ſith they be vnperfect and defiled

with many ſinnes: that is to wit, not for our owne worthyneſſe, but for Chryſtes ſake through faith. Fifthly, for what ende good works are to be done, yt is too wit, not too deſerue forgiueneſſe of ſinnes by them, (which is giuen fréely only for Chryſtes merit:) but that wée may yeelde too God our due obedience, that we may glorifie him, that we may eſchue paynes euerlaſting and preſent, and that we may obtaine the rewards that are promiſed. Sixthly, foraſmuchas the good woorks euen of all the ſaincts are diſteined with many ſins: we muſt ſpeake of the difference of the ſinnes that remayne in the ſaincts, and of thoſe that remayne not in the ſaincts.
                  Howbeit bycauſe this Epiſtle conteyneth otherwyſe a moſte plentifull doctrine, and that the phraſe thereof hathe ſome hardeneſſe in it: we wil interprete the very text in order, diuiding it into ſix common places, wherof twoo or thrée maye bée ſtoode vppon ſomewhat longer, ſermonlyke.
               
               
                  The firſt.
                  
                     LAy away from you that old man according to youre former conuerſation, whiche is corrupt thorough the deceiuable luſts, and be ye renued in the ſpirit of youre mynd, and put on that new man which after God is ſhapen in holyneſſe and rightuouſneſſe. The firſt parte is a generall exhortacion to new obedience agreeable to Gods will, or comformable too Gods rightuouſneſſe. This exhortacion is enlarged with an Antitheſis or ſetting togyther of contraries: Lay away ſin, and put on rightuouſneſſe. Or ceaſe too doo euill, and doo good woorkes.
                  
                     The old man, by this name he méeneth all the defaultsThe old mā. in nature, all euill inclinations, affections, and dooings, that agrée not wyth the wyll or lawe of GOD: that is too wit, in the mynde, ignoraunce of God, darkneſſe and doubtefulneſſe concernyng GOD, concernyng the

prouidence, will, and woorde of God, and concerning the promiſes and threatnings of God. In the will, voydneſſe of the feare & loue towards God, and of al vertues which ought to be perfect and earneſt: and alſo euill inclinations ſtanding in ones own conceyt, pryde, & fleſhly careleſnes. And in the hart, a headyneſſe of al affections, flames of vnlawfull loue, of hatred, of deſire of reuenge, and of couetouſneſſe. All this huge heape of ſinne that ſticketh in the nature of man vnrenued, is betokened by the terme olde man, whom in other places he calleth ſomtimes the natural man, ſomtime the outward man, & ſometymes fleſhe.
                  
                  
                     The luſtes of errour or deceyuable luſtes, he nameth all euillDecieueable luſtes. inclinations of corrupted nature, whereby wee are caryed headlong intoo error and ſin, as it is ſayde: Concupiſcence is the fountayn of all euyls, both of the fault and of the puniſhment. For thorough concupiſcence both the cleanneſſe and ſoundeneſſe of the ſoule is marred, and the body is made ſubiect vnto death.
                  To be renued, and to put on the new man are in maner all one. The mynd is renewed when the darkneſſe of ſin isTo put on the new mā. chaced out of the mind by the goſpel and the holy ghoſt, and there is kindled true knowledge of God, true faith, loue, rightuouſneſſe and obedience of al vertues. For vnder the name of mind he comprehēdeth al the powers of the ſoule which the Philoſophers are woont to diſtinguiſh.
                  
                     The new man he calleth him that is renued by the voice of the Goſpell and by the holy ghoſt, who kindleth in mēsThe newe man. minds the light of the true knowledge of God, and al vertues agreable to Gods rightuouſneſſe, ſuche as were in the firſt man that was created after Gods image, before his fall.
               
               
                  The ſecond.
                  HE putteth in a bréefe & moſt lerned definition of Gods image after which mā was created, namely y• it is tru

ryghtuouſneſſe and holyneſſe: and Coloſſ. iij. he writeth that it is the true knowledge of God the creator. Vppon theſe twoo textes wée buylde this true and lerned definition of Gods image.
                  Gods image in the firſt man, was not onely a being ofWhat Gods image is. mynde and will, nor onely a relation or acceptation of mankynde before God: but alſo a qualitie of the ſeconde ſpeciall kynde, that is too ſay a natural ryghtneſſe and excellente perfectneſſe of all the powers of man, as of the mynd, the will, & the hart, agreeing with the firſt pattern or diuine mynde: that is too wit, in the mynd, light (that is a manifeſt knowledge of God the Creator without any darkneſſe or wauering:) In the wil, harty loue of God & all vertues ſtirred vp and blazyng without any ſinful inclinations, and without concupiſcence and fleſhly careleſneſſe: and too be ſhort, true ryghtuouſneſſe and holyneſſe, that is too ſay, vniuerſall obedience agréeing with the wil of God, and directed truly too this ende, that the patterne might be knowne abrode and glorified. And in the hart, ſtayedneſſe and obedience of all the affections and deſires vnto the mynd with continuall and earneſt ioy and gladneſſe ſetled in God.
               
               
                  The third.
                  
                     WHerefore put away lying and ſpeake euery man truth to his neighbour, bycauſe we are members one of another. The doctrine that concerneth the folowing of truthe and the ſhūning of lyes is very large, wherof an abridgement is ſet forth in the expoſition of the eighth commandement. He nameth héere, a lye, not only the ordinary ſpechesWhat lying is. in common conuerſation, whiche agrée not with the things themſelues: but chéefly, falſe opinions concerning God, falſe doctrines and corruptions of the true doctrine Alſo ſlaunders in courtes of plea, vntrouth, backbytings, railings, miſſetalke, fondneſſe, bragging, diſſimulatiōs &c.Truth. Al theſe vyces dooth he wil men to lay away, and contrarywiſe

too embrace truthe, which in the doctrine concerning God, in trades neceſſary for mans lyfe, in iudgmentes, and in all the whole ſtate of lyfe among men, diligently hunteth after, embraceth, loueth, and holdeth faſt true méenings, that is to ſay, méenings that agrée with the things themſelues, ſuch as they be in déede, hating vntruth and ſophiſtry, and in all trades and conuerſations of life, continually ſaying & doing ſuch things as are true, playnly vttered and wholſome: and in manners ſo behauing himſelfe as his ſpeech and his geſturs may be all one with his mynde.
               
               
                  The fourth.
                  
                     BE angry and ſin not. It is ment of méekeneſſe whiche is a vertue that repreſſeth irefulneſſe and deſire of reuenge, and which noriſheth not hatred. The eyght cauſes which ſhould moue vs to refraine irefulneſſe, are reckned vp in the expoſition of the fifth commaundement.
               
               
                  The fifth.
                  
                     GIue no place to the backbyter. It is ment of fréendlyneſſeFriendlyneſſe. whiche is a parte of truthe, and conceiueth no miſtruſt of other folks willes and méenings without a reaſonable lykelyhod, ne nouriſheth ill will, rancoure, ſuſpition, or hatred, nor giueth credit to falſe reports whiche might haue withdrawne the mynd, but maketh tryall of mens willes and méenings by reſonable lykelyhode. Ageinſt this vertue there fyghteth maliciouſneſſe, ſuſpition, diſtruſt, and lyght credite. Of whiche is ſpoken in the fyfth and eight commaundments.
               
               
                  The ſixth.
                  
                     HE that hath ſtolne, let him ſteale no more, but rather letPaynfulneſſe and labour. him labour with his hands the thing that is good, that he may haue to giue to them that neede. It is ment of paynefulneſſe and labour, which is therfore to be endured, that wée may obey god who enioyneth vs labours agréeable to our calling: and that we may eſchue many ſinnes and

wickedneſſes wherof Idleneſſe is the noriſhement, and to get honeſtly things néedfull to the ſuſtentation of oure ſelues and of ours, and too be beſtowed in almes déedes vppon the poore. Ageinſt this vertue fight ſlouthfulneſſe, Idleneſſe, théeuerie, ſluttiſhneſſe. &c. Of which wée haue ſpoken in the .iiij. and .vij. commaundmentes.
                  In the ende let two or thrée of the places that bée expounded moſt at large, bée repeted and committed too the héerers to learne by hart.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋpon the .xx. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. j. Cor. x.
                  
                     TAke heede therefore how yee walke circumſpectly: not as vnwiſe, but as wiſe men, redeming the tyme, bycauſe the dayes are euill. Wherfore, be ye not vnwiſe, but vnderſtand what the wil of the Lord is, and be not drunken with wine, wherein is exceſſe. But be filled with the ſpirit, ſpeaking vnto your ſelues in Pſalmes and Himnes, and ſpirituall ſongs, ſinging and making melodie to the Lorde in your harts, giuing thanks always for althings vnto God the father, in the name of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt: ſubmitting your ſelues one to an other in the feare of God.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is hortator
                        •
                     e, conteyning precepts of good woorkes.
                  
                     The cheefe places are three.
                     1 A generall exhortation too good woorks, that rule all the deuyſes and dooings of oure lyfe with ſingular héede and circumſpectneſſe, ſo as they may agrée with Gods will.
                     
                        2 A precept of ſobriety and of eſchuing drunkenneſſe.
                     3 Of ſongs and muſike too be vſed in Gods ſeruice.
                     4 Of thanks giuing to be yéelded to God.
                     5 Of obedience, lowlyneſſe, and the feare of God.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  
                     WAlke warely, to walke ſignifieth the ſame thing thatTo walke. to leade a mans lyfe or to rule the deuiſes and doings of the lyfe. Bliſſed are they that walke in the lawe of the Lorde: that is, whiche liue accordyng to the doctrine deliuered of GOD, or whiche order their deuiſes and dooings according to Gods woorde all their lyfe long. And Paule in this place counſelleth vs too walke according too the will of our Lorde God warely and héedfully, or with perfecte wareneſſe and circumſpectneſſe. Therefore in this place may bée recited the doctrine that concerneth newe obedience, and a man may entreate of the cauſes that ought to ſtir vs vp to the deſire of weldoing, which are Gods commaundement, and neceſſitie of duetie and of holding faſt the faith. And moreouer to the intent wée may eſchue paynes preſent and eternall, and obteyn the promiſed rewards. And in eſpecially let men conſider the pithyneſſe of the commandement walke warely, bée not careleſſe, ſet not lyght by the ſleyghts of the diuell, cocker not your owne luſtes, but order your behauiour and lyfe with ſingular waryneſſe, héede, watchefulneſſe, and circumſpectneſſe, leaſt eyther by the diuels policies, or by your owne frayleneſſe yée bée throwne headlong ageyne ageyne intoo ſynne and death. Haue a ſpeciall care to eſchue occaſions of falling, according to this ſaying: To eſchue occaſions of ſynning is to eſchue ſynne. Shunne the leude companies of vngodly and filthy perſones. For it is moſte true that Theognis ſayeth: Thou mayeſt learne good of the good, but if thou companye wyth the wicked, thou marreſt thy ſelfe.
                  
                     Fall to honeſt labours which of themſelues are bridles ofHoneſt labor. concupiſcence and furtherances of vertue. For Idleneſſe yeldeth ſinfulneſſe. And with your labours mingle calling vpon God, and requeſt him to aſſiſt you and gouerne you. All theſe things dooth Paule comprehend in this one worde, walke warely. So Ioſeph walked warely whenTo walke warely. he yelded not to the enticementes of the adultreſſe, & contrariwiſe Dauid beyng careleſſe ſlydeth into horrible ſinnes, which afterward were puniſhed with moſt horrible puniſhmentes. This commaundement may be very aboundantly enlarged by a diſtribution, and by a ſetting togither of the contraries, when wée entreate of euery of the vertues of the ten Commaundementes in order, and of their cauſes, and of the vices that encounter them. For to walke warely, is the ſame thing ye to know God aright, to truſt in God, to loue God, to feare God, to vſe patience in tribulacions, to call vppon God hartely, to gyue him thankes, to profeſſe him, to ſpred abroad the true doctrine, to obey Magiſtrates and ciuill ordinances, to bée iuſt, diſcrete and méeld, to apply the dueties of a mans vocation buzily, to bée méeke, treatable, mercifull, peaceable, chaſt, ſober, ſoothfaſt, and to eſchue all ſinnes that fight ageinſte theſe vertues. Theſe beyng vnfolded into their partes, & enlightned with Antitheſies & examples, will bring forth plenteouſneſſe of matter both manifeſt and ample.
                  
                     Not as vnwiſe folke, men without the true knowledge of God, and without the feare of God and fayth.
                  
                     Redeeming the time, neglecte not onely occaſion of walkingRedeeming of the time. warely, or of liuing godlyly and honeſtly, or of deſeruing well at other mens handes: or els purchaſe oportunitie of atteyning the true knowledge of God, & euerlaſting lyfe, euen with the loſſe of all that yée haue.
                  
                     Bycauſe the dayes are euill, by reaſon of the malice andEuill dayes. miſerie of men. It is a figure called Synecdoche, wherin ye thing that conteyneth, is put for the thing that is conteyned,

For the dayes are good, but men that liue in thoſe dayes are euill and wretched. Therfore let paſſe no occaſion of liuing godlily, and of dooing things acceptable too God, & to the welfare of men, neyther ſuffer your ſelues to be plucked away from God by the moſt corrupt maliciouſneſſe of this age. There happen many lettes, many allurementes, & leude luſtes, which hale men away from true godlineſie. But redéeme yée the time, fighte ageynſt theſe impedimentes, and walke warely.
                  
                     Not like fooles, that is to ſay, as folke ignorant of God, and voyd of fayth and true godlineſſe.
                  
                     But as thoſe that vnderſtand what is the will of the Lord, that is to wit, which is reueled in Gods woord, to whome as to a rule wée muſt referre all the deuiſes and dooings of our life. This is the will of the Father, that euery one that beléeueth in the ſonne ſhould haue lyfe euerlaſting. This is Gods will, euen your holyneſſe, that yée ſhould not liue like the Gentiles that know not God.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  
                     BE not drunken with wine, wherin is ryottouſneſſe. TheAgeinſte all riot and exceſſe. The doctrine that concerneth ſobrietie, & the eyght cauſes for which drunkenneſſe is to bee eſchewed, and ſoberneſſe followed, may bée ſet out of the expoſition of the vertues of the ſixth commaundement.
                  The Gréeke woorde Aſotia, ryottouſneſſe, comprehendeth exceſſe of fare, waſtfulneſſe, wantonneſſe, vncleane talke, chamberings, ſcoldings, braulings, quarrelinges, manquellings, and to be ſhort, a Cyclopiſh life ordinarie to dronken folke, ſuch as was the exceſſe or cyclopiſh life of Alexander the greate, deſcribed by Plutarche. pag. xlj. And Cicero in his booke De finibus ſayeth: I like not of theſe belly goddes, tha
                        •
                      ſhall ſpew into my diſh, and muſt bée caried away from the table, & which fall to cramming them ſelues freſh and faſting ageyne the next morow.
               
               
                  
                  The third place.
                  Singing Pſalmes, Himnes, and ſpiritual ſongs vnto the Lord.
               
               
                  Of ſongs and Muſick
                        •
                     .
                  GOd hath put intoo man the knowledge of numbersMuſicke. and tunes, and in all ages would haue his doctrine and prayſes too bée comprehended in verſes, and that muſicke ſhould bée vſed in his holy ſeruice, chéefly for this cauſe, that the true doctrine concerning God, and all the exhortacions, comforts, prayſes, & thankeſgeuing, being included in numbers & verſes or ſongs, might the eaſlyer bée imprinted in mēs minds, & ſinke déeplyer into their harts, & kindle more feruent motions of Godlineſſe. For al folke do more deſirouſly take, and with greater pleaſure lerne, & more ſtedfaſtly kéepe in mind, verſes than proſe. Such an aliance haue our ſoules with harmonie & nūber, euen by nature. And ſith that for this commoditie chéefly, ſinging is wont to be vſed, that the holy woordes may ſinke the déeper into the mindes of the héerers, and kindle more earneſt motions in their hartes: It were good to reteyne Muſicke in Churches, not ouer cunning and curious, butMuſicke in Churches. ſimple and graue, ſo as the woordes that are knit in number might be hard and vnderſtood of the common people. Wée ſée that both in the Church and alſo among the Heathen (who conterfeyted the example of the firſt Fathers) the doctrine concerning God and other good thinges, and thankesgiuings and prayſes of God, were compriſed in verſes, to be ſung in holy ſeruice and els where. The chéef Poetes of ſuch Himnes and ſongs were Moyſes, Dauid, Aſaph, the ſonnes of Chora, Heman, Salomon, Eſay, Ieremie. &c.
                  And in our age God hath rayſed vp Luther, who (as ourLuther the Germane Orpheus. 
                     Orpheus of Germanie) hath compriſed in Dutch verſe the ſumme of Chriſtian doctrine, & the holy ſtories, & the chéef of Dauids Pſalmes: & hath added to thē ſo trim and

fit notes and ſo apt to ſtirre vp mens affections, that not onely they bée ſung with exceeding pleaſure and delight, but alſo perce wondrouſly intoo the mindes and hartes of the héerers: and kindle affections of true godlineſſe, faith, gladneſſe, and earneſt ioy, in mens breſts, as by the note of the Song, Chriſte lag in todes banden. &c. All the godly euen though they giue but meane héede, may eaſly iudge. And foraſmuch as S. Baſill in his preface to the Pſalter hath ſpoken right grauely concerning this profitableneſſe of Muſike: I will tranſlate the whole place, and write it hereunto.
                  Pſalmes do with a certeine weltuned delightfulneſſeBaſil concerning Pſalmes and ſpirituall ſongs. and pleaſure, endue the minde with wholſome doctrine and wiſdome. For in aſmuch as the holy Ghoſt ſaw, that mankind could hardly bée bent to godlineſſe and vertue, bycauſe it neglecteth the manner of liuing well, and is caried headlong vnto pleaſure: He mingled the delightfulneſſe of melody with his precepts of inſtruction: to the intent that with the ſwéetneſſe of the delight, the doctrine of God & profitable thinges might ſlip into mens mindes, according to the cuſtome of wiſe Phiſicians, who ſeaſon the mouth of the cup with a little honny when they miniſter any ſowre medicine to a ſicke body. For this cauſe therfore was this fine writing of the Pſalmes in méeter deuiſed, that ſuch as are youthfull both in yeares and vertue, might in theyr owne opinion ſing, and in very déede inſtruct their minds. For there is not any of the frantike ſort, that when he departeth out of the church home to his houſe, doth eaſly beare away with ſinne any Apoſtolicall or Propheticall precepte. But as for the ſayinges of the Pſalmes, they both ſing them at home with delight, and beare them about with thē to the market, & many beyng ſtarke mad for anger, as ſoone as they beare the tune of Pſalmes that delight them, returne home well at eaſe and quiet in themſelues, & the féerce and heady motions

of theyr minds are aſſuaged with ſinging. Pſalmes bring calmneſſe to the minde, & alaying the troubleſome waues of mēs thoughts, ſettleth quietneſſe in their barts, méekeneth the ſturdineſſe of the mind, reſtreyneth headyneſſe, boweth ment to myldeneſſe and ſoberneſie, procureth fréendſhip, ſetteth folkes at one that were at variaunce, and reconcileth enemies. For who wil take him any longer for his foe, with whom he hath with one voyce ſpoken vnto God? therefore ſinging of Pſalmes yeeldeth a moſt ſouereyne benefite namely mutuall loue, in yelding harmonie as it were a certeine bande to knit mens mindes togither, and the tune of one queere linketh togither the whole Church. Pſalmes chace a way féendes, procure the help of Angels, driue away feares of the nighte, aſſwage the labours of the day, defend infantes, are an ornament too men, giue comfort to old folke, decke women with cō
                     lineſſe, repleniſh deſerts with inhabiters, accuſtome men to modeſtie in their meetings, inſtruct yong beginners in their firſte principles, help thoſe that haue profited with further aduauntage, and ſtrengthen thoſe that be perfect. The Pſalmes are the common voyce of the Church, they beautify the feaſtfull dayes, and they woorke that ſorowfulneſſe which is according vnto God: for they are able to wreſt teares euen out of a ſtony harte. To ſing Pſalmes is an Angelike office, a heauenly miniſtracion, and a ſpiritual perfume. O wōderful deuice of a moſt wiſe ſchoolemaſter, who would haue vs learne profitable things by ſinging. Therefore are his preceptes faſtned the ſurer in our mindes. For nothing that is learned by compulſion, continueth long in memorie. But y• which entereth with ſome ſwéete kind of delectacion, doth ſettle more ſtedfaſtly, and roote more déepely. For what is it that a man ſhall not learne out of ye Pſalmes? From thence ye may fetch the aſſured ſtoutneſſe of harte, from thence ſhall ye draw true rightuouſneſſe, modeſtie, & grauitie: perfect wiſdome,

the true maner of repentance, patience, & all kind of good things. Héere is perfect diuinitie, héere is prophe
                        •
                     ying of Chriſtes cōming in the fleſh, threatuing of the laſt iudgement, hope of reſurrection, feare of puniſhmentes, promiſes of glorie, & reuelacions of myſteries. All theſe things are layde vp in the treaſurie of the Pſalmbooke as in a moſt large ſtorehouſe.
               
               
                  The fourth place.
                  IT entreateth of thankeſgeuing wherewithall God is too bée magnified for all his heauenly benefites with a true harte and a liuely voyce in loudſounded ſongs and Hymnes. Moreouer concerning lowlineſſe and the feare of▪ God, there may bée declaracions fet out of the rules of life, or out of the expoſition of the vertues of the firſt and ſecond Commanndement.
               
            
            
               Vppon the .xxj. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. Epheſ. vj.
                  
                     MY Brethren, bee ſtrong through the Lorde, and through the power of his might: Putte on all the armour of God that ye may ſtand ageinſt all the aſſaultes of the Diuell: for we wreſtle not ageynſt bloude and fleſh, but ageynſt rule, ageynſte power, ageynſt worldly rulers, euen gouernours of the darknes of this world, ageynſt ſpirituall craftines in heauenly things. VVherefore, take vnto you the whole armour of God, that yee may bee able to reſiſt in the euill day, and ſtande perfecte in all things. Stand therfore, and your loynes gyrde with the truth, hauing on the breſte plate of rightuouſneſſe, and hauing shoos on your feete, that ye may be prepared for the Goſpell of peace. Aboue all, take to you the shield of fayth, wherwith ye may quench all the fiery dartes of the wicked. And take the helmet

of ſaluacion, & the ſword of the ſpirit, which is the worde of God. And pray alwayes with all maner of prayer and ſupplication in the ſpirite, and watch thereunto with all inſtance and ſupplication, for all ſainctes and for me: that vtteraunce may be giuen vnto me, that I may open my mouth f
                        •
                     eely, to vtter the ſecretes of my Goſpell (wherof I am a meſſanger in bondes) that therin I may ſpeake freely, as I ought to ſpeake.
               
               
                  The di ſpoſement.
                  IT is that kind of caſes that are perſuaſiue. For it is anMans lyfe is a warfare. exhortacion to the godly to continue ſtedfaſtely in true godlineſſe or in the acknowledgement of God & in faith, and to fortifie and ſtrengthen their hartes ageynſt the aſſaultes of the Diuell, of naughty nature, of Heretikes, & of Tyrauntes. And Paule enlargeth and garniſheth his purpoſed exhortacion with a lightſome ſimilitude taken of warfare and worldly battels, out of Eſay. lix. In which warfare it behooueth firſt and formeſt, that the enemies bée knowen. Secondly that munition bée gotten néedfull for a mans own defence. And thirdly, artillerie & weapon fit to put backe and vanquiſhe the enemie. All the wholeMans enemies. The Diuell. lyfe of a Chriſtian man is as it were a warfare againſte oure moſt miſchéeuous enemies. Of whom y• firſt is y• Diuel, a lyer, & a murtherer, who lyeth cōtinually in wait to anoy vs in our ſoules, in our bodies, & in our goods, ſpredding abroad falſe opinions concerning God, dropping into our minds epicuriſh doutes, contempt of Gods word, carnall carefulneſſe & pryde, & egging vs wretched wights vnto all kind of ſinnes, with his blaſt & alluremēts which he trūpeth in our wayes, to ye intēt y• hauing haled vs from God, he may draw vs into euerlaſting deſtruction. Agein he empayreth our bodies & goods, by fires, battels, robberies, ſlaunders, diſeaſes, & deaths. The ſecond enemie isThe fleſh. our own fleſh, y• is to ſay, ye wandring & heady braydes of our own nature corrupted with ſin, darkneſſe & doutfulneſſe

concerning God, fleſhly reſtyneſſe, the heates of hatred, lecherie, deſire of reuenge of excellencie and money, and finally the whole huge heape of naughty inclinacions and ſinfull affections cleauing in our hartes. Iacob. j. Euery one that is tempted, is tempted of his owne concupiſcēce. The third enemy are Heretikes, ſpreding abrodeHeretikes. falſe opinions, which are the very firy weapons wherewith they kill the faith and prayers of many. The fourthThe world. enimie is, the manaces and perſecutions of tyraunts & of all vngodly perſones. For through the terrours and diſpleaſures of great men, & the cruelneſſe of perſecutions many renounce the profeſſion of true godlineſſe, & many by reaſon of the contempt & néedyneſſe of the godly miniſters, are moued to withhold the fat prebends linked with Idolatrie. Ageinſt theſe foure enimies doth Paule fortify & arme ye godly with armour, munition, & weapon néedful for ye defence of thēſelues & ye putting backe of ye enemie.
               
               
                  The armour or apparell is this.
                  FIrſt, the ſword girdle wherewithall it behooueth vs tooThe ſworde girdle of a Chriſtian. bée girded and cloſed in, is truth, or the true doctrine of the Goſpell, and the true knowledge of God. They therefore that eyther bée ignorant of the doctrine, or haue a delight in the corruptings of the Goſpell, ſhall make but an vnlucky match. Secondly, the Breſtplate wherewith theHis breſtplate. breſt is defended, is rightuouſneſſe: that is to wit, the reconciliation of a man into Gods fauour for Chriſtes ſake through fayth. Thirdly his ſhoes are the very profeſſionHis ſhoes. of the Goſpel, which directeth the way or vocation of the godly, & boundeth them about with liſtes, within which they muſt kéepe their ſtanding.
                  The armour neceſſarie to repulſe the blowes of ourHis Buckler or ſheeld. The firy da
                           •••
                        s of the Diuell. enemies, and to defend our ſelues are, firſt a Buckler or Sheeld, y• is to wit, faith, which quencheth all ye firy dartes of the diuell. And ye firy & moſt noyſome dartes of ye diuell

are theſe: Epicuriſh and Academical doutings whither there bée any God, whither God haue care of vs, whither the goſpell bée true, whither God regard vs in our troubles, & whither he will giue vs eternall lyfe. Alſo fleſhly careleſſeneſſe which neglecteth the wrath and iudgement of God, hereſies, and falſe pleaſurable opinions. &c. Secōdly the helmet whichThe helmet of a chriſtian. chéefly fenceth the head, is the aſſured hope of eternal ſaluation, wherwith wée being ſtrengthened do beare out al the perils and miſeries of this life with the ſtouter ſtomacke: with this helmet did Steuen couer his head, what time he went reioyſing in his hart, and through ſtrong hope did eaſe his harme & ſmart: with the like armor did Paule, Polycarpe, Laurence, and all the holy Martyrs ſuſtein moſt bitter torments of bodie, that they might atteine lyfe and bliſſe euerlaſting.
                  The weapons which he appoynteth vs too repulſe and too ſtrike the enemie with all, are twoo. Firſt a ſword, not ofHis ſwoord. ſtéele, but ſpirituall, that is too wit Gods woord, wherwithal bothe the féendes are chaſed, (as Chriſt hath taught vs by his owne example. Math. iiij.) and the noyſome opinions of heretikes diſpr
                        ••
                     ed and put away, like as the heriſies of the Manichées, and Arians in old time, and in our dayes the heriſies of the Papiſts, of the Anabaptiſts, of Swinkféeld & of others are chaſed by y• woord of God. Let all chriſten ſouldiers whet this ſwoord with earneſtneſſe in lerning, teaching, & continual minding it: and let them haue it alwayes redy at hand.
                  The other kynd of armor is continuall and feruent prayer,
                     Earneſt prayer. whereby wée muſt ſéeke and looke for Gods helpe, and for luckie ſucceſſe in our warfare, and for victory by the graundcapteine of our armie our Lord Ieſus Chryſte the ſonne of God. For without Gods aſſiſtence, euen the heathen mē ſaw it was but vain too draw weapon in battel, or too take pains to fight. Pindarus: loue of contention, loue of warre, if God be not on thy ſide: O ſonne win with thy launce, but win alwayes with God.
                  But more notable are the teſtimonies of Gods woorde

which ſhew vs the true calling vpon God vnknowne too the heathen, and warrant the godly ſouldiers that they may certeinlyTeſtimonles that God heereth our prayers. beléeue, their prayers too bée receiued and herd of God, and themſelues too bee helped in déede in their calling by the ſonne of God. Pſalm. xx. Some truſt in chariots and ſome in horſes, but wée wil call vpon the name of the Lord our God▪ Pſal. l. Cal vppon mée in the day of trouble. Pſal. xc. He ſhall cry vntoo mée, and I will héere him, I will deliuer him and ſhew him my ſauing health▪ Pſ. cxlvij. He ſhal not obtein his purpoſe in the ſtrength of a horſe. Theréfore let vs vſe theſe weapons, when wée are like too bée anoyed by dangers of the deuill, by our owne fleſh, and by tyrannous biſhops & kings. Let vs not caſt downe our courages, let vs not quake▪ let vs not moue ſedition, as Muncer and the Anabaptiſts of Munſter did. But let vs ſtrengthen our ſelues with the promiſes of Gods woord, and commit our daungers too God, and with quiet myndes looke for an end too our welfare at the hand of Gods ſonne the captein & general of our warres: like as Ezechias and Eſay fought ageinſt Sennacherib, and Moiſes ageinſt Pharao, only by prayer. So Luther with vnappalled courage ſuſteined the aſſaults of the Romiſh Biſhop, of the Emperor, and of many Kings, Princes, and Biſhops, and by continual prayer and earneſt faith vanquiſhed them and pal them too flight. Take ſtrong fayth for a sheelde, and for thy dart ſtedy prayer. Let Gods woord bee thy ſword: Chryſt will alone doo the reſt.
                  
                  Hitherto I haue bréefly paſſed ouer the ſtate of the Epiſtle and the chéefe members of the ſame, too the entent that the ſumme of the matter béeing ſet out ſeuerally in order, might with y• more eaſe bée caryed away. And I wold counſel thoſe that bée well mynded, too adde too this bréefe diſtribution, Luthers moſt lyghtſome Sermon, wherein he hath enlyghtened this part of this. vj. chapter. Now will I bréefly expound certeine of the harder woordes and phraſes.
                  
                     Bee manly in the Lord▪
                      A néedful vertue for al godly folkeManlyneſſe.
                     
is manlyneſſe: I méene not that knightly and warlike valeantneſſe that chaſeth enemies with worldly weapōs, ſuch as appered in great Alexander & in Iulius Caeſar: but the grown manlyneſſe as they terme it, that is too wit ſtedfaſtneſſe of mynd continuing throughout in true godlyneſſe & profeſſion of the heauenly doctrine, and by patience, faith, & prayer fighting ageinſt al dangers and allurements that withdraw the mind from poſſeſſion of true godlineſſe: As for example DanielExamples of manlyneſſe. is manly in the Lord when he ſtarteth not from profeſſion of the true doctrine for feare of death which hung ouer his head by the Lyons. The thrée yoongmen in the burning Ouen at Babilon were manly or valeant in the Lord, whē they forſooke not the acknowledgement of the true God. All the Apoſtles and Martyrs were manly in the Lord, bycauſe they choſe rather too die, than too breake their fayth due too Chryſt▪ and the profeſſion of the goſpell.
                  
                     Put on the complet armor of God. The complet armor of the Romanes is deſcribed by Polybius (in his. vj. booke. pa. 181.) too bée a ſwoord, a iaueling, a buckler or a ſhéeld, a burganet, a pike, a brigand▪ &c. But this armor boteth vs nothing ageinſt the traines & aſſaultes of the diuell the enimie of our ſoules. But the complet armor wherwith Paule apparelleth chriſten ſouldiers in this place, dooth defend and garde the godly in ſuch wyſe as they may bée able too ſtand ſafe and without daunger ageinſt the policies and aſſaultes of the Diuell, yea and alſo ouercome them.
                  
                     Ageinſt the craftie aſſaultes of the Diuel, There bée chéefly fiue kindes or wayes and manners of craftie traines, wherwithall the Diuell is woont too aſſault the fayth of the godly and too caſt them headlong intoo eternall deſtruction, by pulling their mindes from God. Of theſe things wée haue giuen an inkling héertoofore in the latter part of the Epiſtle vppon the third Sunday after Trinitie.
                  
                     We wreſtle not ageinſt flesh and blud: that is to ſay ageinſtFleſh & blud▪
                      bodily enimies, that may bée ſéene with eyes, & ſtriken with

ſwoords, or driuen away with gun ſhot. But ageinſt rule and power, and ageinſt the rulers of the darkneſſe of this worlde,The povvers of darkneſſe. and ageinſt ſpirituall craftyneſſe in heauenly things, there be moſt puiſſant and ghoſtly enemies wandering with the heauenly things or in the air Eph. ij. Whoſe ſuttleties & ſtrokes can neither bée vewed nor forſéene with bodely eyeſight, nor fenſed and put backe with bodily armor▪ And as among mā
                     kynd there bée degrées of kings, Princes, & other gouernors: So are there alſo diſtinct orders and offices among Angels & diuels, which are ment in this place by the termes of rule & power. He nameth them worldly rulers of the darkneſſe of this world, bicauſe they beare rule in the myndes of the vngodly, or of thoſe that want the lyght of the true knowledge of God, and of fayth, and hold their hartes ſo blinded: yea and the moſt part of mankind captiue, as he ſayeth before in the ſecond chapter: after the Prince that hath power in the aire, who is y• ſpirit y• worketh mightely in ye childrē of diſobediēce.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the .xxij. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Phil. j.
                  
                     I Thanke my God with al remembrance of you alwayes in al my prayers for you, and pray with gladneſſe: Bicauſe ye are come intoo the felowship of the goſpell, frō the firſt day vntil nowe. And am ſurely certifyed of this, that hee which hath begon a good worke in you, shal perform it vntill the day of Ieſus Chryſte, as it becommeth mee, that I should ſo iudge of you all▪ bicauſe I haue you in my heart: foraſmuch as ye are all companions of grace with me, euen in my bonds, and in the defending and eſtablishing of the goſpel: for God is my recorde how greatly I long after you all, from the very hart roote in Ieſus Chriſt. And this I pray, that your loue

may encreaſe yet more and more in knowledge, and in vnderſtanding, that ye may accept the things that are moſt excellēt, that ye may be pure, and ſuch as offend no man, vntill the day of Chryſt, beeing filled with the frute of rightcouſneſſe, which commeth by Ieſus Chryſt, vntoo the glory and praiſe of God.
               
               
                  The ſtate and cheefe places of this Epiſtle are all one with the Epiſtle vppon the xviij. Sunday after Trinitie.
                  FIrſt, mannes ſouereine good, wherof wée haue moſt cauſeOur ſouereine or cheef good. too bée glad and reioyce in the behalfe both of our ſelues & of others, is the true acknowledgemēt of God and our Lord Ieſu Chryſt according too the goſpel. Therefore he ſayeth: I make my prayers with ioy, for that you take part with the goſpel: that is to ſay, for that you are come to the knowledge of the goſpel, or for that yée are made partakers of all Gods benefites which he offereth vs by the goſpell, or bycauſe you are become members of the Church.
                  Secondly, of yéelding thankes vntoo God, partly for his otherThankſgiuing▪
                      innumerable benefites towards vs, and chéefly for theſe ſouerein benefits that he hath diſcloſed his wil by his goſpel, too our reconciliation and eternall lyfe: that he voutſaued too make his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chryſt a ſacrifiſe for vs: and that by the goſpel he offereth and imparteth vntoo vs remiſſion of ſinnes, the holy Ghoſt, ryghtuouſneſſe and eternal life.
                  Thirdly concerning perſeuerance, too the other woords beforePerſeuerance. reherſed, let this moſt ſwéete cōfort alſo bée added, which is the chéefe thing too bée conſidered in this Epiſtle: He that hath begon this good woorke in you, ſhall accompliſh it vntoo the day of Ieſu Chryſt. That is too ſay, God that hathe called you too the knowledge of the goſpel, & kindled in you the béeginnings of his lyght, faith, ryghtuouſneſſe & all good works: ſhal alſo encreaſe your faith, & defend & ſtrengthen you, vnto y• day that Chriſt ſhal cal the ſoule out of your mortal bodies.
                  
                     Fourthly, let the notable exāple of Paules frendlineſſe beFrendlyneſſe. thought vpon, who vnfeinedly from his hart reioyceth at the ſingular benefit befalne too the Theſſalonians, namely yt the true knowledge of God & euerlaſting ſaluation was hapned to thē: ſaying, I bear you in my hart, ye is, I fauor you with all my hart, & am glad with al my hart, yt you haue ſped wel. Alſo Chryſt is my witneſſe, that I lōg after you in the bowels of Ieſus Chryſt. That is too ſay, I long after you with a pure chriſtenlike affectiō, not in hope of any gain, but bicauſe I ſée you loue Chriſt ſincerely & conſtantly. And I wishe this, that your loue, that is too ſay, you, may encreaſe more & more in knowledge of God and all vnderſtanding: that is to ſay, in all true iudgement, that ye may like of things moſt excellent and acceptable to God, that you may be pure in faith, voide of falſe opinions, errors, doutings, diſtruſtes, and ſtumbling blocks, that is to ſay, that yée ſtumble not, nor ſlip into wickedneſſe, wherby you may forgoe grace, and become giltie of endleſſe damnation, as Caine, Saule, and Iudas fell.
                  Fifthly, this ſentence fulfilled with the workes of ryghtuouſneſſe,The doctrine of good vvoorkes. by Ieſus Chryſt, to the glory and praiſe of God, conteineth a ſum of the Doctrine concerning the true woorſhipping of God, or good workes.
                  
                     Firſt, what they bée, that is to wit, the woorkes commaunded by God, which are wrought by a perſon iuſtified by faith for Chryſtes ſake, who dwelling in the beléeuers, woorketh good woorks, which muſt ſhyne foorth among men, that God may bée glorifyed and prayſed of vs.
                  
                     Secondly, what are the efficiēt cauſes, namely, firſt Gods word & the true knowledge of Chriſt. 2. Chryſt dwelling in vs by his holy ſpirit, & filling vs with the frutes of rightuouſneſſe, or ruling our members, yt they may bée the inſtrumēts of rightuouſneſſe vnto God. 3. The mynd and wil of man, and his outward members ſeruiceable to Chriſt that moueth vs.
                  
                     Thirdly, how pleaſe they God? He anſwereth, by Ieſus Chryſt, & not by their owne woorthyneſſe or deſert: as is ſayd

j. Peter. ij. Offer yée ſpirituall ſacrifyſes acceptable too God through Chryſt.
                  
                     Fourthly, too what end are they too bée doon? Too the glory and praiſe of God, that is too wit, that due obedience & honor may bée yéelded vntoo God, that God may bée magnified, that the true knowledge of God may be ſpred further abrode, and that mo may bée allured too true godlineſſe and woorſhipping of God. Good woorks are not to be doone to the end they ſhuld iuſtifie vs before God. For woorkes are the frutes of rightuouſneſſe, as Auſten ſayth: Good woorks folow him that is alredy iuſtified, but goe not before him that is too bée iuſtified. Therfore the trée muſt firſt be good (that is too ſay, the perſon muſt firſt be iuſtified by Ieſus Chriſte) béefore it bring foorth good frutes. And ſo thou ſeeſt the whole ſumme of the doctrine of good woorks too bée lernedly cōpriſed in this ſhort ſentence of Paule. Let the héerers beare away cheefly theſe twoo ſentences out of this Epiſtle, that is too wit. God who hath begon this good woorke in you, shall accomplish it, euen too the day of Ieſus Chryſt. And: Fulfilled with the frutes of ryghtuouſneſſe through Ieſus Chriſt, to the glory and praiſe of god.
                  
               
            
            
               Vppon the .xxiij. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Phil. iij.
                  
                     BRethren, be folowers together of mee, and loke on them which walk euen ſo as ye haue vs for an enſample. For many walk (of whom I haue told you often, and now tel you weeping) that they are the enimies of the croſſe of Chryſte, whoſe end is damnation, whoſe belly is their God, and glorie to their shame, which are worldly minded. But our conuerſation is in heauen, from whence we looke for the ſauiour, euen the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, which shal change our vile body, that he may make it like vnto his glorious body: according to the working, wherby he is able alſo to ſubdue al things vnto him ſelfe.
               
               
                  
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of the kind of caſes that debate matters. For it is an exhortation that they ſhould beware of falſe teachers, and bée ſtedfaſt, and ſet folks at one that are at ods.
               
               
                  The cheefe places are foure.
                  FIrſt the teachers of the church muſt bée as patterns or examples for their héerers too looke vppon, that they may folow their behauior and doctrine, and eſchue ſuch as differ and diſagrée from this ſampler.
                  Secondly, our conuerſation is in heauen: that is to ſay the miniſtration of the goſpell is not a ciuill gouernment, but a ſpirituall: and all the whole conuerſation and lyfe of a chryſten man muſt bée ghoſtly and heauenly, not directed too the ſéeking of the commodities of this preſent lyfe, but too the atteinement of the glory and life that is in heauen.
                  Thirdly there is a teſtimonie concerning the rayſing and glorification of our bodyes.
                  Fourthly, concerning the deſire too maintein concord, and too knit toogither the minds of thoſe that bée at oddes.
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  
                     BRethren bee yee folowers of mee, and looke on them that walke euen ſo as yee haue ſeene vs for an enſample.
                  
                  Paule ſetteth foorth himſelfe too the Philippians as an examplePrechers muſt be patternes too theyr flocke. for them too folow in Doctrine and maners, that they might beware of falſe teachers, whoſe doctrin & maners differ from this patterne. And let the ſtudious beare in mynd ye counſell of Paules which he ſetteth foorth too Timothie and all godly teachers, as a rule of al their lyfe and of al their deuiſes and dooings. Bee a patterne of the faythful, in Doctrine, in conuerſation, in louingneſſe, in ſpirit, in faith and in chaſtitie, and giue heede too reading. The firſt counſell of Paule is that we ſhuld be patterns: that is too ſay that we ſhuld ſhine before others by our example of Doctrine and conuerſation:

For it is a common ordinarie in this lyfe, that wée the inferiour ſort doo followe the examples of our gouernours and teachers: as theſe verſes admoniſh.
                  
                     In ſooth th'examples of rulers flowe too the people:
                  
                  
                     And as their Capteins demeane thē, ſo do the whole Cāp.
                  
                  And Plato ſayeth that the beſt manner of inſtructing is, If the Teacher ſhyne before his héerers by his example, and bée ſéene too doo the ſame things himſelfe which he exhorteth other men vntoo. Therefore muſt teachers vſe much more waryneſſe, héede, and diligence in ruling their behauior, than other men muſt, bycauſe the people muſt looke vppon their examples, according as Paule commaundeth heere, that the Philippians ſhould bée followers of him, that is too wit, in doctrine, fayth, and other vertues: And that they ſhould haue an eye too ſuch as walk ſo, that is too ſay, as liue ſo, teache ſo, beléeue ſo, and profeſſe ſo, namely that wée obteyne remiſſion of ſinnes and euerlaſting lyfe, onely for Chryſtes paſſion and death, and not for the woorkes of the Lawe and for our owne vertues. But if the teachers eyther ſpred abroade any falſe doctrine, or bée defiled with heynous offences: their héerers are eaſly infected with their opinions and examples. And concerning the faultie behauiour of the teachers, it is a cōmon ſayd ſawe, he that teacheth well, and liueth amiſſe, reacheth foorth with his one hande, and pulleth backe with the other. Afterward he peynteth out as it were in a table, the chéef vertues wherein the Teachers muſt ſhyne before their héerers.
                  1 In talke and doctrine. For the true doctrine concerningIn doctrine. GOD, is the ground woork of Gods Churche and of euery mannes welfare. Therefore let the teachers take héede, that firſt they themſelues lerne a right, and then teache a right, orderly, properly, and playnly too their héerers, the true and full doctrine of the Goſpell concerning the true knowledge of Gods being and will, concerning the perſone and benefites of Chriſte, concerning Iuſtification, faith, inuocation,

good woorks, affliction, and all other articles: and alſo that they learnedly and aptly confute the corruptings of them. They muſt not bée dull in lerning the doctrine, and in framing themſelues too an apt and lerned trade in teaching. They muſt not bée ambitiouſe in deuiſing newe opinions and formes of ſpeaking. They muſt not raſhly alter the accuſtomed and profitable manner of teaching, but muſt endeuer that one true and agréeable ſumme of doctrine may bée deliuered ouer too thoſe that come after: like as Paule in this place willeth the Philippians too kéepe the doctrine that he had deliuered them concerning iuſtification, as a pattern, and ſo too conuey it ouer to their poſteritie.
                  2 In conuerſation, or in directing all the outward deuyſesIn cōuerſation. and dooings of the lyfe according too all the commaundements of GOD. Their manners muſt not bée defyled with ambition, couetouſneſſe, and luſtes, leaſt eyther miſlibertie might bée confirmed in ſome, or occaſion miniſtred the vngodly too ſlaunder the doctrine. Mat. v. Let your light ſo ſhyne before men, &c.
                  3 In Louingneſſe. There muſt bée in you, a hartye goodIn louingneſſe. will towardes God, towardes your fellowminiſters, and towardes your héerers▪ Yée muſt bée iuſt, ſofte, beneficiall, treatable, and ſéekers of the common concorde and quietneſſe. Yée muſt not nouriſh ſpyte, malice, hatred, quarels, backebytings, or priuie miſchéeues. Yée muſt not trouble the quietneſſe of the Churche. But yée muſt bée the ſinewes and bandes of louingneſſe and fellowſhippe, or of the glewing toogyther of the reſte of the congregation in the Churche.
                  4 In Spirite. Vntoo your Louingneſſe, yée muſt mingleIn ſpirit or zelouſneſſe. ſharpneſſe of Spirit, not winking at the falſifying of doctrine, at Hereſies, Blaſphemies, and wicked behauiours, but endeuering too hold ſhorte both falſe opinions and blaſphemies, and alſo diſhoneſt demeanours, throughe earneſt zele of the Spirite.
                  
                     5 In Fayth, which is ſtayed vppon GOD, looking forIn fayth or faythfulneſſe. helpe and defence at Gods hande in all perilles, and continuing firme and ſtedfaſt in teaching and profeſſing the true doctrine, without wreſting the doctrine too the willes of great men, or without ſtarting from the true profeſſion, for feare of forgoing office, glorie, riches, or pleaſures, as doo the falſe Teachers whom Paule deſcribeth in this place too bée,
                  
                     The enimies of Chryſtes Croſſe, bycauſe that too the intenteEnimies of Chriſts croſſe. they myght eſcape trouble and perſecutions at the Iewes handes, they taught that wée are iuſtifyed, not for Chryſtes ſake onely who was crucifyed for vs, but alſo that the woorkes of the Lawe are néedfull too ſaluation. The ende of theſe men is deſtruction, that is too ſay: Althoughe they floriſh a whyle in lyfe, yet ſhall they at length bée ouerwhelmed with endleſſe tormentes. VVhoſe belly is theyrBelly gods. God, that is too ſay, they preferre the belly and the pleaſures of the belly before God and all other things, and imploye all the déedes of their lyfe too the atteynement thereof. And therefore they bée Idolaters. For looke what thing euery mā loueth and woorſhippeth aboue al other things, the ſame is his God, who onely ought too bée loued and woorſhipped aboue all things.
                  Now, the greateſt part of men being Epicures, make a God of their belly, and though that all of them be wray not the méening of their mynde in ſo groſſe woordes: yet in the inwarde bowelles of their hartes they thinke ſo, as did that Cyclops in Euripides, who ſayeth that he acknowledgeth no other God, nor offereth ſacrifiſes too any other than too him ſelfe and too his belly, whiche is the greateſt of all Gods.
                  
                     And their glorie is in their shame. Although falſe teachers bée a whyle in glorie and eſtimation among Noble men, and with the common ſorte, yet dooth this reputation turne too their owne ſhame. VVhiche are worldly mynded,
                     Worldly minded.
                     
that is too ſay, haue an eye onely too eaſe, promotion and riches, and too the intent they may liue at eaſe, and not bée perſecuted by the Iewes, they vrge earthly things or worldly pelf vppon men, as ceremonies, differences of meates, and ſuch like Iewiſh obſeruations.
                  
                     Our conuerſation is in heauen, or is heauenly. Firſt heThe difference of the gouernments of Moſes, of the world, and of Chryſt. ſheweth the difference betwene the miniſtration of the goſpell and the Lawe, and the ciuill gouernement. The miniſtration of Moyſes Lawe was partly heauenly or ſpiritual, and partly earthly or ceremoniall, whiche being bound too a certein policie, conſiſted for the moſt part in ceremonies, ſacrifiſes, circumciſion, differences of dayes and meates▪ &c. But the miniſtration of the Goſpell is altogither heauenly or ſpirituall, neyther dooth it appoynt any certeine ſtate of gouernement, or kingdome in this mortall lyfe, according too this ſaying, Iohn. xix. My kingdome is not of this world▪ ij. Cor. iij. The Goſpell is the miniſtration of the Spirite, whereby the true knowledge of God, faith, rightuouſneſſe, and eternall lyfe is begonne in the godly, who after this life ſhall liue in heauen as it were in one Citie with God, and enioy his wiſdome and goodneſſe. This heauenly conuerſation dooth Paule will vs too ſéeke after, and too looke for, and not too dreame of any worldly kingdome ſuch as the Iewes looke for, and ſuch as the Anabaptiſts in West phalye, and the ſeditious Bouers would haue had.
                  Secondly, the lyfe or conuerſation of a Chriſtian is heauenly, that is too ſay, it is not employed about earthly things too the atteynement of authoritie, riches, and pleaſures: but too the compaſſing of heauenly benefites, as remiſſion of ſinnes, rightuouſneſſe, and euerlaſting welfare.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  COncerning the reſurrection and glorification of our bodyes, let the whole doctrine bée taken out of. j. Corin. xv. 
                        •
                     . Theſſ. iiij. Mat. xxij. Daniel▪ xij.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth place.
                  COncerning the deſire of concord, let the declaration therof bée taken out of the Expoſition of the fifth commaundement.
               
            
            
               Vppon the .xxiiij. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Coloſ. j.
                  
                     FOr this cauſe wee alſo, ſince the day wee herd of it, haue not ceaſed praying for you, and deſiring that ye might bee fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in all wiſdome and ſpirituall vnderſtanding, that yee might walke woorthy of the Lord in all things that pleaſe, being frutefull in all good woorkes, and encreaſing in the knowledge of GOD, ſtrengthed with all might, through his glorious power, vntoo all patience, and long ſuffering, with ioyfulneſſe, gyuing thankes vntoo the Father, which hath made vs meete too bee partakers of the inheritance of ſainctes in lyght. Which hath deliuered vs from the power of darkneſſe, and hath tranſlated vs intoo the kingdome of his deare ſonne, in whom wee haue redemption thorowe his bloud, that is too ſay, the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes.
                  
                     THe propoſition of this Epiſtle is this: I beſéeche the ſōne of GOD too encreaſe in you faith and all other vertues kindled by his Goſpell.
                     
                        The cheef places of doctrine are three.
                        1 Of the true knowledge of God and of faith.
                        2 Of good woorks or the frutes of faith.
                        3 Of the benefites of the ſoune of God, or of forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and iuſtification.
                     
                     
                        Paule ſpeaketh of fayth when he ſayeth: VVee pray vntooWhat Faith is. God that ye may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wiſdome and ſpirituall vnderſtanding. Now let vs alwayes haue in ſight the lerned definition of faith, builded vppon the woords of this Epiſtle. Faith is a knowledge of Gods being and will reueled in the Lawe and the Goſpell, kindied by the holy Ghoſte, who boweth the hartes of the godly, too aſſure them ſelues that it is the vnmouable wil of the euerlaſting Father, that all which beléeue in the ſonne, ſhould not periſhe, but haue forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and eternall lyfe by the bludſhed of the ſonne of God.
                     The partes of Faith are twoo, Knowledge or perſeuerance,The parts of Faith. and confidence certeynly aſſuring a man that his ſinnes are forgiuen him, and he deliuered out of the power of darkneſſe, by the blud of Gods ſonne. And the knowledge is eyther of the being of the eternall GOD, which is ſoothfaſt, iuſt, mercifull, and chaſte, in which there bée thrée ſeuerall perſones, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſte: or elſe it is of Gods will vttered both in his Lawe (whiche ſayeth thus, Curſed is euery one that continueth not in all the things that are written in the booke of the Lawe,) and alſo in the Goſpell concerning Chryſt, who ſayeth him ſelfe Iohn. vj. This is the will of the eternall Father▪ that euery one which ſéeth the ſonne and beléeueth in him, ſhould not periſh but haue lyfe euerlaſting. This will of GOD reueled in his Goſpell is it with knowledge wherof Paule in this place wiſheth vs too bée fulfilled, that is too wit, that wée might fully knowe the fatherly good will and excéeding great mercie of God promiſed in his ſonne. This knowledgeTrue knovvlegde. of GOD is the true wiſdome and vnderſtanding that diſcerneth true or falſe opinions or doctrines (concerning GOD) aſunder, and it ſpringeth not eyther of mennes imaginations or of Philoſophicall or Phariſaicall wiſdome, which vnderſtandeth the Lawe of outward Diſcipline, and the promiſe made vntoo Abraham, too bée ment of a ciuill

gouernement and worldly kingdome. But it is a ſpiritual wiſdome kindled and ſtrengthened by the holy Ghoſt, which vnderſtandeth that the Lawe is the ſpirituall iudgement of GOD ageinſt ſinne, and the Goſpell behyghteth not a worldly kingdome, but ſpirituall and euerlaſting good things, true and effectuall comfort, ryghtuouſneſſe, lyfe, and ioy. In this place may bée recited the whole doctrine concerning the knowledge of God and concerning faith whiche is an aſſurance of Gods mercie, or of forgiueneſſe of ſinnes promiſed for Chryſtes ſake.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  COncerning the frutes of fayth, or good woorkes, Paule ſayeth: That yee may walke woorthye of the Lord, ſo as yee may pleaſe him, being frutefull in all good woorkes, and encreaſing in the knowledge of GOD ſtrengthened with all myght, through his glorious power, vntoo all patience and long ſuffering, with ioyfulneſſe giuing thankes too God the Father.
                  
                  By the way, let the phraſe bée conſidered: That yee mayToo Walke. walke, that is too ſay, that yée may liue, or that yée may gouerne your intentes, deuiſes and dooings, as is woorthye the Lord, or as agréeth with the will and woord of the Lord. For woorthyneſſe, in this place ſignifieth not a deſeruing or recompenſing, or a perfect fulfilling of the Law, but according as he ſayeth in another place, bring foorth frutes woorthy repentance, that is too ſay, agréeing too repentance, that you may pleaſe him in all things, or that you may pleaſe him thorowly. Heere is too bée told, howe good woorkes pleaſe God. Which thing is declared in theſe foure Articles.
                  
                     Firſt, the perſone that bringeth foorth the frutes of goodHow good woorks pleaſe God. woorkes muſt bée Gods fauoure, for Chryſte the Mediatours ſake by fayth. For without Fayth, it is impoſſible

too pleaſe God. Ebr. xj. And all that is not of fayth is ſinne. Rom. xiiij.
                     2 Wée muſt acknowledge that many inward ſinnes ſticke ſtill in vs, whiche are a let that our good woorkes are not perfect, ne pleaſe God of their owne woorthyneſſe. For there is no rightuouſe man vppon the earth, that dooth good and ſinneth not.
                     3 Yet notwithſtāding wée muſt bée fully perſuaded that it is Gods will, that wée ſhould walke agréeably too his wil, and yéeld frute in all kynds of goods woorks.
                     4 Theſe good woorkes or new begoonne obediēce pleaſe God, not of their owne woorthyneſſe, but for Chryſt the Mediatours ſake, through faith, out of which as out of the trée of all good woorkes ſpring all good frutes. This then is the true woorthineſſe of good woorks, that they bée Gods ſeruices and ſacrifiſes acceptable too God through Chryſt. j. Pet. y. Offer yée ſpirituall ſacrifiſes acceptable too GOD through Ieſus Chryſt. Paule in this place reckeneth vp ſix good woorks of which may bée ſpoken in order.
                  
                  The firſt is the true acknowledging of GOD, or faithSix good woorks. Firſt Fayth. 2. Manlyneſſe. which is the piller and foundation of all the reſte of the vertues.
                  The ſecond is Manlyneſſe or Conſtancie and Perſeuerance, whiche continueth in the true knowledge of God and in faith vntoo the houre of death, and (by the almightie power of God) valiantly ouercommeth the Diuels craftes, the aſſaultes of corrupted nature, and the outrages of Tyrants.
                  The third and fourth are Patience and Longſufferance,3. and. 4. Patience & Long ſufferance. which calmly outweareth the miſeries that accompanie the profeſſion of the Goſpell, and is not diſcouraged with continuance of long delay, ſo as it ſhould fret and repyne at God, or ſéeke for other vnlawfull helpes.
                  Concerning theſe vertues is ſpokē alredy in the firſt and fifth commaundement.
                  The fifth is Ioyfulneſſe of conſcience ſettling and delighting5. Ioy of conſcience,
                     
in God, which perteyneth to the firſt cōmandment.
                  The ſixth is thankſgiuing wherof I haue ſpoken in the6. Thanksgiuing. ſecond commaundement.
               
               
                  The third place. Of Chriſts benefits or of remiſſion of ſinnes and Iuſtification.
                  PAule ſayeth: VVhich hath made vs mete to be partakersOf iuſtification. of the lot of ſaincts in light, that is too ſay, who of his owne frée goodneſſe and mercy and not thorough our power, or for our deſeruings, hath made vs méete to becom partakers of the lyght or true knowledge of his Goſpell and of the lot of the ſaintes, or of the inheritance of lyfe and glorie euerlaſting▪ ſuch ſhalbe beſtowed vpon al ſaintes, who hath deliuered vs out of the power of darkneſſe, that is to ſay of ſinne and death, wherthrough the diuel kepte all mankynd oppreſſed in moſt miſerable thraldome, and tranſlated vs into the kingdom of his dere ſon, that is to ſay, hath adopted vs to bée the ſonnes of God, for his déere beloued ſonnes ſake, by whome we haue redemption through his bloud, that is to wit, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes. This ſentence comprehendeth in ſingular lyghtſomneſſe of woorkes, a ſumme of the doctrine of the Iuſtification of a chriſten man, and in eſpecially theſe twoo places.
                  Firſt, what it is▪ Iuſtification is a riddance of a manWhat iuſtification is. out of the power of darkneſſe, ſin, & death: or it is the forgiueneſſe of ſins & the adopting vs to bée the ſons of God, and a partnerſhyp with the ſaincts in lyght, that is to ſay, the inheriting of eternall lyfe, lyght, ryghtuouſneſſe, and all good things, whiche are giuen too the Sainctes for the price which our Lorde Ieſus Chryſt the ſon of God hath payed for vs by ſheading his owne bloud.
                  Secondly, what is the enforcing cauſe or the deſert, forThe deſert of iuſtification. which we are deliuered & redeemed, & made partakers of this light & lot of the godly, y• is to wit the only blud or paſſion & death of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God. It

was not the bloud of Abell, it was not the bloude of the lamb and of all the ſacrifiſes, it was not the bloud of all the martirs, and much leſſe is it the ceremonies and rites of Moyſes, or of the munks, or of the maſſe, or oure owne vertues and good deedes that do it, as is ſayd more at large Rom. iij. we are iuſtified fréely by the grace of god, through the redemption made by Ieſus Chryſt, whome God hath ſet foorth a mercy feate through faith in his bloud.
               
            
            
               Vppon the .xxv. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle, ij. Pet. j.
                  
                     NOt with ſtanding I thinke it mete (as long as I am in this tabernacle) to ſtirre you vp by putting you in remembrance, foraſmuch as I am ſure how that the tyme is at hand that I muſt put of my tabernacle, euen as our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt hath shewed me, I wilenforce therfore that on euery ſide ye might haue wherwith to ſtirre vp the remembrance of theſe things after my departing. For we folowed not deceiuable fables, when we opened vnto you the power and coming of our Lorde Ieſus Chryſt, but with our eyes we ſaw his maieſtie: euen then verily, when he receiued of god the father honor and glory, and when ther came ſuch a voyce to him from the excellēt glory. This is my dere beloued ſon, in whom I haue delite. This voyce wee harde when it came from heauen, being wyth him in the holy mount. Wee haue alſo a ryght ſure woorde of propheſy, wherevnto if yee take heede, as vnto
                        •
                      a lyght that shyneth in a darke place, yee doo well, vntill the day dawne, and the day ſtarte aryſe in youre hartes. See that yee fyrſte knowe thys, that no prophecie in the Scripture hath any priuate interpretation. For the Scripture came neuet by the will of man
                        •
                      but holy men of God ſpake as they were moued by the holy ghoſt.
               
               
                  
                  The diſpoſement.
                  
                     THis epiſtle is partly perſuaſiue, and partly in ſtructiue. The propoſition and ſumme of it is this: I counſel you to reteyne ſtedfaſtly the true doctrine concerning Chryſt deliuered by the Prophets and Apoſtles, which is the only fountayn and rule of the true religion and of oure euerlaſting ſaluation.
               
               
                  The cheef places of doctrine are theſe.
                  FIrſt it belongeth to the duetie of a faithfull Biſhop too repete oft, and to beate into the heads of his héerers, the ſum of the true doctrin: and to admoniſh and exhort them continually, that they kéep it pure and vn corrupt vnto the laſt gaſpe of theirly 
                        ••
                     , and that they eſchue falſe teachers.
                  The ſecond and principal is, that there is but one true religion and doctrine concerning GOD, which is vttered in the writings of the prophets and Apoſtles, whiche all the Godly are bound diligently to learne throughly to beare away, and ſted faſtly to reteyne.
                  The third concerneth the interpretation of the propheticult ſcriptures.
               
               
                  The fourth place.
                  IN reaching, it is very 
                        〈…〉
                      repete oft and in theIn teaching thiogs muſt be repeted oft. ſame words to beate into 
                        〈…〉
                      heads the, ſumme of the true doctr 
                        ••
                     al
                        ••
                      the matters that are profitable and need, full, that they may ſticke the faſter and take, the déeper rootein the harts of the héerers. Therfore Paul ſayth to the Philipians: I am not wéery too wryte the ſelfeſame things too you, and for you it is he b
                        •
                     uefull. And the wyſe counſell o
                        •
                      
                     Socrates is known 
                        〈…〉
                      in Xenophon ſayth, that the ſelfeſame things are to he ſpoken to the ſelfſame perſones. And the ſaying of Epictetus conteyneth a moſt large rule of oure demeanoure. Hée ſpake alwayes one thing. This you muſt knowe, that it is not poſſible for a man too bée learned, vnleſſe that euery day hée reade or

heare ſuche things as he hath learned, and alſo vſe them in his lyfe. Wherefore Sainct Peter alſo ſayeth in this place, that as long as hée liueth, he will neuer ceaſe from admoniſhing and ſtirring vp his héerers to embrace and hold faſt with a firme and ſtedfaſt faith the true doctrine concerning Chryſt deliuered by himſelf and approued by the records of the prophets. And there is a notable metaphor in the terme Tabernacle, wherby wée are doon to vnderſtand,Tabernacle or tent. that a man hath no certeyn and continual ſeate of lyfe in this body, nor any euerlaſting citie allotted him in this world, but that wée muſt fléet out of this lyfe within a whyle. Therfore ſéeing that lyfe is ſhorte, and cunning long in getting, wée had néed too vſe continual warnings and puttings in mynd, that the cunning of all cunnings (that is too wit, the true doctrine concernyng God and our euerlaſting welfare) may bée lerned by vs aright and too the full, and kept faythfully.
               
               
                  The firſt and principall place.
                  THe foundation of the whole religiō and fayth of a'chriſtenThe foundation of religion. man is this méening or opinion, that there is in déed among mankynd y• doctrine deliuered by god himſelf, which diſcloſeth vntoo vs the being of God, and alſo thys ſecrete will of his, concerning remiſſion of ſinnes and euerlaſting lyfe aſſuredly to be giuen for Chriſtes ſake: & that this doctrine comprehended in the wrytings of ſaint Peter, Paule, and the prophets, is in déede that only one certein and vnmouable wiſedome concerning God & the very true religion: And that all other opinions concerning God, all the religions and woorſhippings of the heathen, and others diſagréeing with this doctrine, are reiected of God and dam
                        ••
                     s.
                  Although this ſentence be vnto chriſtians a moſt ſure & infallible principle of principles, yet not with ſtāding, it is woont cōmonly to be confirmed with too elue arguments, to y• intent y• heathen men & others y• gayn ſay it & deny it,

may the eaſlyer bée perſuaded. Some ſuche degrées of teſtimonies are cited in the preface vpon the .iiij. tome of Luthers woorkes, and in an oration of the lyfe of Ambroſe. And in the .xij. chapter of the Arguments concerning the authoritie and certeyntie of the Chriſten doctrine, they are ſet foorth in a booke by themſelues, and are to bée ſeene bréefly noted in the beginning of my commentarie vppon Mathew. Vnto which alſo may bée ioyned theſe reaſons folowing: yt the Church only hath always poſſeſſed whole and ſound the doctrine not only of the Goſpel, but alſo of the Lawe concerning the one true God, and concernyng wedlocke and chaſtitie, ageinſt which doctrine al the heathen haue admitted an innumerable and monſtrous multitude of Gods, euen cleane contrary to the iudgement of nature, and alſo rouing and outragious kinds of lecheries. And the church only hath kept the continuall accōpt of the yéeres of the world euen from the creation therof.
                  Vntoo theſe fiftéen teſtimonies concerning the certentie of the chriſten doctrin, may alſo be referred theſe four argumentes which Peter vſeth in this Epiſtle, when he exhorteth and ſtirreth vp his héerers to reteyne and kéepe ſtedfaſtly the preſent truth, that is to ſay, the true doctrin which he had taught them concerning Chryſt.
                  1 Of the matter or the kinde of doctrine it ſelf, which isThe matter or ſubſtance of the chriſtian doctrine. not a tale or a flimflawe, nor a ſophiſticall, paynted, and vayne Fable, as the Epicures déeme: but a true declaration of the power and mighte of the comming of oure Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, and in very déede the power of God, to the ſaluation of euery one that beleueth. For he diſtributeth the whole doctrine concerning Chryſt, into the cō
                     ming of Chriſt (who for vs men & for our ſaluation came down from heauen, and becam fleſh, or was made man for vs, and came to vs by his doctrine, miracles, paſſion, death and reſurrection, that he might offer and yeld vnto vs him ſelfe and all his benefits:) and ſecondly in too the almightineſſe

and effectual operation of the doctrine, paſſion & deth of Chriſt, whereby he hath wrought remiſſion of ſinnes, & ſoulhelth vntoo vs, which he imparteth to vs by his word.
                  2 Of the teſtimonie of Peter and the reſt of the ApoſtlesWitneſſe by ſyght. that behild with their eyes Chriſtes maieſtie, glory, and heuenly miracles. For one witneſſe that ſéeth a thing is woorth ten that doo but héere of it.
                  3 Of ye record of ye euerlaſting father vttred by this voiceThe record of god the father. ſent down from heuen vpon moūt Tabor. This is my beloued ſonne in whom I am wel pleaſed, heare yée him.
                  Nowe out of this woonderfull ſtory of Chryſtes tranſfiguration, which the Euangeliſtes haue ſet foorth Math. xvy. Luke. ix. Mark. ix. and ſpecially out of the eternall fathers ſaying: This is my beloued Son, there are ſeuen notable places noted in ye. xvy. & third chapters of Mathew, which places the ſtudiouſe ſort may allege for the enlightening of this Sermon of Peters.
                  4 Of the record of the Prophetes who haue playnelyThe record of the prophets. taught the ſelfe ſame doctrine concerning God, & the perſon, office, and benefits of Chriſt, whiche ſainct Peter and the reſt of the Apoſtles haue ſpread abroade through the whole worlde, like as our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the ſonne of god teſtifieth himſelf, ſaying Iohn. 
                        •
                     . Serch the ſcriptures for it is they y• beare witneſſe of mée. If yée beléeued Moyſes yée would alſo beléeue mée, for he hath written of mée. Alſo Act. x. All the prophetes beare recorde vnto Chryſte, how euery one that beleeueth in him receyueth forgiueneſſe of ſinnes through his name. Therefore in this place Peter willeth vs to take heed, that is to ſay, hée defully andTo take heede. continually to reade, to think vpon, with ſtedfaſt faith to embrace, and conſtantly to folow the doctrine of the prophets as a lampe ſhining in a dark place. For Gods wordGods worde the lanterne of lyght. is the candell that putteth away the miſt and darkneſſe of not knowing God, of ſin, and of death out of our minds, & kindleth in thē the day or light of true knowlege of God,

and true lyfe and comforte in all gréefs and tribulations. For like as thoſe that iorney through rough & vnknown grounds in the deepe and dark night, do long for the riſing of the morning ſtar and for the breaking of the day with great deſire: So the miſerable mynds of men and theyr blynde harts that walke in the ſorowfull and great dangers of this life, can neither knowe God aright nor rule the deuyſes and doings of this lyfe, ſtedyly, nor haue ſtedfaſt comfort in tribulatiōs, but if the lamp of Gods word ſhyne before them, and the ſon of God the ſon of rightuouſneſſe direct and gouerne their harts. And therfore they long moſt erneſtly to ſee that cléere light in ye euerlaſting company of the Son of God. But concerning the effects & profitableneſſe of the prophetical and Apoſtolical doctrin, wherby eche man may be enflamed with more erneſt deſirouſneſſe of it, I ſhal ſpeake more at large an on after in the ſecond Sunday of Aduent.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  
                     OF the interpretation of propheticall ſcripture. Peter cō
                     mendethThe commendation of ſcripture. the doctrine of the prophets to the churche by two arguments. 1. Of the efficient cauſe: bicauſe it is deliuered by the inſtinct and inſp
                        •
                     ration of the holy ghoſte. 2. Of the finall cauſe or the effects: bicauſe it is a burning creſſet lygheny
                        •
                     ng our myndes with the true knowledge of God, true ryghteonſneſſe and lyfe, putting away the miſt and darkneſſe of not knowing God, of ſinne, and of death, that the very day, or the cléere and bryght light of knowing God, & the very light of the worlde or the morning ſtar our Lord Ieſus Chriſt may ariſe in our hartes.
                  For the common ground & the very drift of al the Prophetes,The marke whe
                           •
                         at the prophets ſhoote. or the marke that they ſhoote at is the promyſed Redéemer our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, as it is ſayde. Act. x. All the Prophets beare record vnto Chryſt. Rom. j. Put a part for the Goſpel of God, which he promiſed afore by his prophets in the holy ſcriptures concerning ye ſon. And

Peter addeth, That no propheſie in the ſcripture hath anyHow ſcripture is to be interpreted. priuate interpretation, that is too ſay, it is not too bée expoū
                     ded according to euery mans fanſie, nor according to the iudgements and lykely perſuaſions of mans reaſon, nor as euery man liſteth: but accordyng as the very holy ghoſt (the beſt interpreter of hymſelfe) hath opened it in the cleere and lyghtſome teſtimonies of the woord by him deliuered. As Chryſt ſayeth. Iohn. xvj. The holy ghoſt ſhal teach ye al things, and ſhal bring you in remembrance of thoſe things that I haue ſayd vntoo you. j. Cor. u. He hath reueled theſe things to vs by his ſpirite. For the naturall man perceyueth not the things which are of Gods ſpirit. For they are fooliſhneſſe too him, and he is not able to vnderſtand them bicauſe they muſt be weyed ſpiritually.
               
               
                  Of interpretation.
                  IN the good writings and authors of other arts in generall,Interpretation, what it is in generall. Interpretation is, to shewe the propoſition, ſtate or ground of the matter written, and the order of the partes and Arguments, and aptly to bring the cheef poynts into the common places of the ſame arte of which the writing entreateth, and too enlyghten them by putting them intoo theyr definitions, diuiſions, ſentences, and examples: and to open the maner of handling it, with the phraſes and figures of the wordes according to the preceptes of the artes after the order of Rhetorike. But in the right vnderſtanding and expoundingInterpretation of ſc
                           ••
                        pture. of the propheticall Scripture, beſide theſe ordinarie tricks of all good interpreters, it behoueth that a lyght be kindled by the holy ghoſte in the myndes of the godly, by the foreſhinyng wherof they may handſomly receiue and vnderſtand the doctrine of the Goſpel concerning Chryſt which is ſet aboue and beyonde the ſight of mans reaſon, and diſcerne it aryght from mans wiſedome. This lyght dooth the holy ghoſt kindle by the woord which himſelf teacheth, whyle it is herd, red, and thought vppon, and when

the textes are conferred by the godly, who are more ſkilfull too learne than to preſume, & more earneſt to beléeue than to ſtryue, & more in loue with Gods wiſdome than in liking with theyr owne, as Tertullian ſayeth.
                  The beſt manner of interpreting the Prophetes is,Beſt interpretacion of the ſcripture by conference of textes. (which wée ſée Luther hath folowed in his thirde & fourth Tome) that firſte a man do thorowly conſider & wey the na
                        ••
                     ue ſignification of the wordes and weyghtineſſe of the phraſes: and then reducing the matters to the places of the Goſpell, enlighten them by comparing them with the textes of the new Teſtament. For it is as true as cō
                     monly ſayd, y• there is no better way to interprete ſcriptures, than to expound one text by another: and that the old Teſtament or the Prophetes is the fountaine of the new Teſtament, & the new Teſtament ageyn the light of the olde Teſtament. Wée ſée all of vs that there commeth a wonderfull light to the ſayings of the Prophetes, by laying to them the like textes, whiche are in the wrytings of y• Apoſtles: like as Paule expoundeth very lightſomly the promis made to Abraham cōcerning the ſeede. Galat. iij. and. Rom. iiij. And the whole doctrine touching the paſſeouer mencioned in. Exod. xij. is expoūded in this ſhort ſaying of Paule. Chriſt our Eaſterlambe is offered vp for vs. All the whole Propheſie of Eſay is enlightened in ye ſayings cited by chriſt & the Apoſtles, through whoſe forelight, the true and natiue méening of the whole Prophete may bee the eaſlyer and rightlier vnderſtood.
                  Now whereas the Papiſtes prate that the holy ſcriptureThe prating of the Papiſtes. is darke and doutfull, and therfore there is néede of ſome other more certeine rule, to interpret it by: they are manifeſtly conuinced by this place of Peters, which compareth the ſcripture to a creſſet or a light: like as the Pſalme alſo ſayeth. Thy woord is a lanterne to my féete. Alſo, the commaundement of the Lord is bright, and giueth lighte to the eyes. And it is manifeſte that the chéef

pointes of the Chriſtian doctrine, the ten Commaundementes, and the promis of the Goſpell, are not written darkely or doutfully, but in euident and propre termes. And bycauſe the ruder ſorte in ſome places vnderſtande not the kindes of ſpéeche, phraſe, and figures of woordes, and the matters them ſelues ſet aboue the reach of mans reaſon: It is Gods will that the voyce of interpreters ſhould ſound in his Churche, and he hath giuen moreouer the giftes of tongues, of eloquence, and of other artes which are helpes of learned interpretacion. But concerning the whole maner of interpreting ſcripture, there is more ſayd in another place. And certeine rules of the maner of interpreting ſayings that are contrarie in Rhetoricall order one to another, are recited in the caſe of cō
                     trarietie of lawes.
               
            
            
               Vppon the .xxvj. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. j. Theſ. iiij.
                  
                     I Would not Brethren haue you ignorant concerning them which are fallen a ſleepe, that ye ſorow not as other do, which haue no hope. For yf wee beleeue that Ieſus dyed and roſe ageyne: euen ſo them alſo which ſleepe by Ieſus will God bring ageyne with him. For this ſay wee vnto you in the worde of the Lord, that wee whiche liue, and are remayning in the comming of the Lord, ſhall not come ere they which ſleepe. For the Lord him ſelf ſhall deſcend from heauen with a shout, and the voyce of the Archaungell and trompe of God. And the dead in Chriſt shall ariſe firſte, then shall wee which lyue and remayne, bee caught vp with them alſo in the cloude, to meete the Lord in the ayre. And ſo shall we euer be with the Lord. VVherfore comfort your ſelues one another with theſe woordes.
               
               
                  
                  The diſpoſementes.
                  IT is of that ſort that is perſuaſiue. For it is a comfort to bee ſet ageynſt death, or ageynſt the moorning and heauineſſe that wee take for the death of our ſelues or of ſome others that are deere vnto vs. And in the ende of the Epiſtle there is ſhewed this bound & vſe of this preſent diſcourſe concerning the reſurrection of the dead. Comforte your ſelues one another with theſe wordes. For the moſt effectual & moſt ſtedy cōfort in al ye tribulacions of this moſt ſhorte & miſerable lyfe (which in very déede is nothing els but Duſt, ſhadow, deaw, but a Ghoſt, but a ſteam, but a puffe, f
                           •
                        ther, aire, blaſt, cinder, a dreame, froth, a ſtorme, but a ſtadge, but a ſpan, but a footſtep.
                  
                  Yea and in death it ſelfe, is the aſſured hope of theThe comforte of all perſecutions troubles and greefes. reſurrection & of the bliſſed lyfe and euerlaſting company whiche wée ſhall haue with God: verely bycauſe wée are throughly perſwaded, that wée which embrace Chriſtes doctrine by fatyh, are not created to the miſeries of this troubleſome & mortall lyfe onely: ne that he meaneth the ſoul, which was created of nothing, the thing which was ſometime nothing, dooth vtterly periſh and decay ſo as it ſhould vtterly returne to nothing ageyn: but y• our ſoules do in déede remayne aliue after death, & ye aſſoone as they are looſed from ye bond of their bodies, they are out of hand with the Lord, & enioy ye ſight of God in quiet peace & ioy: & that our bodies alſo which ſléepe in death, ſhall aſſuredly reuiue, & become agein ye dwelling places of their ſoules, ſo as we hauing receiued ye ſame bodies ageyn▪ (which ſhal be glorified & haue a liuely beautie) & the ſame fleſh which we now carie about vs, and beyng vtterly free from all ſinne, labour and gréef, ſhall liue for euermore with the Lord, enioying the ſight, wiſdome, light, rightuouſneſſe, and bliſfulneſſe of the whole Godhead, and glorifie God ageyne on our behalf for euer and euer.
                  
                     Of this hope which is peculiar to the Chriſtians, andTeſtimonies of the reſurrection. the very helmet of our ſaluation, holy Iob ſayeth: this hope is layd vp in my boſome. I know that my redéemer liueth, and I ſhall riſe out of the earth in the laſt day, and ſhall bée compaſſed ageine with my ſkinne, & in my fleſh ſhall I ſée God, whom I ſhall ſée and none other for mée, & with theſe eyes ſhall I behold him and with none other. Apoc. vj. &. xxj. The ſoules of the ſaincts are before ye throne of God, and ſerue him day and night. And God ſhall wipe all teares from their eyes, and there ſhall bée no death, nor moorning, nor crying, nor labour. &c. Apo. xiiij. Bliſſed are the dead that dye in the Lord from henceforth.
                  The Philoſophicall conſolations that are to be ſet ageynſtPhiloſophicall conſolatious ageynſt death and all grief. death, and whiche burie a man with ſomewhat leſſe ſorow, are gathered by Cicero in his firſt Tuſculane queſtion, and by Plutarche in his booke to Apollonius. And the ſumme therof is comprehended in this oration of Socrates in Plato: I am in great hope (O yée Iudges) that it falleth well on my behalf that I am ſente to death. For one of theſe two things muſt néedes bée, eyther that death taketh vtterly away all féeling, or els that we fléete out of this place into ſome other. Therefore whither all féeling periſh, and that death bee like that kinde of ſléepe, which oftentimes without ſight of dreames yeldeth moſt quiet reſt, good God what a gayne is it to dye? Or yf the things be true which are reported, that death is a remouing into ſuch coaſtes as they inhabit which are paſſed out of this lyfe: that is now a farre greater bliſſe, that when a man hath eſcaped from theſe that will néedes bée counted for Iudges, he ſhall come to thoſe that deſerue the name of Iudges in déede, (I meane Minos, Rhadamanthus, Aeacus and Triptolemus,) and be conuerſaunt with thoſe that liued rightuouſly and faythfully. Now to haue communication with Orpheus, Muſaeus, Homer, and Heſiodus, what eſtéeme you it too bée woorth? Truely I could finde in my

harte to dye oft entimes (yf it were poſſible) ſo that the things whiche I ſpeake of might befall mée, what a pleaſure would it bee too mée (thinke you) when I ſhould talke with Palamedes, with A
                           •
                        ax, and with others that were entrapped by the iudgement of vnrightuous men? neyther would I wiſh you, yee Iudges to feare y• death, where by ye haue ſet mée at libertie. For there can no manner of euill befall vnto a good man eyther aliue or dead, neyther ſhall his caſe bée at any time neglected of the Gods immortall, neyther is this thing happened to mée by chaunce.
                  Now foraſmuch as (according as Baſilius right grauelyIt behoueth Chriſtians to reade the Philoſophers and P
                           •••
                        es. counſelleth) it is for the behoof of Chriſtian folke to reade the writings of Philoſophers and Poetes: bycauſe eyther they ſay the ſame that wée doo, and ſo their conſent is profitable: or els they ſpeake diuers things, & ſo it auayleth to conferre them: wée will in this place recite in forme of logicke, the chéef argumentes of Ciceros firſte Tuſculane queſtion, wherein he hath comprehended the comfortes and remedies too bee vſed ageynſt death, to the intent that the laying of them togither may enlighten both the kindes of doctrine, and that wée conſidering the doutes and darkneſſe of the Philoſophers about this article, may be the more in loue with the doctrine of ye Church deliuered by God, & warranted of God, by rayſing ageyn of dead men, and other notable miracles.
                  The propoſition of the firſte Tuſculane queſtion isThe propoſition or ground of Ciceros firſt Tuſculane queſtion and his argumēts vppon the ſame. this: Death is not euill, or death is not to bee feared. For eyther mens ſoules are not quenched by death, but remaine aliue, & depart into thoſe places which the bliſſed ſort doo inhabite, or els they periſh vtterly with the bodyes, ſo as there remayneth in them no féeling, ſenſe, or perceyueraunce of any harme.
                  The firſte parte of this Dilemna, that mens ſoules are immortall, Cicero proueth by ſix argumentes, which wée

haue recited héeretofore in the diſpoſement of the .j. Cor. xv. vppon the ſecond holy day in Eaſter.
                  The latter part, that though the ſoules dye with theyr bodyes, yet there is no harme in death. Cicero likewiſe goeth about to proue by ſix argumentes alſo.
               
               
                  The firſt Argument.
                  IF there bée any euill in death, eyther it is to the ſoule or to the body.
                  But neyther in the body nor in the ſoule that are quite dead, can remayne any ſenſe of euill.
                  
                     Ergo in death whiche vtterly quencheth a man & bringeth him to nothing, there is no euill at all.
               
               
                  The ſecond.
                  THat whiche riddeth men from the troubles and miſeries that hang ouer them, and is the ende of all miſchéeues and harmes, is not to bée counted among euill things.
                  Death riddeth men from the troubles that hang ouer them, and is the end and vttermoſt refuge from all miſeries.
                  
                     Ergo death is not euill.
               
               
                  The third.
                  THat which many excellent men haue of their owne accord or certeinly with a ſtout and quiet minde vndertaken, is not to bée feared.
                  Many valiaunt and good men haue with ſtout courage vndertaken to dye for their countrey and for other cauſes, as the Decians, the Scipios, Theramenes, Socrates, Leonides. &c.
                  
                  
                     Ergo death is not to be feared as the chéef euill.
               
               
                  The fourth.
                  In ſléepe there is none euill.
                  
                     Death is like to ſléepe:
                  
                     Ergo there is none euill in death.
               
               
                  The fifth.
                  No naturall things are euill.
                  Death is due vnto nature, who hath lent vs the occupying of lyfe, as it were of money, without ſetting any day of payment.
                  
                     Ergo death is not euill.
               
               
                  The ſixth.
                  No commendable thing is euill.
                  The deathes of ſuch as excelled in vertue (and ſpecially of thoſe that vndertooke them for their coūtry ſake) purchaſe euerlaſting commendation.
                  
                     Ergo they bée not euill.
                  Theſe argumentes haue I bréefly ſet downe, not onely to the intent the reading of the firſt Tuſculane queſtion may bee the playner to the yonger ſort, by ſhewing too them the framing and order of the argumentes, but alſo to thintent the difference betwene the Chriſtian doctrine and the doctrine of the Philoſophers might bée ſéene the more euidently. For Philoſophie knoweth vtterly nothingThe blindneſſe of mans reaſon in the cheef pointes of knowledge. at all of the reſtitution of our dead bodies, and the reſurrection of our fleſh, but déemeth that the ſame are reſolued into their firſt matter whereof they were made, and there vtterly periſh for euer, euen as the bodyes of beaſtes doo. Neyther hath it any certeyn, ſtable and ſtedy beleef of the immortalitie of the ſoule, and of the euerlaſting felowſhip with God and the bliſſed ſort: but floting, 
                        •
                     o
                        ••
                     ing, gazing about, ſticking, and making many backeturnings like a ſhip y• is wether driuen on the huge ſea, & like images ye wauer in a troubled water: weout bringing any certeins and ſound comfort too the mindes that are

encountring and wreſtling with death. Therfore let vs with moſt thankfull mindes embrace Gods voyce auouched with the reſurrection of his owne ſonne, whiche alonly ſheweth both the cauſes of death and all miſeries, and the true and effectuall remedies of the ſame, that is to wit, the moſt ioyfull reſurrection and lyfe and glorie euerlaſting with God.
               
            
            
               Vppon the firſt Sunday in Aduent.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. xiij.
                  
                     THis alſo we know (I meane the ſeaſon,) how that it is time that we ſhould now awake out of ſleepe. For now is our ſaluation neerer, than when we beleeued. The night is paſſed, and the day is come nye. Let vs therfore caſt away the deedes of darkneſſe, and let vs put on the armour of light. Let vs wake honeſtly as it were in the day light: not in eating and drinking, neyther in chambering and wantonneſſe, neyther in ſtrife and enuying: but put yee on the Lorde Ieſus Chriſte. And make not prouiſion for the fleſh to fulfill the luſtes of it.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is of that kind that is perſuaſiue. For it is an exhortacion to watchfulneſſe or diligence in learning the doctrine of the Goſpel, and in framing the whole lyfe after ye rule of Gods word. The ſtate or ſumme of it is this: I exhort you to embrace earneſtly the Goſpel, wherin is offe
                           ••
                        d you euerlaſting ſaluation by Ieſus Chriſt, and to worſhi
                           〈…〉
                         with true fayth & dutyfulneſſe of all vertues.
                  
               
               
                  The cheef places are three.
                  
                     THe doctrine of the Goſpell concerning Chriſtes delight of the world, by whom lyfe and euerlaſting ſaluacion are

offered & giuen to vs, muſt earneſtly and with ſingular heedfulneſſe and diligence bee of all the godly ſort, learned, kept, and ſpred abrode.
                     ij Of the faith of the Fathers, and that all holy men of all ages obteyned eternall ſaluation by one ſelfe ſame way, that is to wit by the voyce of the goſpel, for the only mediator Chriſtes ſake, through faith.
                     iij An exhortation too new obedience or a lyfe agreeable with the Goſpell, or too good woorkes, of which he reckeneth fiue kindes in order.
                  
                  
                     1 Diligence and watchfulneſſe in learning the Doctrine,Watchfulneſſe. and folowing true godlyneſſe according too the lyght ſhewed in the Goſpell.
                     2 Sobrietie which eſchueth drunkenneſſe and gluttonie.Soberneſſe. Chaſtitie.
                     
                     3 Chaſtitie or ſtayedneſſe which eſchueth forbidden luſts and wantonneſſe.
                     4 Méekneſſe and deſire of concord, which repreſſeth wilfulneſſeMeekneſſe. and enuiouſneſſe.
                     5 Gouernement or brideling of all the affections.Gouernement.
                     
                  
                  Concerning theſe vertues, ſobrietie, chaſtitie, méekneſſe, and deſire of concorde, and concerning the vices that encounter them, there bée orderly expoſitions ſet foorth in the declaration of the ten commaundements, and in my rules of lyfe. Which I would wiſh too bee matched with this booke conteining the diſpoſements of the Epiſtles, in the end thereof, for this cauſe, that there ſhould not néed too tedious turning and returning too the morall preceptes or places of vertues and vices in euery ſeueral Epiſtle. Now therfore wil I adde certeine aduertiſements to the firſt two places of this dayes Epiſtle, which are propre too the goſpell, and will expound certeine of the darker termes and ſpéeches.
               
               
                  ¶ THE ENTERANCE.
                  FIrſt & formoſt in this place, the preacher may make ſomeOf the inſtitution of Aduent. ſhort preface concerning the tyme. For our aunceters of old tyme termed the four Sundayes next before Chriſtmas,

                     the Sundayes in Aduent. And their méening was, that their héerers ſhould bée put in remembrance, and prepared too diſcharge their mindes from all other cares & deſires, and with greater care, watchfulneſſe, ſobretie, reuerence, and héedfulneſſe, too ſettle them ſelues too conſider this woonderfull purpoſe of God concerning the redemption of mankynde by the comming of his ſonne in the fleſh. And our forefathers made foure commings of Chriſt. Firſt in the fleſh. Secondly in the miniſterie. Thirdly too his Paſſion, whereof is ſpoken in the goſpel of this day. And fourthly too the laſt iudgement, wherof wée ſhall héere more this day ſeuennight.
                  Therefore too the intent that men might bée ſtirred vp too the more héedfull conſideration of ſo great matters, at thisTake tyme vvhen it commeth, for tyme vvill avvay. time which goeth next before the comming or birthe of our Sauior Ieſu Chriſt, the Epiſtle that is red this day, was appoynted very fit for the time. For in it Paul making mention of the tyme alſo, exhorteth all the godly too wake out of their ſléepe and darkneſſe of ſinnes, ignorance of God, and careleſſeneſſe which neglecteth GOD, and letteth looſe the reynes too all miſdéedes and luſtes: and not too let ſlip the occaſion of atteyning eternall ſaluation by the Goſpell: but too lerne the doctrine of it with ſinguler endeuer, watchfulneſſe and héede, and by al meanes too embrace and hold faſt the benefites that are offered in the ſame. For the lyght of the goſpell ſhyneth not at all tymes among the Iewes and the Gentyles: But ſometymes the blynd and ſorowfull darkneſſe of not knowing the Goſpell, ouerdreepeth the greateſt part of mankynde, as before the comming of Chryſt many hundred yéeres the Gentyles were left in ignorance of the Goſpel. Yea and among the Iewes alſo the lyght of the true Doctrine was for the more part quenched quite out. And now alſo the wickedneſſe and vnthankfulneſſe of men is puniſhed with the blindneſſe and outrages of Mahomet & the Pope. Therefore let vs acknowledge the exceeding great benefit of God, that in this our time (when the world is at the laſt caſt) he hath

kindled agein ſo cléere and notable a lyght of his goſpell, concerning the office and benefites of Chryſt, & our euerlaſting ſaluation. And let vs not like thankleſſe perſons hold ſkorne of gods ſo great gift, but let vs with ſinguler watchfulneſſe, diligence and héede, endeuer too embrace it, hold it faſte and ſpred it abrode. For doutleſſe as Plato ſayth of another kynd of Doctrine. There came neuer, neither ſhall there come a greater gift. And if the preſent oportunitie bée neglected and deſpyſed, within a whyle after there will folow new darkeneſſe and confuſions of opinions. Wherefore ſéeing that the lyght of the true Doctrine ſhyneth now among vs, and that the Goſpell of ſaluation is neerer or better knowne too vs, than too our fathers: let vs with all héede and watchfulneſſe kéepe it. For by the Goſpell are ſuch benefites offered vntoo vs, as no other Doctrine is able too giue vs.
                  Admit that Philoſophie bée the guide of lyfe, admit it bée the ſercher of truth, the expulſer of vyce, the foūder of lawes, and the miſtreſſe of manners and diſcipline, as Cicero ſaith: Admit that Eloquence bée the Quéene of al worldly things: Bée it that a Troian is comparable too many other. Yet doo all theſe Artes ſerue only for the darke nyght of this mortal lyfe, neyther can they bring true lyght and eternall ſaluation. The Goſpel only is the power of God that woorketh ſaluation too euery one that beléeueth. For by the Goſpell andThe goſpell is the cheef of all doctrines. none otherwyſe dooth God ſhewe his mightie operation in vs, kindling in our mindes the day or light of the true knowledge of God, and of true fayth and prayer, giuing vs eternal ſaluation, (that is too ſay deliuerance from ſinne, from Gods wrath, and from euerlaſting death) and new rightuouſneſſe, lyfe, ioy, and glory euerlaſting. Theſe heauenly and perpetuall benefites are offered too vs by the Goſpell, according as wée ſhall ſpeake more at large of the profitableneſſe of the Goſpell in the Epiſtle of the next Sunday.
               
               
                  
                  The ſecond place.
                  AFter one and the ſelfe ſame manner doo all the SainctesAll folke of all ages haue but one way too ſaluation. of all ages, the Fathers, the Prophets, the Iewes and the Gentyles obteine eternal ſaluation: that is too wit, for the only ſon of Gods ſake our Lord Ieſus Chryſt through fayth, as it is plainly ſayd. Act. iiij. There is not any other name giuē vntoo men vnder heauen, wherin wée muſt bée ſaued. Act. xv. Wée beléeue our ſelues to be ſaued by the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, as our fathers were. And of Abraham it is expreſly ſaid, Abraham ſaw my day. And agein, Abraham beléeued God, and it was imputed too him for ryghtuouſneſſe.
                  
                     VVhy then dooth Paule ſay that ſaluation is neerer too vs now, than when we beleeued? I anſwer, for thrée cauſes. Firſt bicauſe Chryſte the author & giuer of euerlaſting life whom the fathers looked for too come, is now come in the ſight of the world. Secondly, bicauſe a greater and bryghter light of the Goſpel is kindled and ſpred further abrode now, than before Chryſtes comming. And wee ſée that the very Apoſtles did not cléerly perceiue before Chryſtes reſurrection, what manner of kingdome Chryſtes kingdome ſhould bée. And thirdly, bicauſe the Gentyles alſo were called too the felowſhippe of euerlaſting ſaluation, by the vniuerſall preaching of the Goſpell.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  PAule enlyghteneth his exhortation too new obedyence or a lyfe agreeable too the Goſpel, by an Allegorie of the light or of the day, and of darkneſſe, which Allegorie he vnfoldeth ſomewhat at large. j. Theſſ. v. Eph. iiij. and .v. Concerning the cauſes that ſhould moue vs too folowe good works earneſtly, and concerning the ſeueral ſinnes which Paule warneth vs too ſhun in this place, an expoſition may bée fetched out of the place that entreateth of good woorkes, and out of the expoſition of the ten commaundements. I will but ſhew the harder phraſes at this tyme.
                  
                     
                     Let vs lay aſide the woorkes of darkneſſe: that is too ſay ignoranceThe vvorks of darkneſſe. of God, careleſſeneſſe which neglecteth the doctrine of the Goſpell, and euerlaſting ſaluation,) all ſinfull luſtes, and all outward offences fighting ageinſt the law of God.
                  
                     And let vs put on the armor of lyght: that is too wit, trueThe armor of lyght. knowledge of God, true fayth, inuocation, ſtudie, and profeſſion of the true Doctrine, patience, lowlyneſſe, hope, and the reſt of the weapons that are néedefull for the mayntenance of the honor of true godlyneſſe, for the diſappoynting of the diuels policies, and for the repreſſing of the headineſſe of ſinfull nature: all which, Paule deſcribeth. Eph. vj.
                  
                     As in the day: that is too ſay, in the cléere knowledge ofThe day light. the Doctrine of the Goſpell, and in true fayth grounded vppon Chryſt. VValking after a comely ſort: That is too ſay, let vs frame the purpoſes and dooings of our lyfe, or let vs liue as it becommeth vs, or as agréeth with the will & woord of God.
                  
                     Not in feaſting. The Gréeke woord Comois ſignifieth drū
                     kenFeaſting. feaſtes, ribaudly ſonges, and wanton daunſings, ſuch as are woont too bée vſed by wildheaded and wanton yoongmen. The contrarie vertue is ſobrietie or ſtayedneſſe, and ſhamefaſtneſſe, which perteyneth too the ſixth commaundement.
                  
                     Neyther in chambering and wantonneſſe. The latin wordChambering and vvantonneſſe. 
                     Laſciuia wantonneſſe, ſignifyeth a forewardneſſe too iolitie, gamings, and diuerſitie of pleaſures, (which notwithſtanding is not matched with craftyneſſe and deſire to doo harm,) like horſes which (waring luſtie through ouermuche reſt and feeding,) become coltiſh and fall too kicking and winſing. And Appius in Liuie ſayeth, that the common people doo rather ware wanton than cruell. But the Gréeke woord Aſelgia ſignifyeth ſomewhat more, namely a more leaud and ruffianly ſauſineſſe, and reproche offered in the way of diſhoneſtie. It appéereth that Paule in this place ſpeaketh of the filthineſſe and vnclenneſſe, whereuntoo the contrary vertue is chaſtitie, perteyning too the ſixth commaundement.
                  
                     
                     Neyther in ſtryfe and enuying, or ſpytefulneſſe. The contrarieStryfe and enuying. vertues are, méekeneſſe, deſire of concord and modeſtie or mildneſſe, of which is ſpoken in the fourth and fifth commaundements.
                  
                     Put on the Lord Ieſus, that is to wit, in receiuing (by faith)Too put on Chryſt. the imputation of Chryſtes ryghtuousneſſe, where withall our ſinnes bée couered as with a cleane garment. And agein by folowing Chryſtes example in earneſtneſſe of learning & teaching the doctrine, in profeſſion, patience, méekeneſſe, chaſtitie, temperance. &c.
                  
                     And make not prouiſion for the flesh, too fulfill the luſtesProuiſion for the flesh. thereof. Rule and expreſſe all ſtraggling luſtes, but yet forpine not your bodyes, neither neglect the welfare thereof, ſo farre as ſhalbée néedfull too the going through with al things aryght, according too your vocations: but haue a care or regard of the fleſh or of ye body, like as Coloſſ. ij. He willeth vs too honor the body, that it may bee kept in helth, after a rightful order and maner. Yet muſt it not waxe wanton and run headlong intoo vyce, nor too the nouriſhing or fulfilling of the inordinate deſires and luſtes thereof.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋppon the ſecond Sunday in Aduent.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. xv.
                  
                     VVHatſoeuer things are written afore tyme, are wrytten for our learning, that wee thorowe patience and comfort of the Scryptures, myght haue hope. The God of patience, and conſolation, giue you that ye bee like minded one towardes one another, after the enſample of Chryſt Ieſu: that ye all agreeing togither, may with one mouth praiſe God the father of our Lord Ieſus. Wherfore receiue yee one another, as Chriſt

receiued vs, too the praiſe of God. And I ſay, that Ieſus Chryſt was a miniſter of the circumciſion for the truthe of God, too confirme the promiſes made vntoo the fathers. And let the gentiles praiſe God for his mercy, as it is written: For this cauſe I wil praiſe thee among the Gentiles, and ſing vnto thy name. And agein he ſaith: reioyce ye Gentiles with his people. And ageine, praiſe the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud ye him all nations togither. And againe Eſayas ſaith: there shalbee the roote of Ieſſe, and he that shall riſe too raigne ouer the Gentyles: in him shall the Gentyles truſt. The God of hope fil you with all ioy and peace in beleuing: that ye may be rich in hope thorow the power of the holy Ghoſt.
                  
                     THis Epiſtle is partly inſtructiue, and partly perſwaſiue.
                     
                        The cheefe places are three.
                        1 Of the endes or vſe of holy ſcripture.
                        2 An exhortation too mainteine concord in the true Doctrine of Chriſt, which is oft times diſtroubled either with newneſſe of orders, or with vnſeaſonable omit ting of them, which thing offendeth the weake.
                        3 A Doctrine concerning the gathering of the Churche of Iewes and Gentyles, and ſpecially of the calling of the Gentyles.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     ALl this whole Epiſtle, in the continuance of Paules diſcourſeOf bearing vvyth the vveake. is directed too this poynt: That the weake which are willing to be taught, are to be born with, and not to be eſtranged from the goſpel by the ſodein laying away of the ceremonies of Moyſes. This thing doth Paul ſhew in the beginning of the .xv. chap. by the example of Chriſt, & by the ſaying of the Pſ. 68. which he citeth. And by y• occaſion he addeth a generall ſaying of ye vſe of holy ſcripture, & forth wt returneth to his pur poſed exhortation taken at the exāple of Chryſt: wherof the

ſumme is this. Let there bee agreement betweene the Iewes that vſe the Ceremonies of Moyſes, and the Gentiles that vſe them not. Let none of them offend or condemne other for the kéeping or nonkéeping of the Ceremonies of Moyſes: but let eche beare with others weakeneſſe, and vphold one another like as Chryſt receiued and redéemed bothe the Iewes and the Gentiles. For he became the miniſter of the Circumciſion, or of the Circumciſed Iewes, too the intent he myght confirme the promyſes too bée true, which were made too the fathers, of his comming: and that the Gentyles being called too the partnerſhip of Chryſtes benefites, ſhould glorifie God, not with the Ceremonies of Moyſes, but with true and earneſt profeſſion and giuing of thankes. Upon this occaſion dooth Paul wynd in the things that are ſpoken of the calling of the Gentyles, and of offering the Sacrifiſes of praiſe too God in this place. And this is the ſumme of all Paules diſcourſe in his xiiij. and .xv. chapters.
                     Neuertheleſſe as at this tyme, I will ſomewhat at large vnfold but one ſaying of this Epiſtle, which concerneth the endes and profitableneſſe of holy ſcripture.
                     
                        VVhatſoeuer things are written aforetime, are written forThe profit of holy ſcripture. our learning, that wee through patience and comfort of the ſcriptures, myght haue hope. God hath made men that they ſhould bée reaſonable creatures, to whō when they acknowledge him and glorifie him) he might communicate his owne wiſdome, lyfe, ioyfulneſſe, and glory for euermore. Wherefore too the intent men myght acknowledge God, he of his excéeding great goodneſſe hathe diſcloſed himſelfe, not onely by perceyuerances graffed in mannes mynd at his firſt creation, but alſo by auouchement of miracles, wrought aboue the accuſtomed order of Nature, and by deliueraunce of the certeine Doctrine of the lawe and the Goſpell, which it was his will too haue enrolled in the bookes of the Prophets and Apoſtles, & too bée acknowledged, woorſhipped & ſerued according to ye ſame & none otherwiſe. And by theſe wrytings of ye
                        
Prophetes red, herd, and thought vppon by vs, God is effectuall in vs in déed, teaching vs, comforting vs, and kindling in vs the beginnings of lyfe and glorie euerlaſting.
                     Firſt then in this ſaying, lette vs conſider it too bée Gods excéeding great benefit, that he hath come foorth of his ſecret dwelling place, and vttered himſelfe too vs, and deliuered vs a certeine doctrine concerning him ſelfe compryſed in wryting. And let vs aſſure our ſelues, that in all thoughtes concerning God, Gods being and will, and our owne eternall ſaluation, it behoueth our myndes too bée tyed too theſe wrytings of the Prophetes and Apoſtles, and that wée may not otherwyſe déeme or ſpeake of God and our owne eternall ſaluation, than as he hath appoynted in the woord reueled to vs by his ſonne. Eſai. viij. for a Lawe and a witneſſe: that if they ſpeake not according too this woord, they ſhall not ſée the morning light. And Hilarius very diſcréetly ſayeth: Of God is it too bée lerned, what is too bée thought of GOD, bycauſe he can not otherwyſe bée knowen than by his own authoritie. And Ireneus ſayeth: Bycauſe it was impoſſible tooThe vncerteintie of mennes lerning. knowe God without God, God by his woord teacheth men too knowe God. Now let vs conſider how great is the darkneſſe of mennes myndes, and how foule bée the errours and outrages of the Heathen wandring without this woord and doctrine written by the Prophetes and Apoſtles, of whome ſome dout whither there bée any God at all, others knowe not what and of what manner GOD is, others ſurmyſe an innumerable number of Gods, others eſtraunge the Gods from all medling with worldly matters, others hold opinion that mennes ſoules periſh togither with their bodyes, & other ſome that they remayne ſtil alyue. And vniuerſally al of them being vncertein and doutfull of Gods will towards them, and of their owne ſaluation, doo fall eyther intoo Epicuriſh contempt of God, or elſe intoo perpetuall deſpayre. The ſame thing befalleth in the Churche too al ſuch as leauing the woord, looke for new enlyghtmentes and reuelations,

or traunces, and iudge of Gods election, not by the vniuerſal promiſe writtē, but by imaginatiōs of mānes reaſon.
                     With moſt thankfull mynde therefore is this excéeding great benefit of God too bée embraced, that he hath deliuered vs the doctrine written, whereby he will haue our faith and all our thoughts concerning him & our own ſaluatiō ruled. And therfore let vs reade theſe writings diligently and heedfully, let vs bée in hand with them night and day, as Chryſte cōmandeth, Serche ye ſcriptures. And Paule biddeth vs take héed too reading and doctrine. And for this purpoſe chéefly are the firſt traynements of learning in ſchooles, and the whole maner of ſpelling and reading, too bée lerned, that wée may reade and vnderſtande the booke heretofore written too the church by the prophets and Apoſtles.
                     
                        Secondly, let vs conſider that by theſe writings or by this woord of God which wée héere, reade, and think vpon, God in very déed woorketh mightily in vs, & that by this only meane and not otherwiſe, he teacheth, cōforteth, draweth, begetteth a new, and ſaueth men, and kindleth in vs the faith whereby wée receyue theſe benefites, as it is playnly ſayd Roman. x. How ſhall they beléeue onleſſe they héere? Howe ſhall they héere without a preacher? Faith is by héering, and héering by the woord of God. Rō. j. The Goſpel is the power of God too ſaluation to euery one that beléeueth. Act. xj. Hée ſhal ſpeake woordes too thée by whiche thou ſhalt bée ſaued, thou and all thy houſhold. ij. Cor. v. Wée are meſſangers in ſted of Chriſt, as though God exhorteth or comforteth by vs. And in this place Paule expreſly ſayeth, that wée may haue hope by cō
                        fort of the Scripture. His méening is, that in all our troubles, baniſhments, diſeaſes, and death, wée ſhould ſéeke comfort out of this woorde which is written before tyme for vs, and that wée ſhould by fayth reſt vppon God knowen by the woord, & beléeue this woord written, as well as if wée ſhould héere God declaring his will with his owne lyuely voyce from heauen. Let vs ſet theſe teſtimonies ageinſt Stinkféeld,

who cryeth out that GOD conuerteth, ſanctifyeth, andThe errour of the Enthuſiaſtes. comforteth vs, not by thinking vppon the woorde written, but immediatly by himſelfe without any meanes. Whiche fantaſticall imagination dooth vtterly put away all the exercyſes of faith and Chriſten inuocation.
                     
                        Thirdly, Whereas Paule fayeth that theſe Bookes ofwherfore ſcripture ſerueth. holy writ were written before for oure learning, he the rewithall counſelleth vs too reade the ſame diligently, continually, and héedfully. For he hath not ſet foorth theſe holy Bookes, for myſe too knibble in bencheholes, or for flyes too ray in the pulpit, or for mothes and bowds too conſume in corners, but for vs too reade, that wée may ſucke wholeſome inſtruction and comfort out of them. Ageine, this ſelfeſayd parcell dooth vs too wit, that all the promiſes of grace, helpe, deliuerance, and of all Gods benefites, and that all the examples of Gods wrath in puniſhing, and of his mercie in receyuing thoſe that bée falne, perteyne too vs alſo, and are alſo too bée applyed too vs.
                     
                        Fourthly, let vs in this ſaying of Paules cōſider the foureThe vſes or effects of holy writ. chéef ends, vſes, or profites and effectes. Of which the firſt is the doctrine of the moſt high matters, vnknowen too mānes reaſon, and perteyning too the eternall ſaluation of vs all, concerning which things, all other bookes written by men can vtterly teache nothing at al that is ſound and ſubſtantiall, that is to wit, concerning the true knowledge & calling vpon the true God the father, the ſonne, & the holy Ghoſt euerlaſting: concerning the twoo natures in Chriſt: the creation of all things & of Angels and men: of the cauſe of ſinne, miſerie and death vntoo mankynde: of the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes and attonement of man with GOD for the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt ſake, who was crucified & roſe agein for vs: of true comfort too bée ſet ageinſt death and all tribulations: of the aboliſhement of ſinne and death: of the reſtorement of our bodyes: of the euerlaſting puniſhments of ye vngodly: & of the eternall lyfe and glorie of the godly.

Of theſe ſo great matters, and ſpecially of the perſone and benefites of our Lord Ieſus Chryſt the ſonne of God, who hath vanquiſhed ſinne, death, and the Diuell for vs, there are none other bookes eyther in heauen or earth, that inſtruct vs.
                     The ſecond is Patience, a vertue no leſſe neceſſarie too aPatience. godly and right chriſten man, than meate and drink is néedful too ye mayntenance of the lyfe of this body. For perſecution and aduerſitie are vnſeparable companions of true godlyneſſe and chriſten profeſſion, according too Paules ſaying: All that will liue godlily in Chryſt, muſt ſuffer perſecution. Otherwyſe, al the whole lyfe of man were nothing elſe but miſerie, as Euripides hath truly ſayd, This life in good ſooth is not lyfe, but miſerie. Nowe in theſe miſeries there can no calmneſſe and ioy of mynd bée ſettled in God without diſobedience and repyning, nor yet continue without the comfort of fayth, which the holy ſcripture onely ſheweth. And therefore in this place, vntoo patience is foorthwith added, comfort of the Scriptures. But patience is a vertue whiche in bearing aduerſities quietly and myldly, dooth reuerently ſubmit it ſelfe too Gods will, & ſéeketh not vnlawful helpes, but aſſureth it ſelf by faith too bée in Gods fauoure, ſéeking & looking for helpe, aſſuagement, and deliuerance at Gods hand, and by this faith and hope alayeth the gréef, and féeleth peace and gladneſſe in harte. All the whole orderly ſetting out of the doctrine of patience, and the difference of the philoſophical patience and the Chriſten patience, may bée conueyed hither out of the Expoſition of the ten commaundements.
                     The third end of holy writ is, true, certeine and firmeTrue and ſtedfaſt comfort. comfort, too bée ſette not only ageinſt pouertie, ſickneſſe, and aduerſities, but alſo ageinſt Gods wrath, ſinne, and death: which comfort none other bookes beſydes theſe wrytings of the Prophetes and Apoſtles, doo ſhewe. For onely the ſcripture teacheth that our Lord Ieſus Chryſt the ſonne of God,

did by his owne death ouercomme our death and the ſting of death whiche is ſinne, and that all the other troubles of this lyfe are not tokens of Gods wrath, but of his fauoure and fatherly good will toowards vs: who doutleſſe is at hand with vs in our troubles, mitigating and taking them away, and at the length will recompence the lightneſſe of affliction which continueth but a whyle, with an éncōparable weight of glorie. By theſe comfortes written in Gods woorde, the ſonne of God woorketh mightily in vs: and when we think vppon them and embrace them by fayth, he kindleth in oure hartes peace, ioy, and tranquillitie, quietly reſting in the louing kindneſſe of God the father.
                     Now the whole doctrine of the Goſpell is in manner nothingThe doctrine of Goſpell. elſe but a comfort of the conſcience that is afflicted with gréefe that ryſeth of the feeling of Gods wrath, ſinne, death, and other miſeries: in which none other refuge of quietneſſe or hauen of ſauftie can bée ſhewed or found, ſaue the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, our lyfe and reſurrection, on whom who ſoeuer dooth beléeue ſhall not ſée death for euer. Now although mannes reaſon preferreth the comfort of worldly things before the comfort of the ſcriptures, (like as too a néedye or ſicke perſone, mony, or medcines that reſtore health are a more acceptable comfort, than holeſome woordes) yet notwithſtanding it is the peculiar wiſdome of Gods Churche too reſt vppon the woord and fatherly good will of God, and too hang vppon him alone, who is able too helpe aboue al things, and farre more aboundantly than we can eyther requeſt or vnderſtand. And although he ridde vs not out of our troubles out of hand, yet he aſſuageth them, confirming and ſtrengthening the powers of our hart, that they may bée able too endure out the burthen that is layd vppon them.
                     The fourth end is, aſſured hope of deliuerance and of lyfeAſſured hope of deliuerāce. and glorie euerlaſting, without the ioyning of which to the other comfortes, patience it ſelf will bée turned intoo furie,

and at the length the lyfe in deſpayre 
                           •
                        léeth away intoo Hell. But y• hope of lyfe is as it were the Ancor whereby our faith is cheefly vphold and maynteyned in ſo great miſeries and moſt ſorowfull confuſions of mannes lyfe. And therefore Paule termeth it the helmet of eternall ſaluation. j. Theſ. v. But there is a differēce too bée put betwéene this hope which leaneth aſſuredly to Gods promiſe reueled in the ſcriptures, and the vncertein and deceytfull hopes of men whiche Ariſtotle termeth the dreames of thoſe that bée awake. And the definition, cauſes, and effectes of chriſten hope are to bée conſidered, which things the ſtudiouſe may fetch out of the expoſition of the firſt commaundement.
                  
               
            
            
               Vppon the thirde Sunday in Aduent.
               
                  ¶The Epiſtle. j. Cor. iiij.
                  
                     LEt a man this wiſe eſteeme vs, euen as the miniſters of Chryſt, and ſtewardes of the ſecretes of God. Furthermore it is required of the ſtewardes, that a man bee founde faithfull: with mee it is but a very ſmall thing that I should bee iudged of you, eyther of mannes iudgement: no I iudge not myne owne ſelfe, for I knowe nought by my ſelfe, yet am I not thereby iuſtifyed. It is the Lord that iudgeth me. Therefore iudge nothing before the tyme, vntill the Lorde come, which will lighten things that are hyd in darkneſſe, and open the counſayles of the hartes: and then shall euery man haue prayſe of God.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  IN the firſt foure Chapters of the firſt Epiſtle too the Corinthians, the ſtate or principall propoſition is this: I counſell

you too bée at one among your ſelues, & that you vaūt not your ſelues one aboue another, ne nouriſh debate eyther for philoſophie and mannes wiſdome, or for the authoritie and mightie woorking of the Preachers at whoſehands yée haue receyued the doctrine.
                  Too this marke is the leſſon of this dayes Epiſtle too bée leueled, which teacheth that all Miniſters of the Goſpell which doo their dutie a right, are equall in power and woorking as apperteyning too the miniſterie, and ought not to be iudged of men, but the iudgement of them is too bée left vntoo GOD, too iudge whiche miniſters excell one another priuately.
               
               
                  The cheef places.
                  
                     1 A doctrine of the miniſtration of the Goſpell and of the Miniſters, what they bée, what bée the degrées of them, what bée their duties, and of the difference betwéene the Miniſters of the Goſpell of Chryſte, and the ciuill Magiſtrates.
                     2 A rule of lyfe neceſſarie for all the godly in the execution of any manner of vocation, whiche is, This is required in the executer of it, that he bee found faithfull.
                     
                     3 Of manlyneſſe and conſtancie of courage which abandoneth not the duties of a mannes calling, for raſh iudgement and venemous opinions of other men, according as Paule ſayeth héere: It is a ſmal thing for mée too bée iudged of you, that is too ſaye: Séeing that I haue the recorde of a good Conſcience, and execute my office faithfully, I nothing regard the venemous and vntrue miſdéemings of other men towardes mée. For (as great Alexander ſayd) it is a princely matter too bée ill reported off for weldooing. And euery man muſt bée ſo framed and ſettled in mynde in his owne vocation, as Dion wryteth, that the Emperoure Seuerus was:

He was (ſayeth Dion) diligēt and earneſt in the things that were too bée doone, and as for the tales and reportes that were ſpred abrode of him among the commons, he paſſed not for them.
                     4 Of mainteyning the vprightneſſe of a good conſcience, and of the difference betweene the rightuouſneſſe of faith, and the rightuouſneſſe of a good conſcience or of good woorkes.
                     
                     5 A commaundement of not iudging, that is too wit, things vnknowen, things ſecret, and things doutful.
                     
                     6 Records of the laſt iudgement.
                     
                  
                  Theſe places ſhewe the chéefe matters, whereof the records appéere in this ſhort Epiſtle. At this tyme wée wil expound but the twoo firſt places, whiche are the chéef in this Epiſtle. Of the reſt wée will ſpeake an other tyme.
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  
                     OF the miniſtration of the Goſpell. God gathereth too himThe miniſterie of the Goſpell. ſelfe out of mankynd, an euerlaſting church by the preaching of his woord, in which he hath ſhewed him ſelfe, and by whiche alone and not otherwyſe he conuerteth men vntoo him, and endueth them with true knowledge, rightuouſeneſſe, and ſaluation euerlaſting: as it is ſayd Act. xj. He ſhal ſpeake woordes vntoo thée by which thou ſhalt bée ſaued, thou and all thy houſe. For this cauſe hath he of his wonderfull goodneſſe and wiſdome, euen foorth on from the beginning of the world, ſent and ordeyned certein perſones too preache and ſpred abrode the Goſpell by pubike miniſtration. The firſt preacher was the verie ſonne of GOD in Paradiſe. After him followed the Fathers, Prophetes, Apoſtles, and other Miniſters.
                  Nowe, a Miniſter of the Goſpell, is a perſone called ofThe definition of a Miniſter. God, eyther mediatly or immediatly, too teache Chryſts goſpell faithfully, and too diſtribute his Sacramentes, and too performe diligence, faithfulneſſe and conſtancie, in executing

all other poyntes belonging too the miniſtration of the Goſpell. By which miniſtration Chriſt himſelf worketh myghtily, and imparteth true knowledge of God, ryghtuouſneſſe and eternall ſaluation too all men.
               
               
                  The poynts of the miniſtery, or the cheef duties of miniſters, are ſix.
                  
                     1 FAithfully to teache the true doctrine of the Goſpell in eueryFaithfulneſſe in teaching. Article, concernyng God, concernyng the thrée perſones, concernyng the creation of things, concerning Gods lawe, concerning the worthineſſe, the fallyng, and the receyuing ageine of the firſt man and woman for the promiſed ſéedes ſake: concerning ſynne, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes for Chryſtes ſake, good woorkes, repentaunce, the laſt iudgement, euerlaſtyng life. &c.
                  This doctrine which is ſet beyond the ſyght of mannesThe myſteries of God. reaſon, and offereth Gods benefites and eternall ſaluativnto men, Paul in this place termeth the myſtery of god. Which kynde of ſpéeche hée vſeth in an other place alſo. Eph. iij. and Rom. xvj. Where he calleth the Goſpel a myſterie hidden from the beginnyng of the worlde. For it was not knowne to any creature, Angell or man, that God woulde deliuer mankynde from ſinne and deathe, and garniſh him with euerlaſtyng ſaluation, by the death of his owne ſonne. This myſterie or hidden woord of the Goſpell, vnknowne too mannes reaſon, dooth Paule and all other miniſters diſtribute and ſpreade abrode among mankynde. ij. Corin. v. God hath put intoo vs the woorde of attonement. Therfore wée come of meſſage in Chriſtes ſteade, as if God exhorted by vs.
                  2 The ſecond poynt of the miniſtration of the GoſpelMiniſtration of the ſacraments. 
                     is to miniſter the ſacraments inſtituted by Chriſt, that is too wit, Baptim and the Lordes Supper, whiche Sacramentes, reaſon giueth too bée comprehended toogither in this place

vnder the name of myſteries. For lyke as Gods ſecrete will concernyng Reconciliation, Remiſſion of ſinnes, ryghtuouſeneſſe, and euerlaſting Saluation, is diſcloſed and exhibited vntoo vs by the woorde of the Goſpell receyued at oure eares: So are the ſame ſecrete and woonderfull benefites of Gods Sonne, offered and applyed vntoo vs by the vſe of the Sacramentes enteryng in at oure eyes. For the vſe, ſtrength and efficacie of the woorde and of the Sacramentes is all one. Therefore doothe Auſtine learnedly and wittyly define a SacramentAuſtin. to be a viſible woord. Of theſe two duties of the miniſter is ſpoken Math. xxviij. Go and teach all nations, baptiſing &c.
                  3 The third poynt is. The preaching of remiſsion of ſins,The authoritie of bynding and loſing. or the aſſoyling of thoſe that repent, whiche is applyed eyther in the publik miniſtration to all in generall, or elſe priuately to eche perſon ſeuerall in confeſſion, in ſickneſſes, or in other gréefs. Math. xvj. I will giue thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen. And Chryſt priuatly pronounceth forgiueneſſe of ſinnes to the palſyman and to Mary Mawdlin. Math. ix. Luk. vij.
                  4 The fourth poynt is, too bynd ſins or to excommunicateExcommunication. ſuch as are defiled with manifeſt wickedneſſe which will not amend when they are warned.
                  
                  5 The fifth is, to ſhyne before their heerers in example ofGood example. all vertues, like as Paule willeth Tymothie to bee a pattern of the faithfull.
                  
                  6 The ſixthe is, too ordeyne neceſſarie CeremoniesOrdering of ceremonies or orderlyneſſe. by the conſente of the Churche, or to appoynt the order of tymes of readinges, of examinations, of perſones, and of places, that all things may be done after a comely and orderly faſhion.
                  
                  The miniſters that performe theſe duties rightly andAll miniſters equall. faithfully, are all equal and péeres as apperteining to the efficacie and power of the miniſtration: neither is there

any greater or more ſuperiour than an other. For they are altogither not controllers of the doctrine nor Lordes of the church, but Chryſtes Handſeruants (by whoſe ſeruice Chryſte himſelfe worketh) and Stewardes not of their owne propre goods, but of the Goſpell and benifits of Chryſte. Therefore let no man vaunt himſelfe aboue others in the churche, or ſtirre debate and ſtrife, for the authoritie and power of the teacher or miniſter of whom he receiued the doctrine. Let ſuche ſpéeches as theſe are bée baniſhed the Churche and congregation, I holde of Paul, I of Peter, I of Apollo: and let al men eſteeme them ſelues as the members of one Chryſte, and miniſters equall among themſelues. Who if they doo their dutie aryght, let the matter be put ouer to God to iudge whiche of them excelleth other priuately. And the miniſter that doothe the partes of his duetie aryght, let hym not paſſe for mans day, that is too ſay, for mans iudgemente, or for the raſhe and venomous verdytes of other men, wherby hée is déemed eyther inferiour or ſuperiour too others: but let hym contente him ſelfe with the witneſſe of all good conſcience.
                  Nowe where as afterwarde the degrées of MyniſtersDegrees of miniſters. are ſet foorth one from an other, that is doone by mans deuice for orders ſake: concernyng which matter lette Hieromes Epiſtie too Euagrius bée redde, wherein hée auoucheth at length, that Préeſtes and Biſhoppes are all one thyng. And where as afterwarde one was choſen to bée ſette aboue the reſt, that was doone for the auoydyng of Schiſme. But whereſoeuer a Biſhop bée, whether it bée at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at Conſtantinople, or at Rhegium, or at Alexandria, or at Thanis, hée is all of one woorthyneſſe, and all of one préeſthode. The abundaunce of Ryches or Lowlyneſſe of pouertie, maketh not a Byſhop hygher or lower, but are all alike the ſucceſſours of the Apoſtles.
                  
                     The differences betwéene the miniſter of the GoſpellDifference of the miniſter and ciuile magiſtrate. 1. Outward diſcipline. and the ciuill magiſtrate are chéefly foure. Firſt, the ciuill magiſtrate hath to doo with the mayntenance of outward diſcipline and peace, or keepeth the outward members in awe, that they breake not the politike lawes, or trouble the common peace. The miniſtration of the Goſpell ruleth mens hartes or conſciences, and offereth and giueth remiſſion of ſins and the heritage of eternall life, to thoſe that beléeue, and kindleth true knowledge of God in their hartes, and the inward and ſpirituall rightuouſneſſe and lyfe. And yet it leaueth men frée to vſe any maner of honeſt lawes and politike cōſtitutions in the outward conuerſation of life. As for example, it giueth men leaue too vſe diuerſitie of meates, or vnlyke ſpaces of dayes. Secondly, the ciuill magiſtrate puniſheth the diſobedientThe temporall ſvvoord. wyth the ſwoorde, or with bodyly puniſhementes. But the myniſtration of the Goſpell punyſheth not the ſtubburne with the ſwoorde, or wyth bodyly rigoure, but wyth the onely woorde of GOD. Thirdly, the Ciuill Magiſtrate prohibiteth and punyſheth onely outwarde offences. But the Miniſterie of the Goſpell forbyddeth the inwarde vncleanneſſe of the harte, and the ſynfull affections of the whole nature, and exacteth a full conformitie of the whole nature too the will of GOD. Fourthly, the ciuill Magiſtrate hath worldely defences, treaſure, armor, and degrées of perſones and iudgementes, and power too make new lawes, and to execute them. The Miniſterie of the Goſpell hathe no certeyne viſible defences, no degrées of gouernoures that may haue ſuperiour power or lordeſhippe ouer others: but altogyther are the hande ſeruauntes of Chryſte, and of his Church. Wherevppon no man muſte exalte him ſelfe aboue others, nor paſſe for the iudgementes of others, wherby he is déemed hygher or lower, but muſte content hym ſelfe wyth the iudgemente of a good conſcience,

that he executeth his dutie faythfully, & yet iuſtifieth not himſelfe before God for ſo dooing: but thinketh vpon this that all men muſt abyde the iudgement of God, who at the laſt iudgement ſhall iudge, which of the miniſters doo priuately excell others.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  ALl modeſt and wyſe men which meaſure themſeluesOf taking office or charge vpon a man. by their owne abilitie and by theyr owne foote, and conſider their owne great weakeneſſe in no wiſe anſwerable to the moſt difficult vocations of teaching and gouerning other folkes: are woont to debate carefully and thoughtfully with them ſelues, whither they may with good conſcience take vpon them and execute the miniſterie of the Goſpell or other offices, for whiche they fynde themſelues farre vnſufficient. For it is moſt true which Paule ſayeth: Wee are not able to thinke a good thought of our ſelues, as of our ſelues. And ſo is alſo this of Ieremies: I know Lord, y• it is not in mannes power to direct his owne waye. Ageinſt this temptation whiche often times vexeth the harts of vs al, let vs ſet Gods commandment, who biddeth vs obey his calling vppon truſt of his helpe: and the promiſes of God aſſuring vs of his helpe, and of ſucceſſe to the welfare of all thoſe that bring faithfulneſſe with them to the executing of all the dueties of their vocation. And this woord Faithfulneſſe comprehendeth in the miniſterie of teachyng the congregation or a ſchoole, theſe foure vertues.
                  
                     1. Firſt a conuenient good skill in the Chriſten doctrine,Conueniene skill. and a continual endeuer to lerne and encreaſe his knowledge. For lyke as a practitioner that is ignorant of lechcrafte is not a faythfull Phyſitian but a deceyuer: euen ſo he that hath not learned the chéefe poyntes of the doctrine that concerneth God, is not a faythfull ſtewarde or miniſter of Chriſt.
                     
                        2 Secondly Heedfulneſſe and diligence, too bée performedHeede and diligence. in al the poyntes of miniſtration before mencioned, and chéefly in teaching, after this manner: Firſt that hauing a Catechiſme or ſumme of the chriſten doctrine lernedly diſtributed intoo certeyn places, hée beate it continually and buſily intoo his héerers heades, & requireth an account of them what they haue caryed away. Secondly, that in expounding the Goſpels or Epiſtles, he apply all his expoſitions to ſuche places of the Catechiſme, as make vp the body of the doctrine. And afterward let him imploye the doctrine too the kindelyng of ſome effectes in the myndes of the godly, as too Fayth, Inuocation, repentance, pacience. &c.
                     3 Conſtantneſſe in profeſſing the true doctrine and inConſtancie. the myſterie.
                     4 Fourthely, continuall and earneſt requeſting andEarneſt prayer. crauing of Gods helpe.
                  
               
            
            
               Vppon the .iiij. Sunday in Aduent.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Philip. iiij.
                  
                     REioyce in the Lord alway, and agein I ſay reioyce. Let youre ſoftneſſe be knowne too all men: the Lord is euen at hand. Be carefull for nothing, but in all prayer and ſupplication let your petitions bee manifeſt vntoo God with giuing of thāks. And the peace of God (which paſſeth all vnderſtanding) keepe youre hartes and mindes, through Chryſt Ieſu.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  AS ſhort as this Epiſtle is, it conteyneth many notable places and of very large compaſſe.
                  
                     
                     1 Of peace and ioy of conſcience ſettled in God.
                     2 Of méekneſſe.
                     3 Of fayth aſſuring vs that God is with vs, & eſchuing thought which ryſeth vppon diſtruſt.
                     4 Of true Prayer and Thankſgiuing vntoo God.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt place.
                  GOd hath created mannes nature after ſuch a ſort, thatAll men by nature couet contentation of mynd. when the good which the hart coueteth is graunted, it ſettleth, and is glad. For it was his will that mens harts ſhould before al things ſettle vpon the ſouerayn good (that is to wit God) and to ioy in the ſame.
                  Now the Chriſten ioy of which Paule ſpeaketh héere,Chriſten ioy. is not a ryſing of the mynde vppon truſt of his owne goodes, as Seneca defineth it, but it is a calmeneſſe and gladneſſe of the hart ryſing vpon Gods moſt certeyne promyſes and comforts, wherwith the hart béeing aſſured, beleeueth certeinly that he is in Gods fauor for Chryſtes ſake, and that God is with vs, helpeth vs, and will imparte ioy and lyfe euerlaſtyng vnto vs. This definition wil bée the cléerlyer vnderſtoode, by laying toogither examples of mens ioyes, whiche Virgile, decketh with a ſpeciall tytle, in the ſixth booke of his Aeneas. For thou knoweſt howe wée ſpent the laſte nyght in falſe ioyes. Euery one of vs doo leade this lyfe (as long as it is) in excéedyngWhy men run in darkneſſe. greate darkeneſſe and daunger. And the vngodly are ignoraunt of the true good things, and of the true comfortes, bycauſe they doo deſpyſe the lyghte of the Goſpell. One ioyeth in pleaſures, as the Epicures, of whomThe felicitie of worldlings. there is moſte nowe adays. The Niga
                        ••
                      ſéeketh money as the true ioy. The Ambitious man gapeth after honor. The wittie ſort hunt for learning and glory. Other ſome with great trauel ſéeke the defence of fréends and riches. And when any of theſe things are forgone, all the ioye

is gone. As long as Pompey ruled the roſt and was lord of all men, he was mery at the harte. But as ſoone as he was vanquithed by Ceſar, he found that al worldly things were but deceiueable ioyes. As long as Cicero hath luckie ſucceſſe, and gouerneth the common weale with ſingular commendation, he is glad and ioyfull. But when Auguſtus is made freend with Antonie, whome he would haue diſpatched out of the way, and that he ſées he muſte néedes dye: he hath no more ioy, but cryeth out: O vnwiſe man that I am, and nothing leſſe than that which I was ſomtyme falſly thought to hée: O the madneſſe of my doting olde age.
                  But Chriſten folke in the very extremitie of trouble,Chriſten ioy. and in the middes of death are able to reioyce in the Lord with a true hart, bycauſe they know they ſtand in Gods fauour: they know that God is to be obeyed in tribulation: they know for a certentie that a ioyfull iſſue ſhall enſue. And therefore Steuen went to his death with a glad hart, and eaſed his harmes with hope. Laurence lying vppon the gréedyron, laugheth at the tirant Decius, and ſkorneth him to his head. And Simeon ſayth: Lord now letteſt thou thy ſeruaunt departe in peace according to thy word. This is the true and ſubſtantiall ioy, ſettled in the Lord, and ryſing vppon Gods promiſe, which refreſheth and ſtrengthneth mens harts in all perills.
               
               
                  The ſecond place.
                  WHeras the latine interpreter hath tranſlated it Modeſtia veſtra not a ſit omnibus, Let youre modeſtie or ſoftneſſe be knowne to all men: the gréeke worde is Epiceia, a vertue of the fifth commaundement, and comprehendeth, pacience, méekeneſſe, pitie, myldeneſſe, mercy, treatableneſſe, and ſuche other neyghbour vertues. And therfore the definitions, cauſes, effects, and examples of theſe vertues and the vices that encounter them, may bée

conueyed from the expoſition of the fifth Commaundement vntoo this place.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  FAyth is a perceyueraunce of all the Articles of the doctrine deliuered by God, & an aſſent to the ſame, wherby wée embrace the whole doctrine. And it is a truſte certeinly aſſuring vs, that the Lorde is at hande, and that although ſorowes, daungers, perſecutions, and other calamities hang ouer vs: yet it perſuadeth a man for a certeintie that God is with him, and helpeth him, and will bring them to a quiet ende. Therefore it quayleth not through thought and diſtruſte, that it ſhould eyther gad after worldly helpes, or yet deſpayre like as Moyſes ſtā
                     ding at the red ſea, although he ſaw no meane of deliueueraunce, yet beleeueth he that God is at hand, and ſo he is not diſcouraged with penſiueneſſe. So ſayth ye Pſalme, though thouſands of men compaſſe mée about, yet wil I not bée afrayde, bycauſe thou Lord art with mée. Eſay and Ezechias although the Citie was beſéeged by Sennacherib, yet faint they not for penſiueneſſe, but flée vnto God by earneſt prayer, and wayt for deliueraunce.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               Hereafter enſue the diſpoſements of of certeyne Epiſtles which are vſually read to the people vppon the feaſt dayes of Sainctes.
            
               Vpon the feaſt of the Annunciation of our blyſſed Lady Sainct Marie, or vppon the feaſt of the conception of Chriſt.
               
                  The Epiſtle. Eſay. vij.
                  
                     GOd ſpake once ageyn vnto Ahaz, ſaying: require a token of the Lorde thy God, whether it bee towarde the depth beneath, or towarde the hevghte aboue. Then ſayde Ahaz: I will requyre none, neyther will I tempte the Lorde. And he ſayde: hearken to, ye of the houſe of Dauid: is it not ynough for you, that ye be greuous vntoo men, but yee muſt greeue my God alſo? And therefore the Lorde shall giue you a token: Beholde, a virgine shall conceyue and beare a ſonne, and thou his mother shall call his name Emanuell. Butter and hony shall he eate, that hee may knowe to refuſe euill, and choſe the good. Therfore before the childe may know good or euill, malice shall diſſuade from chooſing the good.
                  
                     THe firſt feaſt of the new Teſtament, and the beginning & welſpring of our redemption and euerlaſtingThe firſte feaſt of the new Teſtament. welfare, is ye wonderful cōception or cuppling of the two natures of the Godhead and manhood of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte the Sonne of God, the memoriall whereof the

Churche celebrateth as this day. And of ſingular purpoſe was it Gods wil, that the times of his wonderfull works and of his reuelementes ſhould agrée. For vppon this day beyng the .xxv. day of Marche, was the Sonne of God conceyued in the wombe of the Uirgin Marie, or as this day he cuppled too himſelfe mans nature by eternall alyaunce, a thouſand fyue hundred thréeſcore and ten yéeres ago. The yeere after the firſt promis making of the womans ſéede in Paradiſe. 3962. After the renewing of the ſame promis vntoo Abraham, that all nacions ſhould bée bliſſed in the ſame ſéede, 1938. After the propheſiyng of Iacob concerning Syloh, or the Uirgins iſſue, a thouſand ſeuen hundred and ſix yéeres, and the ſame day beyng the xxv. of March now ful, a thouſand fiue hūdred &. xxxvij. was our Lord Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God made a ſacrifiſe for vs vppon the Altar of the Cr
                           •
                        ſſe. The ſame day alſo is Adam the firſt man reported to haue bin created, 5532. yéeres ago. And afterward about the ſame time it is thought that Abell was ſlayne, and Iſaac layd vppon the Altar. to haue bin ſacrifiſed. Therefore inaſmuch as the day it ſelfe putteth vs in mind of moſt weyghty matters, as of the ſonne of God the founder and redéemer of the Church, of the creation of our ſelues, of the wonderfull alyaunce of the Godhead and manhoode made in the Uirgins wombe, and of the cauſes and benefites of this wonderfull vnion, let vs with all godlineſſe and reuerēce caſt our ſelues downe before God, and yéeld him thankes for his ſo excellent woorkes and benefites, and by deuout and earneſt muſing vpon ſo great things, kindle and confirme in vs fayth, prayer, and moſt aſſured hope of euerlaſting ſaluation. And to the intent our hartes may bée the more fitte and earneſt to the reuerent minding of them, and to thankeſgiuing for the ſame: Let vs alſo celebrate this feaſt with greater modeſtie and ſoberneſſe of behauiour.
                     
                        The doctrine of this holy day concerning the cauſes and benefites of the wonderfull Incarnacion of Gods ſonne, is all one with the doctrine that is ſet forth vppon the byrthday of the ſame ſonne of God. And therfore the diſpoſement of that matter may bee borowed out of that place into this day.
                     Now will I bréefly entreate of the propheſie of thisEmmanuell. dayes Epiſtle. Behold a virgin ſhall cōceyue and bring forth a child, and thou ſhalt call him Emmanuell, which was vttered by the Prophet Eſay, ſeuen hundred and lvij. yéeres before that the Angell Gabriell brought woord of the fulfilling of it too the virgine Marie, and conteyneth the doctrine of the conception of the ſonne of God, whiche is the foundacion of our redemption and ſaluation. I will therefore in few woordes ſet out the chéef pointes of this doctrine, compriſed in accuſtomed queſtions or orderly inſtruction.
                     
                        The conception or incarnation of the Sonne of God, isWhat incarnation is. the wonderfull cuppling or perſonall vnion of the two natures (that is to ſay, of the Godhead begotten of the ſubſtance of the euerlaſting Father, and of the manhood taken in the wombe and of the ſubſtaunce of the virgin Marie) wrought in Chriſt our Mediator, that he may bée Emmanuell (y• is to ſay, God with vs; of one ſubſtaunce both with God the eternall Father and with vs, reconciling God vnto vs:) and by paying the full raunſome for vs, appeaſe Gods moſt iuſt wrath ageynſt ſinne, and reſtore to vs men rightuouſneſſe and eternall lyfe.
                     The partes of the Emmanuell conceyued in the virgin Marie may bée ſayde to bee two: the Godhead, or the ſonne of God, the woorde, & the manhood taken of Maries ſubſtaunce and of the ofſpring of Dauid. Hither may all the whole doctrine concerning the perſon of Gods ſonne, the differences of the perſones of the Godhead, and of the two natures in Chriſte, &c. bée referred.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The cauſes.
                  THe efficient cauſe of the conception or incarnacion ofThe efficiēt cauſe of Chriſtes incarnation. the ſonne of God, is the whole Godhead. For although that the perſone of the ſonne cuppled to it ſelfe mannes fleſh by perſonall vnion: yet is it the worke of all the thrée perſones togither, which alſo go ioyntly togither in this ſaying, the holy Ghoſt ſhall come vppon thee, and the power of the hygheſt ſhall ouerſhadowe thee. The hygheſt is God the Father. The power of the hygheſt is the ſonne of God, who ouerſhadoweth the virgine Marie and the whole Churche, making interceſſion for vs too the euerlaſting Father, cuppling our nature to him ſelfe, and couering vs as a ſhadow ageynſt the heate of Gods wrath. The holy Ghoſt halloweth the fleſh taken of the virgine Maries ſubſtāce, & therof ſhapeth in the virgins wombe, the body of the Meſſias redye too bée borne, which body togither with a reaſonable ſoule, the woord the ſonne of God by taking vnited, & by vniting tooke vnto him. And therefore it is ſayd in our Créede, whiche was conceyued by the holy Ghoſt.
                  
                  The inward forcing cauſe of the conception, byrth,The inward forcing cauſe of Chriſtes incarnation. paſſion, and death of Chriſt is al one, that is to wit, the infinite goodneſſe and mercy of God, toward manhood, tempered with his heauenly Iuſtice, for the full ſatiſfiyng whereof with ſufficient amendes, the very ſonne of God taking our nature vppon him, became both man, and a ſacrifiſe for vs.
                  The outward forcing cauſe, was the fall of our firſteThe outward forcing cauſe. parentes, and the ſinne that ſoked from thence into all men, with death and moſte ſorowfull damnacion of all mankind, which the ſonne of God was Loth ſhould periſh vtterly.Why it behooueth Chriſt to bee both God and man.
                  
                  Now the cauſes why it behooueth our redéemer too bée both God & man, are twelue, which I haue gathered out

of the booke of Athanaſius concerning the incarnation, & recited them in another place. Firſt it behooued him too be man. For like as the impe that is graffed into a trée, is borne by the trée and taketh ſap and life of it: euen ſo our humane nature ſhuld haue vtterly periſhed & bin brought to nothing (like as the body periſheth that is forſaken of the ſoule,) yf the maſſe of our nature were not vphild and mainteyned by the ſonne of God the woorde. Secondly, foraſmuch as man had ſinned, the order of Iuſtice required, that man ſhould aby the penaltie. On the other ſide it behooued him to bée God, that he might be able to pay the full pryce, and to vanquiſh ſinne and death, and to reſtore rightuouſneſſe and lyfe euerlaſting.
                  The matter wherof the ſonne of God our ImmanuellThe matter whereof Chriſt tooke fleſh. tooke mans nature, is the virgine Marie according as Eſay interpreting the firſt promis of the ſéede, and the propheſie of Iacob concerning Siloh, (that is to ſay) the Virgins iſſue, ſayeth in this place, behold a Virgin ſhall conceyue and bring forth a Sonne.
                  For in aſmuch as of the mixture of the ſéede of man and woman is engendred a nature defiled with ſinne, according as it is ſayde: In ſinne hath my Mother conceyued mee: it was the will of Chriſt our Immanuell, (whom it behooued to be vndefiled and faultleſſe) to bée borne, not of the ſéede of man, but onely of the Virgins ſéede halowed and clenzed by the holy Ghoſt.
                  The manner of this wonderfull cuppling or vnion of the twoo natures, is expreſſed with lightſome and moſt weyghtie wordes in the Créede of Athanaſius. The righte fayth therefore is that wée beléeue and confeſſe that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt is very God and very man. God of the ſubſtance of the Father begotten before all worldes, andThe endes and effectes of Chriſtes incarnation. man of the ſubſtance of his mother borne in the world. &c.
                  The endes and effectes of Chriſtes conception are deſcribed in the two names of Immanuell and Ieſus. For

Chriſt is called Immanuell (that is to ſay God with vs,) not only for the taking vppon him of our nature, but alſo bycauſe he is our patrone and aduocate, not accuſing and condēning vs any more, but ſtāding on our ſide, couering, excuſing, and defending vs, embracing vs with brotherly good will, and receyuing vs to the felowſhip of al heauenly good things, according as is ſayd in theſe verſes.
                  
                     Chriſt is aright our Immanuell not only becauſe he is bloud of our bloud now and fleſh of our fleſh alike.
                     But for that to the Father in heauen for vs al he becōming our Preeſt and patrone offreth a ſweete ſacrifiſe,
                     And for that with an earneſt zeale of loue he receyueth all that long for his help or couet health at his hand.
                  
                  The other name which the Angell Gabriell, (interpretingIeſus. this place of Eſay) attributeth too Chriſte, is Ieſus, which is as much to ſay as a ſauiour or deliuerer. And in déede the higheſt benefite of all that redound to vs by Chriſtes incarnacion or conception, is deliueraunce from ſinne, from Gods wrath, and from curſe of the law: and the giuing of rightuouſneſſe ſaluacion, & life euerlaſting. Too the ſetting foorth of this benefite may all the ſayings of the Goſpell bée referred out of the whole ſcripture.
                  Of kin to this wonderfulll vnion of the twoo naturesAliaunces of naturall things to Chriſtes incarnation. in Chriſt, may theſe things bée named: namely the ſimilitudes and ſhadowes of that wonderfull alyance which are ſettled in nature. That is to wit, the vnion of the reaſonable ſoule and of the body in man. The coniunction of the Chriſtall humor and the ſpirite of ſight, whiche is as it were a little fire in the apple of ones eye. And alſo a péece of iron or ſtéele red whot.
                  The things that fight ageynſt it are the chéef errours wherewith the doctrine concerning the conception or incarnacion of the ſonne of God is corrupted by the heretikes, Valentine, Apelles, Marcion, Neſtorius, Eutyches, Apollinarius, and other.
               
               
                  
                  The Antheme vppon the day of the Annunciation of our Lady ſainct Marie.
                  THis is the day whiche the Lorde hath made. This day hath the Lord looked vppon the affliction of his people, and ſent redemption. This day hath the ſéede of a woman chaſed away the death whiche a woman firſt brought in. This day is God become man, continuing ſtill the ſame thing that he was, and taking vppon him that which he was not. Therfore let vs deuoutly hallow the beginning of our redemption, and let vs leape for ioy, ſaying: Glory bée to thée O Lord. This day is God become man. This day is God become man. &c.
               
            
            
               Vppon the feaſtday of Iohn Baptiſt. The ſong of Zacharie.
               
                  
                     ¶ The Epiſtle. Luc. j.
                     
                        BLeſſed be the Lord God of Iſrael: for he hath viſited and redeemed his people.
                     And hath rayſed vp an horne of ſaluation vnto vs, in the houſe of his ſeruaunt Dauid.
                     Euen as he promiſed by the mouth of his holy Prophetes, which were ſince the world began.
                     That wee should be ſaued from our enemies, and from the handes of all that hate vs.
                     To fulfill the mercy promiſed to our Fathers, and to remē
                        ber his holy couenaunt.
                     And to performe the othe whiche he ſware to our Father Abraham, for to geue vs.
                     That we deliuered out of the handes of our enemies, might ſerue him without feare all the dayes of our lyfe, in holyneſſe and rightuouſneſſe before him.
                     And thou childe shalt be called the Prophete of the hyeſt,

for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord too prepare his wayes.
                     And too geue knowledge of ſaluation vnto his people, for the remiſsion of ſinnes.
                     Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day ſpring from an hie hath viſited vs.
                     To giue light to them that ſate in darkneſſe, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our fete into the way of peace.
                  
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis ſong of Zacharie perteyneth too the demonſtratiue kind. For it is a thanks giuing wherby Zacharie ſetteth out this excéeding great benefite of God, for that according too his promiſes made too Dauid and Abraham he ſendeth Chryſt the redéemer too deliuer men from ſinne, from death, and from the Diuels tyrannie, and too giue them lyght, lyfe, and ſoule health euerlaſting.
                  The partes of this ſong are two. In the firſt. viij. verſes be ſetteth out the benefite of the ſending of Chryſt. And in the laſt foure verſes he entreateth of the office of Iohn Baptiſt, and therwithall of Chryſtes benefites alſo.
                  
                     Bliſſed bee the Lord God of Iſraell, who hath viſited and redeemed his people.
                  
                  
                     The propoſition: I thanke the Lord the only true GOD, (who hath diſcouered himſelfe among the people of Iſraell, by his woorde and by aſſured witneſſe of miracles) that he hath exhibited Chryſt the redéemer according too the promiſes made too ye fathers. The woord bliſſe ſignifieth ere whilesWhat bliſsing is. too wiſh good too one, and ere whiles too praiſe or glorifie. As in the Pſalm. xxxiij. I will bliſſe the Lord continually: that is too ſay, I will thanke, I will prayſe, I will glorifie the Lord at all tymes. Pſalm. Ciij. Bliſſe thou the Lord O my ſoule: that is too ſay, giue him thankes. So alſo in this place. Bliſſed bee the Lorde, is as much too ſay, as I thanke the Lord, or I

prayſe & glorifie the Lord God of Iſraell, for ſending Chryſt our redéemer according too the promiſes made to the fathers. For he hath viſited and redeemed his people. The chéefe benefiteRedemption. of the ſonne of God is the redemption and deliuering of man from the Diuels tyrannie, from ſin, from Gods wrath, from Death. &c. And the reſtoring of ryghtuouſneſſe and lyfe euerlaſting. Therfore too y• more enlyghtening of this place, let the ſayings of Paule concerning redemption, bée added out of Rom. iij. j. Cor. j. Epheſ. j. Coloſſ. j. j. Timoth. ij. Heb. ix. Gal. iij. Tit. ij. Eſay. xliij. xliiij. lij. lxiij. &c.
                  Too viſit ſignifyeth not only too looke vpon, or too ſée howToo viſit. one dooth: but alſo too ayde and ſuccor ſuche as wée loue, as in Exo. iiij. The Lord hath viſited his people: that is too ſay, hath helped and deliuer his people from the tiranny of Pharao. Pſal. viij. What is the ſonne of man that thou viſiteſt him? that is too ſay, that thou loueſt and defendeſt miſerable men, rewarding thoſe with eternall life and glory y• flée vntoo thy ſonne? Lu. ix. He knew not the time of his viſitation: namely in which God by his goſpel offred remiſſion of ſinnes & euerlaſting ſaluatiō. And ſo ſpeaketh Zacharie in this place, god hath viſited his people: that is too ſay, not only hath looked vpon them, but alſo redéemed his church, and ſet it frée from all euils, by his ſonne which was promiſed too the fathers, and now performed.
                  In the Gréeke it is, hath made redemption: that is too ſay,Redemption. hath redemed. And the Gréeke woorde Lutroſis (which commeth of the verbe Luo too pay,) ſignifyeth a redemption or deliuerance which is made by paying the pryce of one, that is too ſay a raunſoming. And therof commeth the woord Lutron which is the raunſome that is payde for the deliueraunce or ſetting one frée from captiuitie. Chryſt vſeth this woord now and then, as Math. xx. The ſonne of man came too giue his lyfe for the raunſome of many.
                  2 And hath rayſed vp a horne of ſaluation too vs in the houſe of his ſeruant Dauid.
                  
                     He termeth the kingdome of ſaluation or Chriſt the ſauiorHorne of ſaluation. by the name of a horne of ſaluation. And theſe woordes are taken out of the Pſalm. cxxxiiij. There wil I bring foorth the horne of Dauid, I haue prepared a lyght too myne anoynted. The woord Horne being borowed by a Metaphor of Oxen, dooth after the maner of the Hebrue ſpéech betoken ſtrength, power, and plenteouſneſſe: as Thren 2. He hath broken all y• horne of Iſraell: that is too ſay all the ſtrength of the kingdome of Iſraell. ij. Reg. xxij. and Pſal. xxij. My defender & the horn of my welfare. Pſa. lxxxviij. In my name ſhal his horne bée exalted: that is too ſay the ſtrength and power of Chryſtes kingdome. So alſo in this place: he hath rayſed vp a horne of ſaluation, that is too ſay a Sauiour, who by his power ſhall helpe vs, and giue vs plenteous and eternall ſaluation. InThe houſe of Dauid. the houſe of my ſeruaunt Dauid, that is too ſay, borne of the ſtocke of Dauid, according to the promiſſe. ij. Reg. vij. j. Paralip. xvij. I will raiſe vp thy ſéede after thée, which ſhall iſſue out of thy loynes, & I will ſtabliſh his throne for euermore. I will bée his father and he ſhall bée my ſonne. &c. This promiſſe is vttered out at large. Pſal. lxxxviij. I haue found Dauid my ſeruaunt, with my holy oyle haue I annoynted him. Alſo Pſal. Cxxxj. for Dauid thy ſeruaunts ſake turne not away the face of thine anoynted.
                  Theſe places may bée added for the enlyghtening of this ſong of Zacharies.
                  3 As he hath ſpoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets ſince the world began.
                  He hath ſent Chryſt the ſauyor as he promiſed by the prophets.Promiſes concerning Chryſt. Geneſ. 3. 12. 49. 2. Reg. 7. Eſay. 9. 7. 11. 42. and elſewhere. Ierem. 2
                        •
                     . 31. 33. Dan. 9. Mich. v. &c. Of theſe promiſes ſpeaketh Peter. 1. Peter. 1. Of this ſaluation haue the Prophets made inquirie and ſerche, which haue Propheſied of the grace that ſhuld come vpō vs: ſerching when or at what time the ſpirit of Chriſt which was in them ſhould ſignifie. &c. And Paule Rom. j. put a parte for the Goſpell which God had promiſed

afore by his Prophets, concerning his ſonne, which was borne of the ſéede of Dauid, as perteining too the fleſh. &c. In generall alſo this verſe giueth vs too vnderſtand that the doctryne which is comprehended in the wrytings of the Prophets and Apoſtles, is not deliuered by the authoritie of mā, but by God himſelf: and therfore that credit ought too bée giuen too this Doctrine as too the voyce of God himſelfe ſounding from heauen.
                  4 That wee ſhould bee ſaued from our enimies, andSaluation. from the handes of all that hate vs.
                  God hathe promiſed vs ſaluation, he hathe promiſed for a certeintie too deliuer vs from ſinne, Gods wrathe, death, the tyrannie of the Diuell and of all the enemies of his churche. This interpretation muſt bée taken out of the conference of like ſayings, as. j. Corinth. xv. He muſt reigne, till he haue brought all his enimies vnder his féete. The laſt enimie that ſhall bée deſtroyed is death. &c. Coloſ. ij. He hath forgiuen vs all our treſpaſſes, & hath put out the hand wryting that was ageinſt vs in the lawe written. &c.
                  5 Too performe the mercy promiſed too our fathers,Mercy. and too remember his holy couenant.
                  The foure verſes next folowing are a garniſhment, repeting and enlyghtening the méening of the third and fourth verſes.
                  The cauſes that moued God too ſend his ſonne the Redéemer, are twoo: that is too wit, mercy, and ſoothfaſtneſſe in képing promiſſe. Of his owne free goodneſſe & mercy is God led too performe the benefite promiſed too the fathers, and too exhibit Chryſt the author of eternall ſaluation.
                  Theſe woordes Teſtament, Promiſſe, Couenaunt, Agreement,Teſtament, promiſſe, couenant, leage, agreement. or Leagues, are in manner all of one ſignification. The olde Teſtament was a promiſſe of a certeine politike ſtate and defence made too the people of Iſraell, vnder condition y• they ſhould kéep the law that was deliuered by Moiſes. The new Teſtament is a promiſſe of Chryſte, or a promiſſe of

remiſſion of ſinnes, of Gods fauor, of ryghtuouſneſſe and euerlaſting ſaluation too bée giuen fréely for Chryſt the mediators ſake. Of this new Teſtament or of this promiſſe of Chryſtes made too Adam, Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, Dauid and others, dooth Zacharie ſing in this place, & he auoucheth that God is myndfull of this holy Teſtament, that is too ſay, that his promiſes ſtand ſtedfaſt, or that he kéepeth ſure and vnuiolable this heauenly promiſſe of his, concerning the ſending of Chriſt.
                  6 The othe which he ſware too our father Abraham that he would giue vs.
                  7 That we being deliuered from the hand of our enimies, might ſerue him without feare.
                  8 In holyneſſe and ryghtuouſneſſe before him all the dayes of our lyfe.
                  The conſtruction of the ſixth verſe is clipt, for there wanteth too keepe or too performe the othe which he ſware too our father Abraham.
                  The promiſſe concerning Chryſt, made vntoo Abraham & confirmed by God with an othe, is too bée ſéen in Geneſ. xxij. By my ſelfe haue I ſworne ſayth the Lord, thy ſéede ſhal poſſeſſe the gates of their enimies and all nations of the earth ſhall bée bliſſed in thy ſéede. This othe of Gods is ſet out with many woordes by Paul. Heb. vj. For God deliuering the promiſſe too Abraham, bycauſe he had no greater by whom he myght ſweare, ſware by himſelf. For God méening too ſhew his vnchaungeable purpoſe more at the full too the heires of promiſſe, aſſured it with an othe, that by twoo vnchaungeable things in which it was impoſſible for God to lye, wée myght haue ſtedfaſt comfort. &c. Galath. iij. No man breaketh a mannes Teſtament, or addeth any thing too it. Vntoo Abraham and too his ſéede were the promiſſes giuen. He ſayth not in thy ſéedes as in many, but in thy ſéede as in one, which is Chryſt. &c. But if the inheritance come by the law, then is it not by promiſſe. But God gaue it too Abraham by

promiſſe. That he would giue vs, that we being deliuered. &c.
                     Deliuerance from the hand of our enimyes. Too bée deliuered out of the handes of our enimies, is too bée ſet frée from ſinne, Death, the Diuels tyrannie and euerlaſting damnation, and too obteine the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, too bée receyued intoo Gods fauoure, too bée endued with the holy Ghoſt, and too bée accepted too euerlaſting lyfe. Therefore too bée deliuered frō the hands of our enimies, is in this place, the ſame thing that too bée iuſtified. Iohn. viij. He that woorketh ſinne is the bondſlaue of ſinne. If the ſonne make you frée, you ſhalbée frée in déede. Rom. viij. The lawe of the ſpirite of lyfe hath ſet mée frée from the law of ſin and death. Alſo let like ſayings bée layd too them, out of. j. Corinth. xv. Rom. vj. And let vs know that the deliuerances out of the hand of Pharao, or out of Egipt, and out of the Captiuitie of Babilon, were figures of this deliuerance by Chryſte. Theſe woordes without feare, may bée expounded by the ſaying ofWithout feare. Paule. Hebr. ij. Chryſt by Death deſtroyed him that hathe power of Deathe, that is too wit the Diuell, and delyuered thoſe which through feare of Death were held in bondage all their lyfe.
                  
                     VVee myght ſerue him in holyneſſe. &c. Therefore areHolyneſſe and ryghtuouſneſſe wée ſette frée from ſinne and Death, that héereafter wée ſhould no more ſerue ſinne, but God in holyneſſe and rightuouſneſſe imputed and begonne. Holyneſſe and ryghtuouſneſſe are woordes almoſt of one ſignification. For Holy betokeneth properly, one that is cleane, pure, voyd of all ſinne and ſpot, and acceptable too God. Now God is perfect holy. But wée in this lyfe are holy and ryghtuous, by hauing imputed too vs the holyneſſe and ryghtuouſneſſe of Chryſte, through Faith, and by enterance intoo newe ryghtuouſneſſe or obedience towardes Gods lawe, which ryghtuouſneſſe pleaſeth God, not for the ſelfe woorthyneſſe thereof: but for Chryſtes ſake only through fayth.
                  Therefore too God in holyneſſe and ryghtuouſneſſe, is nothing elſe but too acknowledge God aryght, and through

fayth too beléeue that our ſinnes are forgiuen vs for Chriſtes ſake, and in this Fayth too begin a new obedience or life that pleaſeth God, according too all the commaūdements of God. In fine, Zacharie in theſe verſes comprehendeth the whole Doctrine of Iuſtification and good woorkes. Before him, asBefore God. in the third Chapter of the Romaines. By the déedes of the lawe ſhall no man bée iuſtifyed before him, or in his ſight. Philippians the third Chapter. That I may bée found before him, not hauing myne owne ryghtuouſneſſe which is of the lawe, but the ryghtuouſneſſe which is through the faith of Chryſt, which is of God. All the dayes of our lyfe. All our lyfe long, and not on certeine dayes, as in the lawe. Eſay. lxvj. There ſhall bée Sabboth vppon Sabboth, that is too ſay a continuall Sabboth.
               
               
                  The ſecond part of the ſong of Zacharie.
                  
                  9 ANd thou childe shalt bee called the Prophet of the hygheſt. &c.
                  The foure laſt verſes entreate of the office of Iohn BaptiſtChryſtes benefites. and of all miniſters: and therewithall they conteine the Doctrine of Chryſtes benefites, or of our iuſtification and eternall ſaluation. And he reckeneth vp thrée ſpeciall benefites. Firſt Chryſt is the Sauioure that releaſeth ſinne. Secondly he is the lyght that enlyghteneth all that ſitte in darkneſſe. Eſa. ix. Thirdly he is the author of peace towards God and towardes men.
                  Concerning theſe matters, a larger expoſition is too bée fetched out of the ſumme of the chriſten Drctrine. Now will I a little expound the pitthyneſſe of certeine woordes, the conſidering of which will make the things themſelues the more lyghtſome.
                  
                     Shalt bee called the Prophet of the hygheſt. Of this woordSignifications of this woorde Prophet. 
                     Prophet, there bée chéeflye foure ſignifications vſually in the Scryptures. Firſt a Prophet among the people of

Iſraell, is a perſone called immediatly by God, too rebuke ſinne, too ſet foorth the Goſpel concerning Chryſt, and too rule the counſels and deuyſes of ciuill gouernment, as Elias, Eſay. &c. Secondly a Prophet in generall, ſignifyeth one that foretelleth things too come: As Agabus foretold of the famine. Actes. xj. Thirdly, it ſignifyeth a teacher rayſed vp by God, and endued with ſingular giftes for the ſetting vp ageine of Gods doctrine and ſeruice decayed. Such a one was Iohn Baptiſt who purged the Doctrine concerning Chryſt, (which was defaced with the erroures of the Phariſies,) ſharpely rebuked Idolatrous woorſhippings, repaired the Church of God, and with his finger poynted out Chriſt who was then exhibited. Such Prophets alſo were Auſtine and Luther. Fourthly, a Prophet in general, ſignifyeth an expoū
                     der of Scripture, or a teacher of the Churche. j. Corinth. xiiij. Thou shalt bee called: that is too ſay, thou ſhalt bée, he ſhalbée called the ſonne of the hygheſt, that is too ſay, he ſhall bée the ſonne. &c. Thou shalt goo before the face of the Lord too prepareTo go beefore the face of the Lord. his wayes. Like as Princes when they are comming towardes a Citie, or too Churchward, haue of their garde that go before them, & make them way through the thicke preace of men, ageinſt they come, that they bée not ſtayed with the thronging of the people: So did Iohn Baptiſt go before Chryſt, too prepare his way. Firſt too ſhewe him openly too the Churche of his tyme. And ſecondly too prepare the hartes of men by his preaching, that they might by faith receiue and embrace Chryſt comming vntoo them, y• Chryſt on the other ſide myght bée woorkfull in them.
                  Theſe woordes of Zacharies are taken out of the Prophet Malachie. iij. Beholde, I will ſend myne Angell or meſſenger, too prepare my way before my face. And by and by after ſhall the mightie one come too his Temple, whom you long for, and the meſſenger of the Teſtament whom you would haue. Alſo Eſay the .xl. Chapter. The voyce of a cryer in the wilderneſſe, make redy the way for the Lord.

And this is the common dutie of all miniſters, too prepare the way of the Lord, that is too ſay, too prepare the hartes of their héerers by their preaching, that they may embrace Chryſt by faith. For when Chryſt is comming towards vs, and is offering vs his benefites, there are lettes caſt in his way, eyther our owne rechleſſeleſſe, or our preſumption, or truſt of our owne woorkes, &c. Theſe muſt bée rid away by the miniſtration, that Chryſt may bée receyued by fayth, and woork effectually in our hartes.
                  10 To giue knowledge of, &c. An other dutie of Iohn andTo giue knovvledge of ſaluation. of all other Prophetes is too teache the Churche concerning the eternall ſaluation of mankynd. Zacharie in the laſt thrée verſes dooth lernedly comprehend both the definition of our ſaluation or iuſtification, and the chéef cauſes and effects thereof, and alſo the meane whereby wée may atteyne to it. Our ſaluation or rightuouſneſſe is the forgiueneſſe of ſins which is beſtowed vppon them that beléeue, through the frée mercie of God, for and by Ieſus Chryſt. The efficient cauſe of our ſaluation is Gods incōprehenſible mercie, who being led of his owne frée goodneſſe, forgiueth vs our ſinnes. The forcing cauſe or the deſert for whiche wée are receyued, is Chryſt the ſonne of rightuouſneſſe that ryſeth from on high. The formall cauſe of our rightuouſneſſe is the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes. The effectes are the light of the true knowledge of God: deliuerance from the darkneſſe of ſinne and death: and peace of conſcience before God, as in Rom. v. is writtē: Being iuſtified by faith, wée haue peace too Godwarde, thorough our Lord Ieſus Chryſt. Nowe that the ſumme of the doctrine which Zacharie cōprehendeth in theſe laſt verſes, is conſidered and expounded after the manner of Logicke: Let vs alſo wey the piththyneſſe and weyght of the woords.
                  11 Through the bowelles of the mercie of our GOD, inBovvels of mercie. which the ryſing from on hygh hath viſited vs. By the bowels of mercie he méeneth true, earneſt, vnfeyned, and hartie mercie. For the Gréek woord Splagchna ſignifieth properly

the inward members of fleſhe, ſuch as the Hart, the Liuer, and the Lungs bée. Therefore in as much as the Harte is the inſtrument and ſeate of loue, mercie, ſadneſſe, and the reſt of the affections: Hée méenes by the bowels of mercie, not a fayned and cold mercie, but a burning mercie iſſewing euen from the very harte, After the ſame manner ſpeaketh Paule Colloſſ. iij. put on the bowelles of compaſſion. AlſoWhat mercie is Philip. ij. and elſwhere. Mercie properly, is too bée touched with the feeling of an other bodyes gréefe, and too ſuccour euen thoſe that are falne intoo miſerie by their owne default, of a frankharted kyndneſſe which mitigateth rightfull puniſhments and releaſeth ſomwhat of vttermoſt or extréeme rigour: with which he hath viſited vs, with whiche frée incomparable mercie Chryſt hath viſited vs, embraced vs, helped vs, receyued vs intoo fauoure, and accepted vs too lyfe and glorie euerlaſting. Ryſing: This woord is a nowne andRyſing or Dayſpring not a participle, and it ſignifieth Chriſt the day ſunne of rightuouſneſſe ryſing or ſpringing from euerlaſting out of the ſubſtance of the moſt high Father, and ſhyning intoo ours hartes by his Goſpell, whereby he kindleth a new light of the knowledge of GOD, of ryghtuouſeneſſe, and of eternall lyfe. This expoſition is taken out of Malach. iiij. And the ſunne of rightuouſeneſſe ſhall ryſe vppon you that feare my name. Alſo Zacha. iij. I will bring foorth my ſeruaunt the Ryſing Zach. vj. Behold the mā whoſe name is the Ryſing. Eſai. lx. Vp and bée enlightened O Ieruſalem, for thy lyght is come, and the glorie of the Lord is ryſen vppon thée. For behold, darkneſſe ſhall couer the earth, and clowdes ſhall couer the people. But the Lordryſeth vntoo thée, and the glorie of the Lord ſhall bée ſéene in thée.
                  12 Too giue lyght to them, &c. Chryſt is the true lyghtTo giue light. whiche lighteneth men walking in the darkneſſe of ignorance of GOD, of ſinne, of death, and of endleſſe damnation: that is too wit, by endewing them with the true knowledge of God, true rightuouſeneſſe, comfort, lyfe, and glorie

euerlaſting. For cuſtomably in the holy Scripture the woord Lyght ſignifieth the true knowledge of GOD, comforte,Lyght. lyfe, deliuerance from death and miſerie, and all things that bée of the beſt ſorte. And contrariwyſe Darkneſſe ſignifyethDarkneſſe. ignorance of GOD, ſinne, death, and all moſt ſorowfull euilles. Zacharie tooke theſe woordes of the laſt Verſe, out of the nynth of Eſay: The people that walketh in darkneſſe hath séene a great lyght. Lyght is ryſen vppon them that dwell in the lande of the ſhadowe of death. IntooThe way of peace. the way of peace. Roman. v. Being iuſtifyed by fayth, wée haue peace with GOD through our Lorde Ieſus Chryſt. Philip. iiij. The peace of God whiche paſſeth all vnderſtanding, kéepe your hartes.
               
            
            
               Vppon the day of the Viſitation of our Ladye.
               
                  ¶The ſong of Marie. Luke. j.
                  
                     MY ſoule dooth magnifie the Lorde.
                  And my ſpirit hath reioyſed in GOD my Sauiour.
                  For he hath regarded the lowlyneſſe of his handmayden.
                  For behold from hencefoorth, all generations shall call me bliſſed.
                  For hee that is mightie, hath magnifyed mee: and holy is his name.
                  And his mercie is on them that feare him: throughout all generations.
                  He hath shewed ſtrength with his arme: hee hath ſcatered the proud, in the ymagination of their heartes.
                  
                     He hath putte downe the mightie from their ſeate: and hath exalted the humble and meeke.
                  He hath fylled the hungrye with good things: and the rich he hath ſent emptie away.
                  He remembryng his mercie, hath holpen his ſeruaunt Iſraell: as he promyſed too our forefathers, Abraham and hys ſeede for euer.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis ſong of Maries perteyneth too the kynd of caſes demonſtratiue. For it is a Thankeſgiuing where withall Marie in the perſone of the whole Church ſetteth out the benefites of God with prayſe vntoo God.
                  Firſt, for that God loueth, preſerueth, and defendeth Marie and the whole Church being brought lowe, deſpyſed, & weake, ageinſt the wiſdome and power of féendes, tyrantes and all enimies.
                  Secondly, for that he hath ſent his ſonne Chryſte according too the promiſes made too the Fathers.
                  There bée of the whole Song ten verſes: Whereof the firſt twoo conteyne the propoſition. The next ſix ſet out the firſt benefite, that is too wit, the wonderfull preſeruation of the lowly and weake Churche ageinſt the wiſdome and power of the whole world. And the twoo laſt ſet out the ſecond benefite, that is too wit, the ſending of Chryſte the Redéemer.
                  
                     My ſoule dooth magnifie the Lorde. The propoſition: I yéeld thankes vntoo God. This dooth Marie garniſh with ſingular lightſomneſſe of woordes as it were with an expoſition.What it is too yeeld thanks. For too yéeld thankes, is not onely with wagging of the lippes and with woordes: but alſo with the mynd and the whole hart too acknowledge, confeſſe, and publiſhe, that wée haue receyued a benefite at another mannes hand: and in reſpect thereof too ſubmit our ſelues with our whole hart vntoo him, and on our behalfe too obey him and doo him good

agein. Thus therefore dooth Marie begin: My ſoule dooth magnifie the Lord, and my ſpirite hath reioyced in God my Sauiour, that is too ſay: with my whole harte doo I publiſh this excéeding great benefite of God, which he hath beſtowed in ſending his ſonne the Sauiour of the Churche. Neyther doo I thanke God with my lippes onely, but with my whole ſoule, and with all the motions of my ſoule quickened vp by the haly Ghoſte, couet I too ſhewe the excéeding great gladneſſe and thankfulneſſe of my harte which triumpheth for ioy, and too ſet out God my Sauiour, that he may bée magnified, that is, that he may bée bruted abrode too bée great and to haue beſtowed a ſingular benefite vppon vs, and bée glorified for ſo dooing: and that many men which ſhall bée borne of mée his lowly handmayd, too the true knowledge of GOD and of his ſonne our Sauiour, may bee allured too acknowledge him, and ſet foorth his prayſes.
                  
                     For he hath looked vpon the lowlyneſſe of his handmayd. For behold, from hencefoorth all Generations shall call mee bliſſed.
                  
                  It reckeneth vp the benefites which God graunteth both too Marie priuately and too the whole Church. I yéeld thanks vntoo GOD, that out of all mankynde he hath choſen mee a wretched and deſpyſed Handmayd., too this hygh honour, too bée the mother of his owne ſonne our Lorde Ieſus Chryſte oure Sauiour: and that he loueth and defendeth the whole humble and deſpyſed Churche, voutſauing eternall ſaluation vppon it.
                  Firſt and formoſt let the Hebrew phraſe bée conſidered,The Hebrew Phraſe▪
                      wherein is an ordinarie matter by exchaunge too put the preterperfecttence of the Indicatiue mode for the preſenttence which the Hebrews vtterly want. Therfore all theſe ſpéeches of the preter perfecttence, he hath regarded, the lowlyneſſe, he hath shewed power with his arme, he hath put downe the mightie from their ſeate, he hath exalted the hū
                     ble, &c. are too bee vnderſtood of the preſenttence. GOD alwayes

regardeth his humble Churche: he preſerueth his Church mightily at all times: he putteth downe or caſteth downe Tyrants: and he exalteth or lifteth vp the humble and méeke.
                  Secondly, woordes of perceyuerance, or woords expreſſingWords of sēce or perceuerāce. the ſenſes, among the Hebrewes, ſignifie not onely the perceyuerance in the mynd or ſenſe, but alſo the verye motions or affectiōs of the hart, which accompanie ſuch perceyuerāce Gene. iiij. The Lorde looked vppon Abel and his offerings, that is too ſay, he did not only behold Abel and his offerings, but alſo loued them, allowed them, accepted them mercifully, liked well of him, &c. So likewyſe in this place, he looked vppon the lowlyneſſe of his handmayde, is as much too ſay, as hée not only beholdeth mée with his eyes, but alſo loueth mée, regardeth mée, cheriſheth mée, helpeth mée, defendeth mée, yea and with excéeding great benefits decketh both mée and alſo his humble and deſpyſed Church.
                  Thirdly, the Hebrewes are woont too vtter the AdiectiueTurning of the proper Adiectiue intoo a Subſtantiue. and the Subſtātiue in this wyſe, that they put the one of thē in the Genitiue caſe and the other in any other caſe whatſoeuer the maner of ſpéeche requireth: as in this place, he hath looked vppon the lowlyneſſe of his handmayd is as much too ſay, as he hath looked vppon his lowly handmayd: that is too ſay, his handmayd that is brought down too the ground, vyle, and deſpyſed. For lowlyneſſe in this place importeth not the vertue which otherwyſe is called humbleneſſe, but an abaſing of ſtate and a vyleneſſe of condition, ſuch as is the caſe of an abiect or outcaſt among men.
                  
                     For hee that is mightie hath doone great things tooGreat things. mee, and holy is his name. There is no greater or more wonderfull woorke, than for GOD too bée conceyued and borne of a Virgine. Too brynge thys great and vnſpeakable woorke of GOD too paſſe, Mary declareth hirſelfe too bee choſen out of all mankynde, not for any merites, vertues, or holyneſſe of hir owne, but ſhée acknowledgeth

that GOD onely is holy, that is too ſaye, cleane, pure and voyde of all ſinne and blemiſh, perfectly ryghtuouſe, ſoothfaſt and good, who was induced of hys owne incomparable goodneſſe and mercie, too ſende his owne wel béeloued ſonne.
                  
                     Hee that is mightye, that is too ſay, Almyghtye GOD.Myghtye. For the Incarnation of the ſonne of GOD, is one of the chéefeſt woorkes of Gods almightineſſe, whiche ioyntly toogither with Gods truthe, is the foundation of all the Articles of our fayth. And holy is his name, that is too ſay, he him ſelfe is holy.
                  
                     And his mercie is from generation too generation tooGods ſtedfaſt mercy. them that feare him. That is too wit, his mercie promyſed for Chryſt the Mediatours ſake, is perpetuall and ſet open too all men, and ſtable and firme at all tymes. GOD being led with ſingular goodneſſe and loue towardes mankynde, receyueth all that reſort too him, too fauour and inheritance of eternall lyfe: And in this lyfe decketh them with all benefites both bodily and ghoſtly.
                  Mercie properly ſignifieth the vertue whiche is touchedThe definition of Mercy. with the féeling of another bodyes gréef, and is ſorie that other folkes fare amiſſe, and vppon probable reaſon ſuccoureth thoſe that bée in diſtreſſe, eyther of frée goodneſſe releaſing ſomewhat of extréeme rigour (as when GOD pityeth mankynde): elſe for ryghtes ſake, as when good and gitleſſe men are vexed or troubled with wrongfull diſpleaſures.
                  Nowe, where ſo euer mention is made of Gods mercie in the Pſalmes and the Prophetes, alwayes the promiſe concerning Chryſt is too bée added, for whoſe ſake GOD is mercifull too vs vnwoorthye perſones defyled with much lothſome filthyneſſe: as in the Pſalm. lj. Haue mercie vppon mée O GOD according too thy great mercie, namely whiche is promiſed fréely for oure Lorde Ieſus Chryſte the

Mediators ſake. Pſal. Cij. The mercie of the Lorde endureth for euer and euer, namely, whiche is promiſed for his ſonne the mediatours ſake. Beſides this alſo, mercie is oftentymes vſed in the Prophets for benefiting or for the dueties of charitie. For all the benefites or duties of charitie that are doone too our neyghbour, muſt procéede of true mercie and loue, as in this ordinarie ſaying: I will haue mercie and not ſacrifiſe: that is too ſaye, I require the duties of charitie and well dooing more than ſacrifiſe.
                  
                     Too them that feare him, that is too ſay, whiche acknowledgeWho they bee that feare God. their owne ſinnes and flée vntoo Chryſt the Mediator by faith, and in the ſame faith begin new obedience agréeing with the will and woord of God. For the feare of God by the figure Synecdoche comprehendeth the whole ſeruice of God. Yet is not Gods mercie and forgiueneſſe of ſinnes promiſed for the woorthyneſſe of our feare, faith, or new obedience: but is giuen fréely for Chryſtes ſake onely, too him that repēteth and beléeueth, as is ſayd more at large in the doctrine of Iuſtification.
                  
                     Hee hath shewed ſtrength, &c. This is the ſumme ofToo ſhevve ſtrength. the next thrée verſes. GOD preſerueth and defendeth his Church ageinſt the wiſdome, power, & abilitie of the whole world. Hath shewed ſtrength, that is too ſaye, dooth mightily preſerue and defend his lowly and weake Churche, like as he defended the Iſraelites mightily at the red Sea, and repreſſed the tyrannie of Pharao. With his arme, that is tooGods arme. ſay by his ſonne. For ſo is the ſōne named Exo. xv. Eſai. liij. Who hath beléeued our ſaying, and too whom is the arme of the Lord reueled? Eſai. xl. His arme ſhall beare rule ouer all. He hath ſcattered the proude in the imagination of theirThe proud. hartes, as the Pharaos who by their owne wiſdome went about too oppreſſe the people of Iſraell. Exod. j. ij. xiiij. &c. as the purpoſes of Diocletiā
                      a moſt ſuttle and cruel Prince, who entēded too haué deſtroyed the church, as he diſappoynted the coūſell of Achitophel. ij. Reg. xv. So alſo now of late

yéeres he hath diſapointed very many ſuttle practiſes of y•
                     Putting dovvne of the mighty. Pope and his Prelates that endeuered to haue wiped out the church. He putteth downe the mightie from their ſeates, that is to ſay, Tyraunts which truſt in their own power and wealth, and ſpecially whiche are perſecuters of the Church, them dooth God caſt downe headlong from the hygheſt top of their ſouereintie into dreadful calamities: As for example, Apries king of Egipt who boaſted that no body eyther of the Gods or of men was able to beréeue him of his kingdome, was afterward ſtrangled. Nabuchodonoſor who hild the kingdome of Babilon, (ye largeſt and mightieſt empyre of ye world,) when he waxed proud & ſtahis was depriued not onely of his kingdome, but alſo of his reaſon. Iulian the regenerate beyng wounded & caſting vp his bloud with his owne hand, cried out, thou haſt ouerExalting of the lovvly. come O Galilean. Hath exalted the lowly, that is to ſay, ſuch as were caſte downe to the ground, miſerable, and deſpiſed perſones, like as he lifted vp Moyſes out of pryſon to the Lordſhip of the kingdome of Egipt. He remoued Dauid out of his ſhepeheards cotage into ye throne of the kingdome of Iſraell. He made Daniell & his fellowes rulers of prouinces in the kingdome of Perſia, & Chaldey. He maried Heſter the priſonner to ye moſt puiſſant King Aſſuerus. So alſo God lifted vppe the baſe and wretched handmayde Marie to this moſt high honour, that ſhée becameFilling of the hungry. the Mother of the Sonne of God. He hath filled the hungry with good things, according to the ſaying of the xxxiij. Pſalme, the rich haue wanted and bin a hungred, but they that feare the Lorde ſhall want nothing. Or els let it bée applyed too the conſciences that are made afrayd at the beholding of their ſinnes, and which thirſt and hunger after the rightuouſneſſe of Chriſt. Theſe ſhall bée refreſhed with healthfull comfort, & filled with euerlaſting good things. But the rich or ſuch as truſt in theyr owne rightuouſneſſe and holyneſſe ſhall bée ſhaken of.
               
               
                  
                  The .ix. and .x. verſes.
                  
                     HE remēbring his mercy, hath hild vp Iſrael his child, as he ſpake to our forefathers Abraham and his ſeede for euer.
                  
                  The ſecond and cheef part of this ſong, in which ſhee giueth thankes for the ſending of Chriſt, according to the promiſes made to the fathers. Now, to the enlightening of theſe two verſes, may bee referred all the promiſes and Sermons concerning Chriſt which are written by Moyſes in Gen. iij. xij. xxij. xxvj. xxviij. xlix. in Deut. xviij. and by the reſt of the Prophetes: and alſo all the whole doctrine of the Goſpell concerning the perſon and benefites of Chriſt. At this time I will but open the woordes after the order of Grammer.
                  
                     He remembring his mercy, namely whiche he promiſedTo hold vp. for Chriſt the Mediators ſake. For this is the whole ſum of the goſpel, that God of his free mercy for Chriſtes ſake, holdeth vp men that are falling into endleſſe deſtruction: that is to ſay, deliuereth them from ſinne and death, and giueth them euerlaſting ſaluation.
                  
                     Hath hild vp Iſraell his ſeruaunt, It is a figure of grammer called Appoſition. God hath hilde vp Iſraell his ſeruaunt, that is to ſay, God of his excéeding goodneſſe and frée loue, pitying his people Iſraell, that is to ſay ye whole Church which was like to fall into euerlaſting deſtruction: ſent his ſonne the redéemer to ſuccour vs, falne into ſinne and death, and to deliuer vs from the kingdome of Sathan and death, and to reſtore vs rightuouſneſſe & euerlaſting lyfe Hath hild vp. In the Gréeke the word antilabeto is the Aoriſt of the meane voyce of the verb antilambanethos, whiche properly ſignifieth, to catch hold of one that is falling by thruſting out his hand, & to ſtay him, & to ſuccour him, and help him, that he may ſcape ſafe and harmeleſſe out of the daunger.
                  
                     Iſraell is the propre name of the Patriarke Iacob, giuenIſraell.
                     
him by the ſonne of God in wreſtling with him. Gen. xxxij. It is an ordinarie thing among the Hebrewes too terme the ofſpring by the names of the ſtocke or aunceters from whiche they come. So he calleth the people of Iſraell by the name of their founder, yt is to wit of Iſraell or Iacob, frō whom al the Iſraelites or Iewes iſſued. And bycauſe the promis concerning Chriſt was betaken chéefly to the people of Iſraell, (among whom was alwayes the ſeate of the church) for the ſame cauſe, the name of Iſrael is oftentimes among the Prophetes taken for the whole Churche gathered of the Iewes and the Gentiles togither. And this phraſe of the Prophetes doth Marie kéepe in this place.
                  
                     His child, whom he embraceth with fatherly loue asChild. his ſonne, & which people is the child or ſonne, & ſeruaunt of God choſen out of whole mankind, to ſerue God, and to ſay and do things acceptable to God.
                  
                     As he ſpake to our Fathers, Abraham & his ſeede for euer.
                  
                  This laſt part for euer would bee ioyned to the firſt part of the next verſe before, which is, he remembring his mercy for euer: that is to ſay, his euerlaſting mercy, or his mercy which he hath promiſed to performe euermore towards all thoſe that flée vnto Chriſt, as it ſayd Pſal. Ciij.
                  The mercy of the Lorde is for euer and euer vppon them that feare him.
                  The promiſes concerning Chriſt the defender and deliuererTo whom the promiſes were made. of the people of Iſraell or of the Church, were deliuered firſt to Adā & Eue in Paradiſe. Gen. iij. Secondly to Abrahā. Gen. xij. xxij. xv. xvij. &c. Next to his ſéede or ofſpring Iſaac. Gen. xxvj. Then to Iacob, Gen. xxviij. and xlix. Afterward to Moyſes. Deut. xviij. And ſpecially to king Dauid. ij. Reg. vy. and .xxiij. and .j. Paral. xvij.
                  I hope that this bréef diſpoſement of Maries ſong, and the grammaticall expoſition of the woordes thereof, will not bée miſliked of thoſe that bée well minded.
               
            
            
               
               The Epiſtle vppon the feaſt day of Sainct lames.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Rom. viij.
                  
                     FOr wee knowe that all things worke for the beſt vnto them that loue God, which alſo are called of purpoſe. For thoſe which he knew before, he alſo ordeyned before that they ſhould be like fashioned vnto the shape of his ſonne, that he might bee the firſt begotten ſonne among many brethren. Moreouer whiche hee appointed before, them alſo he called. And which he called, them alſo he iuſtified, and which he iuſtified, them he alſo glorified. What shall wee then ſay to theſe things? yf God be on our ſide, who can bee ageynſt vs? which ſpared not his own ſonne, but gaue him for vs all: how shall he not with him giue vs all things alſo? VVho shal lay any thing to the charge of Gods choſen? it is God that iuſtifieth: who then shall condemne? it is Chriſt whiche is dead, yea rather which is riſen ageyne, which is alſo on the right hand of God, and maketh interceſsion for vs. VVho shall ſeparate vs from the loue of God? shall tribulation? or anguish? or perſecution? eyther hunger? eyther nakedneſſe? eyther perill? eyther ſword? as it is written: For thy ſake are wee killed all day long, and are counted as shepe apointed to be ſlayne. Neuertheleſſe, in all theſe things wee ouercome ſtrōgly thorow his help that loued vs. For I am ſure that neyther death, neyther lyfe, neyther Aungels, nor rule, neyther power, neyther things preſent, neyther things to come, neyther hygh, neyther low, neyther any other creature shall bee able to depart vs from the loue of God, which is in Chriſt Ieſu our Lord.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  THis Epiſtle is perſuaſiue. And the ſtate or propoſition principall thereof is, a comforte of the Churche ſubiect
                     
                     to the croſſe in this lyfe. The places of the comfortings, or the chéef argumentes are foure.
                  1 Of the finall cauſe or the end and iſſue of affictions.
                     Afflictions are healthfull.
                  
                  What things ſo euer are good, and healthful to the godlie, ought to bee ſuffered with a quiet minde and with a certeyne gladneſſe.
                  Afflictions & miſeries are good and healthfull to the godly, & there ſhall aſſuredly follow deliueraunce and a moſt ioyfull iſſue in the euerlaſting life: (for this is the méening of the ſayd ſaying, all things woorke for the beſt too the profit of them that loue God, that is to ſay, all afflictions turne to the profite of them that loue God, or of the godly, as it is ſayde Pſal. 119. It is good for mée O Lorde that thou haſt afflicted mée.
                  
                     Ergo afflictions are to bée ſuffered by the godly, paciently, and with a certeine gladneſſe.
                  For the manifeſtation of the ſecond part of this argument,Platos opinion concerning afflictions. let the ten endes or commodities of afflictious bée borowed hither, out of the place that concerneth the croſſe and calamities.
                  And let yong men beare well in minde this ſaying of Plato, which douteleſſe he tooke out of the doctrine of the Church of the holy fathers. Thus muſt we thinke of a godly man, that whither hee liue in pouertie or bee turmoyled with death or other aduerſities: theſe things ſhall doo him good eyther alyue or dead. For God neuer neglecteth him that hath his hart full bent too liue rightuouſly, and earneſtly followeth vertue, that he may (as much as is poſsible for man) become like and conformable vnto God.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond Argument is taken of the example of the ſonne of God.
                  WHomſoeuer God hath foreknowen and forechoſen to lyfe and glorie euerlaſting, muſt of neceſſitis become like to the Image of the ſonne of God.
                  
                     But the ſonne was fayne firſt to ſuffer and to bée crucified, and afterward to bée glorified.
                  
                     Ergo alſo the Church and all the godly ſhall bée glorified by tribulation and affliction.
               
               
                  The third argument is of the efficient cauſe, or of the will of God.
                  ALl godly perſones muſt reuerently obey the order of Gods wiſdome and rightuouſneſſe.
                  But God by his wiſdome hath apointed this order, that all they that are choſen to eternall life, ſhould firſt be called, ſecondly iuſtified, then diſtreſſed with tribulacion and affliction, and laſtly bée adorned with ioy and glorie euerlaſting.
                  
                     Ergo it behooueth vs to obey this order reuerently.
               
               
                  The fourth argument is of the forcing cauſe, and of Gods help.
                  THe louingneſſe and fatherly good wil of God towards vs, is to bée preferred before all ſorowes, miſeries and temptacions.
                  God aſſuredly beareth vs good will, and is on our ſide, he loueth, helpeth, defendeth, and ſaueth vs for his ſonnes ſake.
                  
                     Ergo the ſorrowes and miſeries that are layd vppon vs by God our Father, are to abidden paciently.
                  Now foraſmuch as there bée two terrible obiections that aſſault the minor of this argument: Paule diſproueth them in few woordes.
               
               
                  Firſt.
                  None that bée defiled with ſinnes are beloued of God.Obiection.
                  
                  Wée are defiled with ſinnes, and giltie of Gods wrath and endleſſe damnacion.
                  
                     Ergo wée are not beloued of God.Aunſwer.
                  
                  Paule aunſwereth firſt to the maior or firſt propoſition,

thus: yt none which are defiled with ſinne (that is to wit, whicherepent not, and flée not by fayth to the Sonne of God the Mediator, that was deliuered for vs,) are belo uedof God.
                  And to the minor or ſecond part of the argument, he anſwereth thus.
                  Wée are in déede gilty of Gods wrath and euerlaſting damnation, as in reſpect of our owne vnclenneſſe and vnworthineſſe: but in aſmuch as wée acknowledge and bewayle our ſinnes, and by fayth doo flée to the ſonne of God the Mediator, who dyed and roſe ageyn for vs, and maketh interceſſion for vs at the right hand of God: wée are beloued of God, and wée are iuſtified, defended and ſaued for the ſounes ſake, who was put too death and rayſed ageyne for vs, vppon this ſonne ſitting at the right hand of the Father, and making interceſſion for vs, and not vpon our owne ſinnes, let vs faſten the eyes of our minde.
               
               
                  The ſecond obiection.
                  REaſon would that they ſhould bée well at eaſe, whichObiection. are beloued of God, for no man dooth harme to thoſe whom he loueth.
                  Wée Chriſtians in this lyfe are of all men moſt miſerable, oppreſſed with afflictions, anguiſh, hunger, and nakedneſſe, and wée are ſlayne all the day long &c.
                  
                     Ergo wée are not beloued of God.Aunſwer.
                  
                  I aunſwer firſt to the maior. The godly ought in déede to bée well at eaſe, howbeit after that order and manner which the wiſdome of God hath vttered in the Goſpell. The godly muſt bée made like too the Image of Gods ſon. They muſt ſuffer and dye, and ſo enter into glorie as he did. ij. God mindeth not to endue the godly with ye ſhort & ſhadowiſh benefites of this lyfe, but with euerlaſting rewards. iij. Theſe calamities are not a tokē of gods wrath or hatred towards vs, but rather of his fatherly good will,

according to this ſaying: whom the Lord loueth, him he chaſtiſeth, and he ſkourgeth euery ſonne whom he receyueth. Hither may the ten commodities of perſecution and afflictions bée referred.
                  And to the minor I aunſwer. Wée Chriſtians are in déede moſt full of miſeries (but it is but the turning of a hand,) bycauſe ſinne ſticketh ſtill in vs, which muſt bee doone away by affliction and death. Howbeit in the meane while, (euen in the very afflictions) wée finde Gods preſence and help, and wonderful deliueraunces, and wee are ſtrengthened by the holy Ghoſt, ſo as wée may aſſure our ſelues that no afflictions can plucke vs away from Gods louingneſſe, wherewith he loueth vs for his Sonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſtes ſake: according to this ſaying. Iohn x. No man ſhall pull my ſhéepe out of myhandes.
                  Hither to I haue ſhewed the ſtate of the Epiſtle, and ſet out the argumentes after the order of Logicke.
                  And I dare auouche that there is no one part of the ſermons of the Prophetes & Apoſtles, that in ſo few woords conteyneth larger wiſedome, me places of Chriſtian doctrine, more effectuall comfort in ſorowes and calamities, more vehement motions, more force of perſuaſion per
                     
                        •
                     ing into mens mindes, and more notable figures and ornamentes of Rhetoricke, than dooth this Epiſtle which is wont to bée read in the Church as this day. And therefore I will bréefly picke out the reſt of the places of doctrine, whereof there bée teſtimonies in this Epiſtle.
                  
                     j. Of the cauſes why the Church before the reſt ofPlaces of doctrine conteyned in this, Epiſtle. mankind ſhould bée vnder the croſſe, and of true comforts too béé ſet ageynſt it.
                     ij. Of Gods predeſtination which is Gods eternall purpoſe or decrée of choſing his Church out of al mankind of ſuch as are called into that company by mercy for his ſonnes ſake: and ſo of euery one ſeuerally that ſhall continue in the fayth to their departing out of this lyfe.
                     
                        iij. Of the Churche and of the wonderfull gathering, preſeruation, gouernement, and Glorification of the Churche.
                     iiij. This ſaying Whom he hath choſen, them alſo hath he called, conteyneth a moſte ſwéete and comfortable doctrine, namely that there is no where any election too euerlaſting Saluation but in the companie of them that bée called, that is too ſay, whiche héere Chryſtes Goſpell. And that GOD in déede worketh effectually in the viſible congregation of this called church, imparting rightuouſneſſe, and glorie euerlaſting vnto men. Therfore let vs not ſéeke for Gods choſen or for his churche among Turks, Hethenfolks, and others that are ignorant of the goſpell.
                     v. Of the benefits of the Son of God which was giuen for vs.
                     vj. Of mans iuſtification before God which is the abſolution of the ſinfull man from the accuſation of the lawe and from endleſſe damnation: and the imputation of rightuouſneſſe, wherthrough (for Chryſt the mediators ſake who dyed and is ryſen ageyn and maketh interceſſion for vs,) he is accepted for rightuouſe by the frée mercy of god, and receiued to lyfe and glorie euerlaſting.
                     vij. Of the kingdom of Chryſt ſitting at the right hand of God, or reygning in equall power with the eternall Father.
                     viij. Of the préeſthoode of Chryſte pacifying the Father with his ſacrifiſe and interceſſion.
                     ix. Of the ſtedfaſtneſſe of election and of the certeyntie of fayth that leaneth vnto Gods louingneſſe to vs wards, and beleeueth that both the whole church is preſerued by God ageinſt the furiouſneſſe of féends and vngodly folke, and alſo that euery godly perſon that continueth in faith ſhall be ſaued.
                  
                  Concerning theſe nyne places, let the full expoſition

bée taken out of the writings that conteyn the ſum of the doctrine. Moreouer let the ſtudious conſider eche ſeueral woord, the vehemencies, the phraſes, and the notable ornaments of figures: as firſt the Gradation of four ſteps. 2. the Homaeoteleuts. 3. the Homoioptots. 4. the rife interrogations. 5. the ſubiections 6. the often Antitheſies. 7. the ſtreynes beginning all with one woorde. 9. the heaping vp of things. 10. the Iſcolies and ſimilitudes. &c.
               
            
            
               
                  Ʋpon the feaſt day oſ S. Mathew the apoſtle and euangiliſt.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Epheſ. iiij.
                  
                     VNto euery one of vs is giuen grace accordyng to the meaſure of the gift of Chryſt. VVherfore he ſayth: He is gone vp an hye, and hath ledde captiuitie captiue, and hath giuen giftes vnto mē. That he aſcended, what meaneth it, but that he alſo deſcēded firſt into the loweſt partes of the earth? He that deſcended is euen the ſame alſo that aſcēded vp, euen aboue al heuens, to fulfil al things. And the very ſame, made ſome Apoſtles, ſome Prophetes, ſome Euangeliſtes, ſome Shepeherdes, and ſome teachers: that the Saincts might haue al things neceſſary to worke and miniſter withal, to the edifying of the body of Chryſt, til we euery one (in the vnitie of fayth, and knowledge of the ſonne of God) growe vp vnto a perfect man, after the meaſure of age of the fulneſſe of Chryſt.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  IT is of that kynd that is inſtructiue. For it is a doctrine of the miniſterie of the Goſpell, and of the teachers or miniſters of the Goſpel. The chéef partes thereof are thrée, applyed to places of Inſtruction.
                  
                     
                     j. The efficient cauſe from whence ſpringeth the miniſterieThe efficient cauſe of the miniſterie. of the Goſpel, and by which it is preſerued, is the ſonne of God our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, who is aſcenddd intoo heauen, and reigneth at the right hand of the father, that he may giue gifts too men.
                     ij. The ſpeciall or particular kyndes or degrées of miniſtersDegrees of Miniſters. of the Goſpell. 1. Apoſtles. 2. prophets. 3. Euangeliſts. 4. Shepherds. &. 5. Teachers or inſtructers of yong beginners.
                     iij. The finall cauſe for which the miniſterie of the goſpellThe finall cauſe of the miniſterie. is ordeined, and for whiche it is maynteyned, is that the true knowledge of God, and the true and vncorrupte doctrine of the goſpell might bée continued and ſpred abrode among men. And that ther may from time to tyme be gathered a church that rightly acknowledgeth, woorſhippeth and glorifieth God euerlaſtingly. And theſe are the chéefe benefits of this epiſtle.
                  
                  And héere withall let other of the notabler places be obſerued.
                  
                     j. Of the diuerſitie of gifts in the church which Chryſt diſtributeth to eche ſeuerall perſon, according as he thinketh good, that they may be employed to further the common profite of the whole church.
                     ij. A deſcription of the triumph of Chryſte the conquerour, leading priſoner the priſonerſhip of ſin, death and the diuell, and aſcending into heauen, and reigning at the right hand of the father.
                     iij. A witneſſe of the two natures in Chryſte, cuppled by perſonall vnion, to be ſet ageinſt Arius, Neſtorius, and Eutyches.
                     
                     iii. j A witneſſe of the almightineſſe and euery where being of Chryſt.
                     v. Of the miniſtration of the goſpel, and of the ſending of teachers and renuers of the doctrine.
                  
                  I wil at an other tyme ſpeake more at large of ye other

parts of the Epiſtle which conteyn moſt ample doctrine. But at this tyme I will bréefly ouerrun onely one place, concerning the miniſterie of the Goſpell, which peculiarly perteyneth to the ſtorie of this dayes feaſt.
                  God created men to the intent he may gather himſelfeWhy God gathereth a church and apoynteth miniſters. a churche out of mankynde too acknowledge him and ſet foorth his prayſe: and that God ageyne on the other ſyde may communicate himſelfe too thoſe that acknowledge hym. And too the intent hée myght bee knowne, hee hath of his excéeding greate goodneſſe diſcloſed himſelfe to mankind, by deliuering him a certeyn doctrine of the Law and the Goſpell, concerning his ſonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt whom he hath ſet foorth too bée a mediator and redéemer, too the ende that men being receyued for his ſake, myghte bée endued with godly lyght, wiſedome, ryghtuouſneſſe, and eternall lyfe. For although God could without mean haue conuerted men vntoo him, and coulde garnyſh them with hys lyghte and glorie: yet notwithſtanding, of his woonderfull wiſedom he hath appointed this order, to the intent that men in this lyfe myght thorough the doctrine of the lawe bée ſtirred vp to acknowledge their ſinnes, and too repent them earneſtly for the ſame: and by the Goſpell conceyue Fayth, wherthrough they may in their extréeme gréefes flée vntoo the ſonne of God our Lord Ieſus Chryſt, who dyed and roſe ageyne for vs, and for his ſake obteyne forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, ryghtuouſneſſe, and the inheritance of euerlaſting life. Wherefore too the intent this doctrine of the lawe and the goſpell, (by whiche only and not any otherwiſe God hath determined to conuert men vntoo him, and too gather an euerlaſting church too himſelfe) myght bée continually knowne and ſpread abroade among mankynde: GOD of his vnmeaſurable goodneſſe hath ordeyned the miniſterie of publik teaching and preaching his doctrine, and hath appointed certeyne perſons to teache, partely by him ſelfe without meanes,

and partly by his Church. And the ſonne of God himſelfeThe firſt preacher of the goſpell. was the firſt preacher or miniſter of the Goſpell in Paradyſe, vttering the woonderfull promis concernyng the ſéede, by which our firſt parentes were receyued intoo fauour. Afterward hée rayſed vp Patriarks and Prophets, and by his power in them maynteined the miniſtration of his doctrine ageynſt the furiouſneſſe of féendes and tyrants. At length taking mans nature vpon him, he hym ſelfe preached viſibly vpon earth, and wrought miracles. And as ſoone as he was riſen from death, he ſent his apoſtles ſainct Mathew and the reſt, too ſpreade this doctrine abroade through the whole world. By theſe were others called too bée teachers and miniſters of the Churche, and ſo from thenſfoorth by continuall ſucceſſion, vntoo our tymes, the miniſterie of the Goſpel hath bin preſerued and maynteined by the infinite goodneſſe and power of the ſon of God. And therfore ſayth Paule in this place: And the very Son of God our Lorde Iuſus Chriſte, hathe gyuenApoſtles. ſome apoſtles, that is too ſay, miniſters called and ſent immediatly by Chryſt him ſelfe, too teache the Goſpell euery where, hauing aſſuredneſſe that they doo not erre. To the doctrine of theſe muſt wée certeinly giue credit, as too the voyce of God ſounding from heauen.
                  
                     Some prophets, that is to ſay, teachers or interpretersProphets. of the ſcriptures written by the prophetes and Apoſtles furniſhed with ſingular giftes for the ſetting vp ageyne of the doctrine héeretofore darkened and decayed, ſuch as were Auſtin, Luther, and others.
                  
                     Some Euangeliſts, that is to ſay, miniſters that teach theEuangeliſts▪ or goſpeller
                           •
                        
                      Goſpell receyued of the Apoſtles, and ſette vp churches in mo places, as. Timothie. ij. Tim. iiij.
                  
                     Some ſhepherds, that is to ſay, miniſters called, not immediatlyShepherds. of God, but by men, to teach the Goſpell, to miniſter the Sacraments, and to rule ſome one churche, in ſome certeine place. Theſe doothe Paule call Elders and

Biſhops, who when they ſtep aſyde from the rule of the Apoſtles doctrine do erre and fall.
                  
                     And ſome teachers, which in the churche, in ſchooles, orTeachers. in mens houſes doo teach the true doctrin of God, but miniſter not the Sacramentes.
                  
                     To the building vp of the Saincts intoo the woorke of the miniſterie, that is to ſay, that the holy church may be builded vp by the miniſterie of the Goſpel, and that mē which are drawen away from God, may bée lynked too GOD ageyne.
                  
                     To the building vp of the bodie of Chryſt, that is too ſay,Chryſtes body. that the Church which is Chryſtes body, may be buylded, that is to ſay, that out of mankynde there may bée gathered a congregation of men, that rightly acknowledge and prayſe God, and his ſonne our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, and become heires of the euerlaſting lyfe.
                  
                     Till wee come into the vnitie of faith and of the knowledge of Gods ſonne, that is too ſay, vntill we all come too one fayth, whiche is the acknowledgement of the Sonne of God.
                  
                     Intoo a perfect man, after the meaſure of age of the fulneſſeA perfect man. of Chryſt, that is too ſay, vntill fayth which at the beginning is ſmall, babiſh and weake, may by little and little grow and become ſtrong, manly, and fulſome, or perfect. For he taketh a ſimilitude of the age of men, whervnto he compareth the encreaſments of Faith.
                  
                     That we may be no longer children wauering and caryedChildren. about with euery wynde of doctrine, that is too ſay, that the one true and vncorrupt doctrine of the goſpel may be preſerued among men, the loſſe whereof maketh infinite errours to créepe in, as it is to bée ſéene among the Heathen folke and the Papiſtes. And Paule vſeth lyghtſome metaphors. 1. Firſt of the childiſh age whiche is vnconſtant and eaſy to be bowed & changed. 2. Of a ſhip floting on the waues. & 3. of a réed, which yeldeth to euery blaſt of wind.
                  
                     
                     In the lewdneſſe of men, and craftyneſſe wherby they hemLeavvdneſſe and craf
                              •
                           ineſſe. vs in with errour, That is to ſay, by the ſleights and wyles of men wherwith they compaſſe vs to deceiue vs.
                  
                     But let vs folow the truth in loue, and in all things let vsTruth. grow into him that is the head, euen Chryſt, that is too ſay, Wée that bee godly teachers, let vs with agreeable endeuer ſpreade abroade the true doctrine of the Goſpell, and by our miniſtration knit ageyn vnto our one head Chryſt all men that bée pulled away from God.
                  
                     In whome all the bodie is coupled and knit togither in eueryThe knitting of the head and the body togither. ioynt by the miniſtration, according too the operation as euery part hath his meaſure and encreaſeth the bodie too the edifiyng of it ſelfe in loue, that is to ſay: Like as in mās body, the power or ſpirite of lyfe ſpreadeth from the head into the reſt of the membres, knitte togyther by ioyntes, that they maye excecute their propre ſeruices or offices, according too the operation that is giuen too eche ſeuerall limbe, whiche ſerue too the encreaſe, perfection and welfare of the whole body: Euen ſo in the churche gathered togither by the miniſterie of the Goſpel, all the members of the churche being knit too Chryſt the head by ioyntes, that is to ſay by the miniſters of the goſpel) doo vndertake ſundry ſeruices and duties, according as Chriſt hath giuen too euery of them conuenient power and ableneſſe: woorking in ſuche wyſe, that the body of the Church may growe and bée buylded in loue, wherethrough eche ſeuerall member ſerueth, not too the welfare of it ſelf alone, but too the welfare of the whole body.
                  Concerning the life and dooings of the apoſtle Mathew,Of the apoſtel Mathew. ther ar few thīgs left in any ſtories of credit. His fathers name was Alphei, which word in the Hebrue is as much to ſay as a lieutenant of men of armes, or a captein of a thouſand ſouldiers. His owne name Matthath ſignifieth a preſent or gift in greeke Theodoros, that is to ſay Gods gifte, or giuen of God. Before his conuerſion hée was a

Publicane that gathered the comon cuſtomes and reuenues of the people of Rome, whiche he had hyred at a certeine rent, and wreſted as muche as he coulde from their ſubiects. The ſtorie of this calling and the notable ſermō of Chryſt which he made in Mathews houſe, may be known by reading the goſpel of this day. It is written of him that after Chryſtes reſurrection he preched about ten yéeres in Iewry, and afterward taughte the Goſpell more than twentie yéeres in Aethiope, and there founded churches, which (as it is certeinly knowne) doo flouriſhe at this day vnder the Empyre of the moſt puiſſaunt king whome we call Preſter Iohn.
               
            
            
               Vppon the feast day of Sainct Michaell the Archangell.
               
                  The Epiſtle. Apocalips. xij.
                  
                     ANd there was a greate battaile in heauen, Michaell and his angels fought with the dragon, and the Dragon fought with his angels, and preuayled not, neyther was their place found any more in heuē. And the great dragon that old ſerpent, called the deuyl and Sathanas was caſt out which deceyueth all the worlde. And he was caſt into the earth, and his angels were caſt out alſo. And I harde a loude voyce, ſaying: In heauen is nowe made ſaluation and ſtrength and the kyngdom of our God, and the power of his Chriſte. For the accuſer of our brethren is caſt down, which accuſed them before God daye and nighte. And they ouercame him by the bloud of the lambe, and by the word of their teſtimonie, and they loued not their lyues vntoo the death.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement of a ſermon concerning the holy Angels
                  AS this daye the Churche haloweth the feaſt of the holy Angells, to the intent the godly may conſider this

excéeding great and woonderfull benefite of God, that he hath appoynted vs Angels too garde vs, and yéeld him thankes for it, and pray vntoo him that the ſonne of God himſelf will defend them ageinſt the Deuils aſſaultes and ſecrete traines, by the watch and warde of his holy Angels. Now that this benefite of God may bée the ryghtlyer acknowledged, I will bréefly expound the doctrine concerning Angels, which ſhall bée compryſed in thrée places.
                  
                     1 What Angels bée.
                     2 What is the office or duetie of the holy Angels.
                     3 Of the euil Angels or Féends.
                  
               
               
                  Firſt. What an Angell is.
                  THe woord Angell is a Gréeke woord, and ſignifieth a meſſenger. Like as Sophocles ſayth: No man rewardeth an Angel (that is too ſay a meſſenger) that bringeth all tydings. And Homer in the .xv. booke of his Jliades, This alſo is good, when the Angell (that is too ſay the meſſenger) is a wiſe and politike perſone. Theruppon is the woord Euangelion, that is too ſay, good and glad tydings, which wée call the Goſpell. And the ſonne of God himſelfe is diuers times called an Angell by Iames and Malachie and in others places, by reaſon of his office for that he is the eternall fathers meſſenger, or Ambaſſador which ſheweth men the Goſpel of glad tidings, or the ſecrete will of God concerning forgiueneſſe of ſinnes for Chryſtes ſake, according as he himſelf ſayth: This is the wil of the father that ſent mée, that euery one which ſéeth the ſonne and beléeueth in him, ſhould haue euerlaſting life, and I will raiſe him vp at the laſt day.
                  But when it is ſpoken of the Angelicall natures or ſubſtances,The definition of an Angell. let this deſcription ſuche as it is, bée had in ſight. An Angell is a ſpirituall or bodileſſe ſubſtance, created by GOD after his ovvne image, that is too ſay, vnderſtanding, free, and ryghtuous, (vvhich is not a parte of another nature, lyke as
                     
                     the ſoule is part of a man and is immortall) ordeined of God too ſet out his prayſe or too ſing glorie too God on hygh, and too bee a ſeruaunt too the Churche, and a keeper of the godly vppon earth. This Deſcription may bée ſet out and confirmed by adding teſtimonies of the Scripture. That there bée Angels, the ſayings of GOD, of Chryſt, of the Prophets, and of the Apoſtles, and the Stories bothe of the Byble and alſo of later tymes doo teſtifie. That they are ſpiritual ſubſtances, and not bodily maſſes compacted of the Elementes, it is euident in the hundred and third Pſalme. Which makeſt thine Angels ſpirites. And in the twentie and foure of Luke. A ſpirit hath no fleſh and bones.
                  After what manner Angels were created, it is not certeinelyThe creation of Angels. expreſſed. But the common opinion is that all the Angels were created togither the firſt day, and ſet in the heauen of heauens. That they were created after the image of God, Chryſt witneſſeth. Iohn. viij. And he abode not in the truthe. Then were the Angels created, too the entent they ſhould bée endued with true ryghtuouſneſſe and holyneſſe. They are immortall bycauſe they alwayes behold the face of the Father.
                  Concerning their Office or charge I will ſpeake afterwarde.The degrees of Angels. The multitude of Angels is infinite, as it is ſayd in the ſeuenth of Daniell, thouſandes of thouſands miniſtred vntoo him. Dyoniſius diſtinguiſheth them intoo nyne Degrées, Cherubin, Thrones, Dominations, Principals, Poteſtates, Vertues, Archangels and Angels. Theſe names are taken out of the ſixth of Eſay, and Colloſſians the firſt, and Epheſians the firſt, and firſt Peter the third Chapter, and alſo in the hundred and third Pſalme. Seraphin ſignifyeth burning. Cherubin commeth of Rubih, which woorde ſignifieth a little boy. And thereuppon they thinke that the Angels appeering with face fulſome, freſh, liuely, and chéerefull, (ſuche as Childrens faces are woont too bée,) are called Cherubin.
                  
                     In the Scryptures there are the names but of fyue AngelsNames of certeine Angels. expreſſed. Michael, that is too ſay, who is like too God. Gabriel, that is too ſay the ſtrength of God, or the Gyant of God. Raphael, that is too ſay, the Phiſition of God. Vriel, that is too ſay, the lyght of God. Hierameel the mercy of God. But wée will let this géere alone, and entreat of a more profitable Doctrine, namely of the Office or benefites of the holy Angels.
                  The firſt and principalleſt Office or duetie of Angels, isOffices or duetie of Angels. too glorifie God the creator with a thankfull voyce and wyth all manner of ſeruiceableneſſe. As in the .xxij. Chapter of S. Lukes Goſpel. They ſing glory too God on high. As the Prophet Eſay in his ſixth Chapter dooth teſtifie. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabaoth. Heauen and earth are full of the glory of his maieſtie. Let this ſong bée bréefly expounded, which conteyne a ſumme of the Doctrine concerning the being of God: concerning the thrée perſons: concerning the holyneſſe and ryghtuouſneſſe propre vntoo God, and too bée imparted too vs for thy Sonnes ſake: and concerning the Goſpell, by which alonely God will bée glorifyed, and by which the glory may bée giuen too God, not only for ryghtuouſneſſe and almightineſſe, but alſo for mercy and ſoothfaſtneſſe. How bée it, concerning the benefites of Angels, let the héerers beare in mynde ſpecially theſe twoo textes of the Pſalme. Pſalme thirtie and thre. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his tentes about, or entrencheth thoſe that feare the Lord, and ſhall deliuer them, which ſaying is taken out of the .xxxij. of Geneſis. Where Iacob beholding the hoſt of Angels, named the place Mahanaim, that is too ſay, the camp or hoſt of God. Pſalm. xcj. He hath giuen his Angels charge of thée, too keepe thée in all thy wayes.
                  Theſe hath GOD made kéepers of our ſoules, bodyes, lyfe, name, houſes, children, and ſubſtaunce. Theſe chaſe away the Diuels when they practyſe the deſtruction of the Churche or of any ſeuerall perſone. And doubtleſſe they fight

ageinſt the féendes, according as the leſſon of this dayes Epiſtle, and the tenth Chapter of Daniel teſtifie. And although wée vnderſtand not what maner of encounters they bée, yet conſidering the greatneſſe of our daungers, let vs the more earneſtly giue thankes too God for theſe kéepers, and gather toogither the ſayings and ſtories of the holy Scripture, and of other wrytings too our inſtruction and comfort. The Angels deliuer Loth out of Sodom. Geneſ. xix. And an Angell ſuccoureth Agar and Iſmael. Geneſ. xxj. xvj. Angels come vntoo Abraham, and beare Rebecca companie. Geneſ. rviij. xxij. xxiiij. and in other places. An Angell deliuereth Iacob out of all perils. Geneſ. xlviij. The Angels go before the Iſraelites, and defend them at their going out of Egipt, and in the wilderneſſe. An Angell appéereth too Ioſua. An hoſte of Angels defend Elizeus ageinſt the Syrians, iiij. Reg. vj. Angels make a ſlaughter in the hoſte of Sennacherib, and deliuer Ezechias. iiij. Reg. xix. Eſay. xxxvij. An Angell leadeth Peter out of priſon. Act. xij. A childe called Cygnaeus being inCygnaeus. the middes of winter left in a wood ouercouered with ſnow, was kept and fed the ſpace of full thrée dayes toogither by the miniſterie of an Angell. Simon Grynaeus eſcaped the handesSymon Grynaeus. of certeine Serieantes by the warning of an Angell: which ſtorie woorthy of remembrance Philip Melancthon recyteth in his expoſition of the .x. chapter of Daniel.
                  But the benefites of the good Aungels will the better bée perceiued, if wée conſider the manifold dangers that hang ouer our heads, by meanes of the Diuell.
               
               
                  The third place.
                  THe Diuell is of the Hebrues named Sathan, that is tooSatan. Diuell. ſay, an enimie or foe. The Gréekes call him Diabolos, that is too ſay a ſlanderer. He is a cruel, ſuttle, mercyleſſe, & ſpitefull enimie of God and of all mankind, and ſpecially of Gods church. At the firſt truly all Angels were created good

by God, but ſome Angelles through Pride and Ambition, (wherethrough they ſought for a hygher degrée of the image of God) fell, and were caſt by God intoo endleſſe damnation. Now although in this lyfe wée bée not able too ſerche out the cauſe why God ſuffereth the euill Angels, which are the authors of all ſinne and wickedneſſe, ſéeing he could vtterly deſtroy them if he liſted: yet muſt wée bothe thinke vppon and alſo beléeue the things that are reported in the woord of God. Iohn. viij. He was a murtherer from the beginning, & abode not in the truthe. Therfore there is no truthe in him, when he ſpeaketh lyes, he ſpeaketh of his owne. For he is a lyer and the father of lying.
                  
                  
                     He is a lyer, and the father of lying, that is too ſay, he dréepethSathan a lyer. into mennes mindes falſe and wicked opinions concerning God, and Epicuriſh and Academicall doutings, he rayſeth vp corruptions of Gods woord: he confirmeth Epicuriſh blaſphemies and al vntruthes in the firſt and ſecond Table. And this Sathan like an enimie or a Serpent in déede, led Eue and all the whole world aſtray, as it is ſayd in the Epiſtle.
                  
                     He is a murtherer, for by his outrageous crueltie and moſtSathan a murtherer. trayterous craftes, he practyſeth miſchéefe too our ſoules, too the lyfe of our bodyes, too our wyues, children, landes, and houſes, and finally manaceth deſtruction too whole realmes and kingdomes. Ageinſt this cruell enemie fighteth our Michael the ſonne of God, who came too deſtroy the woorkes of the Diuell. He being captaine of the holy Angels, caſteth the Diuel out of heauen, and out of the heauenly Church. Therfore let vs giue God thanks, y• he hath appoynted the Angels too bée our kéepers in ſo great daunger of our ſoules and bodyes, and of all that euer wée haue. And let vs endeuer by godlyneſſe and chaſt behauyor, too reteine them ſtill.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Ʋppon the feast day of all Sainctes.
               
                  ¶ The Epiſtle. Apoc. vij.
                  
                     AFter this I beheld, & lo a great multitude which no man could number of all nations and people, and tongues ſtode before the ſeat, and before the Lambe, clothed with long whyte garments, and palmes in theyr handes, and cryed with a loude voyce, ſaying: ſaluation bee aſcribed too him that ſitteth vppon the ſeat of our God, and vntoo the Lambe. And all the Angels ſtode in the cōpaſſe of the ſeat, & of the elders, and of the foure beaſtes, and fell before the ſeat on their faces, and woorshipped God, ſaying: Amen. Bliſsing and glory, wiſdome, and thankes, and honour, and power and might, bee vntoo our God for euermore. Amen. And one of the elders anſwered, ſaying vntoo mee: what are theſe which are arayed in long white garments? and whence came they? And I ſaid vntoo him: Lord, thou wotteſt. And he ſayde too me: theſe are they which came out of great tribulation, and made their garments large, and made them white in the bloud of the Lambe: therfore are they in the preſence of the ſeat of God, and ſerue him day and night in his temple, and he that ſitteth in the ſeat will dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirſt, neyther shall the funne light on them, neither any heat. For the Lambe which is in the middeſt of the ſeat ſhall feede them, and shall leade them vntoo fountaines of liuing water, and GOD shal wype away all teares from their eyes.
               
               
                  The diſpoſement.
                  ALl the whole booke of the Apocalyps is a Propheſie concerning the perſecutiōs and troubles that were too come vppon the chriſten Churche, and wherewithall it ſhould bée diſquieted, partly by Tyrantes, and partly by Heretickes through the inſtinct of the Diuell. And euer now and then there

                        〈1… pages missing〉
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   