
      
         
            
               
               
FOƲ
               ƲRE SEuerall Treatiſes of M. TVLLIVS CICERO: Conteyninge his moſt learned and Eloquente Diſcourſes of Frendſhippe: Oldage: Paradoxes: and Scipio his Dreame.
            All turned out of Latine into English, by Thomas Newton.
            Imprinted at London in Fleeteſtreete neere to S. Dunſtanes Churche, by Tho. Marſhe.
            Cum Priuilegio.
            1577.
            
         
         
            
            
               To the Righte Honorable, his very good Lord, Fraūcis Earle of Bedford, Lord Ruſsell, of the Noble order of the Garter Knight, and one of her Maieſties moſte Honourable priuye Counſel: Tho. Nevvton vvisheth the fernent zeale of God, vvith encreaſe of much Honor.
            
            
               EIghte yeeres agoe (Right Honorable) ſome parte of theſe my poore Labors eſcaped my handes, and raſhly (by peecemeale) paſsed the Printers Preſſe, not wt
               out ſome blemiſhes and Eyeſores: which, as my meaning was then to haue repoliſhed and brought into order, ſo the poastinge ſpeede and shufling vp of the ſame, without my preſence, conſent, and knowledge,

quight defeated my purpoſe, and daſhed my determination. But ſithens things paſſed be irreuocable, I haue thought good (vpō requeſt) to take that direct courſe in the ſecond edition thereof, which ſeemed best to breede the Readers profit, and ſooneſt to ſalue myne own credite. And thereupon haue I pulled all aſunder agayne, and aduentured the ſame anew, adding thervnto one Booke more thē before I had done, becauſe ye whole VVorke beeing by that meanes fully ſupplied, ſhoulde come foorth vniforme, and in one maner of Style and order. VVhich being now throughly finiſhed, I humbly preſent & offer vnto youre good L. not a whitte doubting of your honorable acceptaunce,

if not for anye workemanshippe of myne, which is (God knoweth) verye rude and vnſauerye, yet for noble Cicero his owne ſake, the Author & firſt writer hereof: whoſe onely name (much more hys learned workes) you haue (as they are well worthye) in reuerent estimation. For which verye cauſe, I deemed no worthier Counſay loure could be found to defend and protect ſo noble a Senatour, then your H. whom in the watchful cares of the Common wealth, profounde VViſdome, graue aduiſe, and politicke gouernmēt, he ſo neerely and liuelye reſembleth. My part of trauaile in the Interpretatiō of whoſe Sayings, I hūbly ſubmit vnto your Honourable cenſure, beſeechinge

God to continue and encreaſe hys bleſsinges spiritual and temporall vpon you, your honourable Lady, and Children, to the aduauncement and ſetting foorth of his glorie, the weale of this your Coūtry, & to your own ioye & conſolation.
            
               From Butley in Cheſshyre the. 4. of Maye. 1577.
                  
               
               Your good L. wholy at commaundement,
Thomas Newton.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               The Booke of Freendſhippe. Otherwiſe entituled, Laelius: written dialoguewiſe by Marcus Tullius Cicero, vnto his very freende T. Pomponius Atticus.
            
            
               The Preface.
               
                  
                     QVINTVS Mutius Scaeuola Augur was wont promptlye & pleaſauntly to reporte manye thinges of Caius Laelius hys father in law, and doubted not in all his talke to tearme him a wiſeman. And I, aſſone as euer I entred into mans ſtate, was in ſuch ſort by my father put to Scaeuola, that as nere as I might or coulde, I ſhould not one whit ſteppe aſide from the olde mans ſleeue. And therefore I diligently noted and committed to memorye many reaſons, wiſely by him diſcourſed, and many thinges brieflye and aptly by him ſpoken, and ſought by hys wiſdome to become the better learned. After that he was dead, I got me to P.
                  
                  Scaeuola, whom alone I dare boldlye cal (for witte and ſkille) the oddeſtman of our Citie. But of him we ſhal ſpeake more at an other time. Nowe doe I returne to Scaeuola Augur.
               
               Among his many other diſcourſes of ſundry matters, I do namely remēber, yt be (ſitting at home in his halfe rounde Chayre as his cōmon wont was to doe) when as I, and a verye fewe of his Famyliers were preſente, fell into that talke, whiche as then was almoſte common in manye mennes mouthes. For as I thincke (freende Atticus) you remember well ynough, and muche the rather, becauſe you were verye famylier with P. Sulpitius, what a wondring and moane there was of all men when as hee beeinge Tribune for the Commons, was fallen at deadlye variaunce, with Q. Pompeius, beinge at that time Conſull: with whome aforetime hee had lyued moſte freendlye and louinglye. At that verye time therefore Scaeuola entringe into talke aboute the ſame, declared vnto vs the Speache

that Laelius had with him, and hys other Sonne in Lawe C. Fannius, the Sonne of Marcus, a ſewe Dayes after the Deathe of Aphricanus, touchinge Freendeſhyppe. The chiefe pointes of whiche his Diſcourſe, I faythfullye committed to memorie, and haue in this Booke ſet downe after mine owne phā
                  ſie and diſcretion. For I haue introduced them as it were ſpeakinge one to an other, that theſe tearmes (Quoth I) and (Quoth he) ſhoulde not bee to often repeated. And for this purpoſe haue I done it, becauſe the Treatiſe mighte ſeeme to bee had, as it were of perſons preſent euen before your faces.
               And foraſmuch (freende Atticus) as you haue often times beene in hande wt mee, to penne ſome pretie Diſcourſe of Freendſhippe, I deemed the ſame matter to be a thing both worthy the knowledge of all men, and alſo the Familiaritie that is betweene vs. I haue done it therefore at thy requeſte, willinglye, to the ende I mighte benefite manye.
               But as my Treatyſe, entituled

                  Cato Maior (which is written to thee of Oldage) I introduced Cato an aged mā 
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      the elder. reaſoning thereof (becauſe I iudged no man fitter to ſpeake of that age, then he, who had both bene a very long time an Booke of Oldage. oldman, and alſo in that his oldage had flouriſhed aboue others) ſo now alſo foraſmuch as we haue heard of our elders, what notable familiarity was betwene C. Laelius, and P. Scipio, I haue deemed Laelius a very fit perſon, to diſcourſe vpon thoſe points of Freendſhip, which my A Payre of perfect and faythful frends mayſter Scęuola remēbred were diſcuſſed by him.
               And certainelye this kinde of talke, ſet out by the Authority of auncient and the ſame right honourable perſonages, The vviſe vvords of noble & annciente perſons more regarded & marked then the ſpeaches of others. ſeemeth (I know not how) to cary with it more countenaunce & grauitye. And therfore I myſelfe readinge mine owne woorkes, am ſometime in that caſe, that I thincke Cato telleth the tale, and not myſelfe.
               But as I then beinge olde did write of Oldage to an old man: ſo in this boke, as a moſt faythful frend I haue written to my very frēd cōcerning Frēdſhip. Thē,

did Cato reaſon the matter, who was ye oldeſt man almoſte, & the wiſeſt in thoſe dayes. Now, doth Laelius, a man both wiſe (for ſo was he accoumpted) and in ye nobleneſſe of frendſhippe peereleſſe, vtter his opinion of Frendſhip. I woulde that for a while you ſhoulde not thincke vpon me, but ſuppoſe that Laelius hymſelfe ſpeaketh. C. Fannius and Q. Mutius come to their father in lawe, after the death of Aphricanus. They ſpeake firſte: Laelius maketh anſwere: whoſe whole diſcourſe is of Frendſhip, which thou thy ſelfe in reading ſhalt throughly vnderſtand.
            
            
               
                  FANNIVS.
                  Your words be true, Laelius. For neither better, or nobler hath there benanye then Aphricanus. But you muſt thincke that all men haue eaſt their eyes vpon you, and that you onely, they call & repute wiſe. This title was attributed not long ago to M. Cato. We knowe yt 
                     L. Acilius in our forefathers dayes was called wiſe: but eyther of theim in a 
                        •
                     ere

maner. Acilius, becauſe he was taken for a man ſkilful in the Ciuile Law: Cato, (becauſe he was of great experience, & beecauſe manye thinges were reported to bee by him boche in the Senate, and alſo in the place of Pleas, and Iudgements, eyther wiſely foreſeene, or ſtoutlie atchieued, or wittely aunſwered) purchaſed thereby now in his Oldage, as it were, a Sirname, to be called wiſe. But you, they call wiſe after an other ſorte, not onely by nature, & maners, but alſo by ſtudie and learning: and that not after the cōmon peoples accoumpt, but as the learned ſorte are wonte to call one wiſe, euen ſuch a one, as in all the reſt of Greece is not the like. For they that narowly rippe vpp theſe matters, doe not Seuen ſages of Greece. recken them in the number of wiſemen who are called the Seauen wiſe ſages, In deede, wee haue hearde of one at Athens, 
                     Socrates onely adiudged vviſe. & ſuch an one as by Apollo his Oracle, was adiudged the wiſeſt man in ye world. This wiſdome men thinke to bee in you, yt you accoūpt al yt, which is your The true rycheſte are the giftes of he minde own, to bee ledged win you, & that you thinke al worldly haps inferiour to vertue. And for this cauſe (I beleue) they aſke me & Scaeuola here alſo, after what

ſort you take Aphricanus deathe: & the rather becauſe theſe laſte Nones, when we came into D. Brutꝰ Augurs gardein (as ye vſage is) to talke & reaſon of matters, you were not therat, who were alwaies afore, wont to ſupply yt day & that charge moſt diligētly.
               
               
                  SCAE.
                   In dede Laelius, many do aſke yt queſtion, as Fā
                        niꝰ hath already declared. But I ſhape to them this anſwere, yt I wel perceiue you did moderatly beare the ſorow whiche you cōceiued for ye death of ſo noble a Gentlemā, & ſo louing a frēd: & that you could not choſe but be ſomwhat perplexed in mind: and yt of your natural clemē
                     cte, you could not otherwiſe doe.
                  And as cōcerning your abſēce frō our cō
                     pany theſe Nones, I laid for youre excuſe, yt ſicknes, & not ſorowe was the cauſe therof.
               
               
                  LAE.
                  You ſay very wel Scaeuola. & truly. For neither ought I for anye loſſe of mine own, to be wtdrawen frō executing yt charge (which ſo lōg as I was in health I alwaies performed) neyther do I thinke yt any ſuch chaunce can happen Conſtācy. to a conſtant man, whereby ſhoulde enſue any intermiſſion of dutie.
                  And as for you Fannius, who ſay that

the world doth aſcribe ſo much vnto me as I neyther agnize nor require, you do therein frendlye. But me thinckes you iudge not rightly of Cato: for eyther no Cato a vviſeman man (which I rather beleeue) or if anye were, certes he was a wiſeman. For (to paſſe ouer all other thinges vntouched) how tooke he the death of his ſonne? I remēber Paulus, and I haue ſeene Caius. But theſe maye not ſeeme to bee cō
                     pared to the worthy and noble Cato.
                  
                  And therfore beware how you preferre anye before Cato, no, not him, whom Apollo (as you ſay) adiudged ye wiſeſt: for of this man, his deedes, & of that other, his ſayinges are commended.
                  But nowe (to aunſwere you bothe at once) as concerning mine own ſelf, thus ſtādeth the caſe. If I ſhould flatly deny, that I am nothing at al greeued for the loſſe of Scipio, howe well I ſhoulde doe therein, let wiſemen iudge: but truelye, I ſhould tell you a ſtout lye. For I am Death of freendes greeuous. plunged in heauines, being bereft of ſuche a frend, as (I thinke) neuer ſhalbee the like, and as I can well approue, neuer hath any bene. But I neede no Phyſicke.

I comfort my ſelfe, and chieflye wt this kinde of comfort, that I am not in yt 
                     To be ouer ſorovvful for the death of them that dye vvell, is to repyne at their vvelfare & better ſtate. error, wherwith the more ſort of men at the death of their frendes be commonly encombred. For I thincke that no manner of hurte is happened vnto Scipio: myne is ye harme, if any be. And for a mā to pine away wt ſorow for his own loſſes, is not the propertye of one yt loueth hys frend, but of one rather that loueth himſelfe. As for him, who can deny that he is not in bleſſed plight and eſtate? For, vnleſſe hee woulde haue wiſhed to haue lyued heere for euer (which thing ſurely was moſt farre frō his meaninge) what thing hath hee not obteined that was requiſite and lawfull for a man to wiſhe? Who preſentlye at his entraunce into mans ſtate, farre ſurmounted with hys ſinguler vertues, that great hope which the citizens had already cōceiued of him being yet a childe. Who neuer ſued for the Conſulſhip, and yet was twiſe made Conſul: firſt, before his time: ſecondely, When he vvas but 22. yeares of age. in reſpect of himſelfe, in due & cōueniēt time, but in reſpect of ye cōmon wealth

almoſt to late. Who by ſubuerting two Citties, moſt bitter & deadly enemies to this Empire, not only eaſed vs frō broiles Carthage and Numantia. preſēt, but alſo rid vs frō warres to come. What ſhal I ſay of his moſt curteous manners? of his naturall zeale towardes his mother? of his liberality towards his ſiſters, of his boūtie towards his frēds, of his vpright dealing towardes al men? Theſe things be wel knowē vnto you. And howe entierlye beloued hee was of all the Cittye, was teſtified by yt moane yt was made at his funerals. What therefore coulde the hauinge of a few yeres moe, haue profited him? For oldage, although it be not cōberſome (as I remēber Cato a yere before his death Oldage. diſcourſed wt me & Scipio) yet it taketh a way that gallantiſe, wherein Scipio as then was Wherfore his life was ſuch, either throughe Fortune or glory, yt nothing could be therūto added more. And his quicke departure quight toke away, al paine or ſenſe of Death: of which kind of dying, it is an hard point, to determin any certeinty. What men do iudge, you know. Notwithſtāding, this may I ſafe lye ſay, yt among al the famous & ioyful

dayes, whiche P. Scipio in his life time ſaw, yt day of al other was ye nobleſt, whē as anone a
                        •
                     ter the breaking vp of ye. Senate, Scipio brought home frō the Senat houſe honorablye. the day before he departed this life, he was honorably brought home in the euening, by the Lords of the coūſel, by yt League frends of the Romaines, & by yt Latines: ſo yt frō ſo honorable a ſteppe of dignitie, he ſeemed rather to haue moū
                     ted vp to heauen, thē to haue gone down to hel. For I cānot in anye wiſe agree wt thē in opiniō, which of late brought theſ matters into queſtiō, yt the ſoules died wt the bodies: & that death played ſwoopeſtake of al together. I make more accoūt then ſo, of the aucthority of aūcient perſons Immortality of the ſoule. in thold time, & of our Elders, whiche appointed ſuch reuerent lawes for ye 
                     
                        •
                     ead: which thing (doubtles) they would not haue done, if they had thought yt nothing had concerned thē: & of thē which dwelled in this land, & inſtructed great Greece (which then floriſhed, but now is quight deſtroyed (wt their good leſſōs, & precepts: & of him, yt was by Apollo hys Oracle demed the wiſeſt mā aliue, who did not affirme nowe one thinge, and now another (as manye doe) but continued alwayes in one Opinion, that

mennes ſoules were deuine, and that aſſone as they be departed out of the body, the mindes of euery good and iuſte man haue a very ready and ſpedy paſſage into heauen. Of which opinion alſo Scipio was: who as though he ſhould by inſpiration foretell a thing, a very few daies before his death (when both Philus and Manilius & diuers other were present, and when you your ſelfe, Scaeuola, communed with mee) diſcourſed three whole Immortality of the ſoule. dayes together of the common wealth: ye laſt knitting vp of al which diſcourſe, was in a maner concerning the immortalitie of the ſoule: all which (hee ſaide) hee hearde in his ſleepe by vyſion of Aphricanꝰ. If this be true, that the Soule of euerye worthy wighte, at the time of death doth eaſely mount into heauen, as being deliuered out of yt priſō, & Gieues of the bodies: whom ſhall we thinke, had an eaſier paſſage to God, then Scipio? Wherefore to bee ſorye at this his good hap, I feare, were rather the part of an enuious, then of a frendlye perſon. On the other ſide, if I were doubtful of this, that the Soule dyed together with the

body, & that there remayned no feeling either of weale or woe: then trulye, as in Death ther is no goodnes, ſo neyther is there any euilnes. For when Senſe & feelinge is once gone, hee is become as though he had neuer bene borne: and yet that hee was borne, bothe wee doe reioyce, and all this Cittye, (as longe as it ſtandeth) ſhalbe glad. Wherfore as (I ſaid before) hee is verye well, and in better caſe then I am: whō reaſon wold yt as I came before him into this world, ſo I ſhould haue gone before him out of this life. But yet I take ſuch an inward ioye at the remembrance of our Friendſhippe, that mee thinckes I lyued bleſſedlye, What frendship is. becauſe I lyued with Scipio: wt whō I had a ioynt care of matters both publique & priuate: wt whō both in peace & warre I toke like part: & (yt wherin ye whole ſumme of Frēdſhippe conſiſteth) there was betwene vs a moſt perſect agreement of willes, deſires, & opinions.
                  Therfore this fame of wiſdome (whithe Fannius ere while rehearſed, dothe not ſo much delight me (ſpecially being falſe) as that I hope, the memorie of our

Frēdſhip ſhalbe euerlaſting, & the greater hartioye is it to me, becauſe in ſo many hūndred yeres paſſed, ther cā be reckened ſcarcely iii or iiii. couples of Frē
                     des: There haue not ben found aboue thre or fovver couples of perfect frends in manye hundred yeres ſpace. in which ſorte I ſee there is hope yt the Frēdſhip of Scipio & Laelius ſhalbe renowmed to poſterity.
               
               
                  FAN.
                  It cānot choſe (Laelius) but be euen ſo as you ſay. But becauſe you haue made mētion of Frēdſhip, & wee be alſo at good leyſure, you ſhal do me a ſinguler pleaſure, & likewiſe I hope to Scaeuola if (accordingly as you are wōt of other matters whē they be demaūded of you) you woulde nowe make ſome prety diſcourſe of Frēdſhip, what you think of it, what maner of thing you accoūt it, and what good leſſons you geue therupon.
               
               
                  SCAEV.
                  Certeinly yt hādling of this matter ſhal ſingulerly delite me: & euen as I was aboute to breake my minde to you touchinge the ſame, Fannius preuented me. Wherfore ſir, you ſhal excedingly gratifie vs both.
               
               
                  LAE
                  Certes I would not ſticke to do it, if I thoughte my ſelfe wel able. For the matter is both excellent, and we bee

(as Fānius ſaide) at verye good leaſure. But who am I? or what ability is therin me? This is the faſhion of learned mē & that among the Grekes, to haue a matter propounded vnto thē, to reaſon vpō, although vpon the ſodain. It is a great piece of worcke, & hath nede of no ſmall exerciſe.
                  Wherefore I thincke it beſte for you to Frēdship to be eſtemed more then all vvorldlye thinges. ſeeke thoſe pointes which may be diſputed of Frendſhip, at their handes which profeſſe theſe things. I can no more but exhort you to preferre Frendſhip before al worldly matters. For nothing is ſo agreable to nature, nothing ſo fitte either for proſperity or aduerſitye.
                  But firſt and formoſt this do I think, that Frendſhippe cannot be but in good men. Neither do I ſearche this matter to the quicke, as they which ryp vp this geare ſomwhat more preciſelye: and althoughe perchaunce truly, yet little to common profite. For they denye that anye Frēdship onelye amonge good mē. mā is good, ſauing him that is wiſe. Admit it be ſo. But they expound wyſedome to be ſuch a thing, as neuer yet any earthly man attaigned.
                  But wee muſte hope for thoſe thynges

whiche bee in vre and common practiſe: not for thoſe thinges, which be feigned or wiſhed for. I wil neuer ſaye that C. Fabritius, M. Curius. & T. Corūcanus, whō our elders deemed wiſemen, were wiſe, after theſe mens rule. Wherefore let them kepe to themſelues their name of wiſdome, beinge both liable to muche enuy and alſo vnaccoumpted of, and let them graunt that theſe were good men. But they will neuer ſo do: for they will denye that that can be graunted to anie, ſauing to him that is wiſe. Let vs therfore goe euen bluntly to worcke, and (as ye Prouerbe is) in termes, as plain as a packe ſtaffe. They that ſo behaue themſelues, and ſo lyue, that their faythfulneſſe, honeſty, vpright dealinge and liberalitie is allowed, and in whom is neyther any couetouſnes, luſt, or raſh boldneſſe, who be alſo men of great conſtancie (as were theſe whom I erewhile named) thoſe (as they were accoumpted Nature the beſte guide to frame our lyues by. good men) ſo lette vs thincke them well worthy to be called: who do follow nature the beſt Guyde of wel lyuing, ſo far forth as mannes power can reache. For

thus much me thinkes I eſpye, that we are ſo borne, to then de there ſhoulde bee a certaine felowſhippe amonge vs all: & the nearer that euerye one commeth to other, the greater ſhould the felowſhip Order of Frēdship be. Therfore are our own Countrimen better beloued of vs then ſtraungers, & our kinſfolke dearer to vs, then frennefolke. For, towardes theſe, hath Nature herſelfe bred a frendlineſſe: but in this there is not ſuch durable ſureneſſe. For herein doth Frendſhippe excel kinred, in that, kinred may be without goodwill: but Frendſhippe in no wiſe can lacke it. For take awaye Goodwill, and the name of Frendſhippe is cleane gone: but the name of kinred may ſtill remayne.
                  Now, of what vertue and ſtrengthe, Frendſhippe is, may hereby namely be vnderſtode: that of the infinite ſocieties of mankinde whiche Nature herſelfe hath knitte together, the whole matter is ſo abridged and brought into ſuch narowe rowme, that al perfect Frendſhip is eyther betwene twain, or els betwene a verye fewe. For Frendſhippe is nothinge elles but a perfecte agreemente

with goodwil and hearty loue in al matters, both diuine and humaine. Then What frendship is. the whiche I knowe not whether anye better Gift (Wiſedome onely excepte) were geeuen by God vnto men. Some Frēdshyp the beſte thig next vnto vviſedome, rather preferre Rytheſſe: ſome health: others Honour: many alſo vaine pleaſures. But certes this laſte is for Beaſtes: the other afore are tranſitorye and vncertayne, conſiſtinge not ſo muche in our owne apoyntmentes, as in the fickleneſſe of Fortune.
                  But they whiche repoſe the chiefeſte goodneſſe in Vertue, doe therein excellently wel: and yet this ſame Vertue is Frēdshyp cannot be vvhere vertue is not. it, whiche engendreth and vpholdeth Freendſhippe: neyther can Freendeſhippe in anye wiſe bee withoute Vertue.
                  Now let vs iudge Vertue by the order of our lyfe and talke. And let vs not meaſure it (as ſome vnlearned doe) by the ſtatelyneſſe of Woordes: and let vs accoumpte them Goodmen, who are ſo reputed, that is to witte, the Paules, the Catoes, the Caians, the Scipions, and the Pniloes.
                  
                  
                     
Theſe helde themſelues contented with this common kinde of lyfe. And let vs paſſe theym ouer, whiche are not anye where at all to bee founde. Amonge ſuche manner of perſons, Frendſhyppe hath ſo greate Commodities, as I am ſcarce able to expreſſe. Firſte and foremoſte, 
                        
                           •
                        Co
                           •••
                        
                        diti
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Frēd
                           ••••••
                        . what man can haue anye Ioye to lyue in this lyfe (as Ennius ſayth) whiche delighteth not in the mutual Frendſhippe and goodwill, of ſome eſpeciall Freende? What pleaſaunter thynge can there bee, then to haue one, with whom thou dareſt as boldelye talke, & breake thy minde, as with thine owne ſelfe? What greate Ioye ſhoulde a man haue in his Proſperitie: if hee had not ſome to reioyce and take parte of the ſame with him, aſwel as himſelfe?
                  And as touching Aduerſitie, it were a verye harde matter to beare it, wythout ſome, that would take the ſame, euen more greuouſlye then thou thy ſelfe.
                  To conclude, all other thinges whyche are deſired, do (in a maner) al ſeuerallye ſerue to ſeueral purpoſes: as Riches

for vſe: wealth for worſhippe: Honour, for prayſe: Pleaſure for delight: Health to want griefe and to execute the offices of the bodye. Frendſhippe compriſeth many thinges moe. Which way ſoeuer thou tourneſt thee, it is at hande: in no place is it excluded: it is neuer oute of ſeaſon, neuer troubleſome.
                  Therfore we doe vſe neyther water, fier nor ayer (as they ſaye) in mo places, then wee do frendſhippe. Neither do I Frēdship no leſſe neceſſarye then the Elements ſpeake of the vulgare or meane ſorte of Frendſhippe (whiche notwithſtandinge both delighteth & profiteth) but of true and perfect Frendſhippe, ſuch as theirs was, who are very fewe and ſone reckened. For Frendſhippe maketh proſperitie bothe more glittringe and glorious: and aduerſitie (by partinge & cōmunicating of grieues) it maketh lighter, and eaſier. And whereas Frendſhippe conteyneth in it very many and great commodities, this (doubtleſſe) paſſeth al the reſt, in that, it comforteth vs aforehande with a good hope of yt whiche is to come, and ſuffreth neither the heart to quayle nor the courage to be abated, For hee yt
                     
eyeth and looketh vppon his faythfull Frend, doth (as it were) behold a certen A true faythfull frend is as mannes ovvnſe pattern of his owne ſelfe. And therefore although abſent, yet are they preſent: & beinge needye, haue ſtore ynoughe, and beinge weake, are ſtrong: and (whiche is a ſtraunge matter to bee tolde) beinge dead are aliue. So great is the honour, remembrance, and zeale, that is bredde in freendes one towards an other, By reaſon whereof, the death of the one ſeemeth bleſſed, & the lyfe of the other cō
                     mendable.
                  Now, if you take out of the world the knot of Frendſhip, certes, neyther ſhall any houſe be able to ſtand, ne City to endure, no, nor yet any tillage to continue. And if hereby it cannot throughly be cō
                     ceiued, howe great the force of Freendſhippe and concord is: yet at leaſt by diſcord and diffention, it may well be perceiued. What houſe is there ſo well Withoute Frēdshyp al things goe to hauocke and decaye. ſtaid, what City ſo ſtrong, that through hatred, and diſcorde, may not be vtterly ſubuerted? Whereby, what goodneſſe reſſeth in Frendſhippe, may eaſelye bee iudged.
                  
                     
Men ſaye that a certayne Learned Empedocles affirmed that the vvorlde and al thinges conſiſted of Frendeship. man of Agrigent, diſplayed in Greeke Verſes, that all thinges whiche are in this World, and haue mouinge, are knit together by Frendſhippe, & that by diſcorde, they are diſſeuered. And this doe all men both vnderſtande, and by proofe do finde to hee very true. Therfore if at any time there hath bene kindnes ſhewed by one frend toward another, eyther in aduenturinge, or in participatinge of perils, what is hee that wil not highlye commend the ſame? What a ſhout was there of late made by al the whole Stage, at the newe Enter lude made by my hoſt and frend M. Pacuuius? when as the kinge not knowinge whether of the twayne was Oreſtes: Pylades affirmed Pylades & Oreſtes. himſelfe to be Oreſtes becauſe he would haue ſuffred death for him: Againe, Oreſtes (as the truthe was) ſtiffelye aduouched that hee and not the other was Oreſtes. The ſtanders by clapped their handes together for ioye thereat. And this being done in a feigned tale, what thincke wee woulde they haue done in a

true matter? Here did Nature herſelfe vtter her force, when as men adiudged that thing to bee well done in an other, which they themſelues could not doe-Hytherto as mee thinckes I haue euen throughlye ſpoken my full mynde and opinion of Freendeſhippe. If there bee anye more to bee ſaide (as I thincke there is a greate deale) ſeeke it (if ye thinke it good) at their handes whiche diſpute theſe kinde of matters.
               
               
                  FANNI.
                  But wee had rather heare it of you. Albe it I haue oftentitimes ſoughte the ſame at their handes, and haue hearde theym alſo, and that not vnwyllingelye. But wee looke for an other maner of Veine and Style at your handes.
               
               
                  SCAEVOL.
                  You woulde much more haue ſayd ſo, Fannius, if you had bene preſent with vs in Scipio his Gardeine, at what tyme there was reaſoninge of the Common wealthe, what a Patrone of Iuſtice hee was agaynſte a certain curious Oration that Philus made.
               
               
                  FANN.
                  That ſurelye was an eaſye

matter, for a iuſt man to defend Iuſtice. SCAE. And what ſay you of Freendeſhippe? Shall it not bee alike eaſye for him to doe therein ſemblablye, who for faithfully, conſtantlye, and iuſtlye keepinge the ſame, hath gotten greate renowme?
               
               
                  LAEL.
                  Thys (truly) is euen to force mee to ſpeake. For what ſkilleth it, by what way you do force me? This am I ſure of, that ye force mee. For to wythſtand the earneſt requeſtes of a mannes Sonnes in Law, and namely in a good matter, partly it is an hard caſe, & partlye it ſtandeth not with reaſon.
                  Manye times therefore as I debate wt my ſelfe of Frendſhippe, I am wonte to thincke this one thinge therein worthye of ſpeciall conſideration: whether men ought to ſeeke for Frendſhip onely for a ſtay to their weakeneſſe and neede, that in doing and taking good turnes, a mā 
                     vvherefore Freendes be ſought for. might receiue that of an other, which he coulde not compaſſe or attaigne vnto by himſelfe, and enter chaungeably requite the ſame: or whether this were (in deede) one propertie belonging to Frendſhip,

but yet that there was an other cauſe more noble more cōmēdable, & more procedīg frō nature itſelfe. For loue (wher Loue. of frendlye loue or Frendſhip is named) is ye chiefeſt cauſe that faſtneth goodwil together. For profite is oftentimes gotten euen at their handes, who vnder the coūterfeit ſhew of Frendſhip are ſought vnto, & as ye time ſerueth, are wayted vpō at an inche. But in Frendſhippe there is no glauering, no diſſemblinge: what ſoeuer is in it, the ſame is true and voluntarye.
                  Wherfore me thinkes Frendſhip had Frēdshyp natural. his firſt beginning rather of nature thē of imbecillitye: & of caſtinge ones phanſie towards another, with a certaine feeling of Loue, rather then by conſidering how much profit might eniue therupon. The which ſurely, what maner of thing it is, maye euen in certeine Beaſtes bee perceiued: which for a certen time ſo tē
                     derlye loue their young ones, and bee again ſo loued of them, that their feeling therof eaſely appeareth: which thing in man is much more euident. Firſt by yt deare loue that is betweene Children, &

Parentes which cannot without deteſtable bill anye bee diſſeuered.
                  Secondarilye, when as there is a like feelinge of Loue againe: as when wee haue found one with whoſe Manners and Nature wee well agree: (becauſe to oure owne thinckinge) wee eſpye in him (as it were) a certeine Lighte of Honeſtie and vertue. For nothinge is Vertue. more louelye and amiable then Vertue, nothinge that more allureth men to loue one another: Inſomuche that for Vertue and honeſtie we doe after a ſort, loue euen them whom wee neuer ſaw. Who is hee, that doeth not with a certen ſinguler Loue, and Goodwyll towardes the parties, vſe the remembraūce of C. Fabritius, and M. Curius, whom notwithſtanding hee neuer ſaw? Who againe dothe not hate Tarquinius the proude, Sp. Caſsius, and Sp. Melius? Wee ſtroue for the Empire, in Italye with two Capitaines, Pyrrhus, and Hannibal: and yet from the one of Pyrrhus. Hannibal them, becauſe of his honeſt name wee did not altogether eſtraunge oure hartes: The other for his crueltie, this Citie

of oures will for euer deteſte.
                  Nowe, if the force of Honeſtye bee ſo greate, that wee loue the ſame, yea, in thoſe, whom wee neuer ſawe, and (whiche is more) euen in oure Enemies: what meruayle is it, if mennes hartes bee mooued, when they ſeeme to perceiue and ſee Vertue, and goodneſſe in them, with whom they maye bee ioyned in acquaintaunce and cōuerſation. Albeit Loue is confirmed by benefites receiued, by Goodwyll approued, and Loue confirmed by Benefites by acquaintaunce adioyned: All whiche thinges beinge layed together to that firſte motion of mannes mynde and Loue, there is enkindled a wonderfull greateneſſe of Goodwyll, and Freendlyneſſe. Whiche if anye doe thincke to proceede and come of Imbecillitye, as thoughe it ſhoulde bee but to ſerue euerye mannestourne, thereby to gette the thynge whyche hee deſireth: ſuche men ſurelye doe make a verye baſe and (as a man ſhoulde ſaye) no Gentleman-like Baſe peda grevv of Frēdship race vnto Freendeſhyppe, if they woulde haue it to deſcende and haue

his beginning from needines and want. Which thing if it were ſo: then, as euery man felt himſelfe of ſmalleſt abilitie, ſo ſhould he bee moſt fitteſt for Frendſhip: which thing is farre otherwiſe. For as euery man truſteth moſte to himſelfe: & as euerye man is with vertue and wiſedome ſo ſingulerlye furniſhed, that hee ſtandeth not in neede of anye other, and thincketh that al which is his, reſteth in himſelfe: ſo in ſeeking and mainteining Frendſhip doth he eſpecially ſurmount. For what? Had Aphricanus any neede of me? Neuer a whit ſurely. And I neither of him. But I throughe a certeine Scipio & Laelius, ij perfecte frendes. admiration that I had of his vertue loued him: and againe, he, for ſome opinion perchaunce, that hee conceiued of my maners phanſied mee: and our dayly cō
                     uerſation together, encreaſed our goodwilles. But although many and greate commodities enſued thereof, yet did not the cauſes of our loue one to the other iſſue from any hope of ſuche thinges. For as wee bee bountifull and liberal, not of purpoſe to get thanckes therefore (for wee do not lay out our benefites to vſurye,

but are by nature enclineable to lyberalitie) Good turnes & pleſures laid out to vſurye. ſo likewiſe do we thincke that Freendſhip is to be deſired of men, not ledde thereto with hope of rewarde, but becauſe all the fruicte thereof reſteth in very loue itſelfe. Frēdshyp muſt not be deſired for profit.
                  
                  Wee farre diſagree in opinion from them whiche after the manner of bruite Beaſtes doe referre al thinges to Pleaſure & Senſualitie. And no meruayle. For why? They that haue abaſed & caſte al their cogitations vpon a thing ſo vile and contemptible, cannot haue anye regarde to any high, noble, and heauenly thinge. Wherefore let vs ſet aſide ſuche maner of perſons from this talke: and let vs vnderſtand yt the feelinge of Loue and perfecte goodwill is engendred by Nature, with hauinge ſome ſignificatiō or proofe of honeſtye. Whiche honeſtye they that deſire and ſeeke after, applye themſelues, and draw neerer thereunto: that they may enioy both the companye, and alſo the maners of him, whom they haue begon to loue: and that they may be Mates, and alike in Loue, readier to doe a good turne, then to ſeeke for anye.

And let this bee an honeſt kinde of ſtrife betweene them.
                  Thus ſhal verye great commodities bee taken of Freendſhip, and the firſte beginninge thereof, beinge of Nature and not of Imbecillitie) ſhall bee bothe waightier and truer. For if Profite ſhoulde faſten and knitt Freendſhyppe, Nature cā
                        not bee chaunged ne yet Frendship then the ſame beinge chaunged, ſhoulde diſſolue and lewſe it agayne. But beecauſe Nature cannot be chaunged, therfore true Freendſhyppes are euerlaſtinge. Thus you ſee the beeginninge of Freendſhyppe: excepte peraduenture there bee ſome thinge elles that you would demaunde.
               
               
                  SCAE.
                  Naye Laelius, I praye you proceede in your matter: for, as for him heere that is my younger, I dare vpon myne owne warrant aunſwere.
               
               
                  FAN.
                  In deede you ſay wel: wherfore let vs heare further.
               
               
                  LAELIVS.
                  GEeue eare then Gentlemen to thoſe things, whiche manye times and

often haue beene reaſoned betweene mee and Scipio, concerninge Freendeſhyppe: Howbeit his ſayinge was, that nothing was harder, then for Freendeſhyppe to continue vnto the laſte houre of Death. For hee woulde ſaye, that it oftentimes happened, eyther that one and the ſelfe ſame thinge ſhoulde not be Continuance of Frēdship. expediente for bothe parties: or elles that they woulde not alwayes bee of one mynde in matters of the common wealthe. Hee woulde alſo ſaye, that mennes maners did often chaunge, ſomtimes by the worlde goinge awrye, ſomtymes by growinge forwarde in age.
                  And of theſe thinges hee woulde bringe an Example by a compariſon made of Boyes age, becauſe the hoatteſt loue that Children had, was oftentimes determined Children in Freendshipp and lo
                           •
                        e nevv fangled. and ended, at the age when theire voyces c
                        •
                     aunge: And albeit they continued it till the age of their Adoleſcencye: yet hee ſayde, that their Freendſhyppe was oftentimes broken of, eyther throughe ſome contention, or by reaſon of Ryotte, or ſome other

profite becauſe both of thē could not obteyn one ſelfe thinge. Inſomuch that if anye of them, by longer time continued in Frendſhippe, yet that they often times iarred, if they happened to ſue for Preferrement and Dignitye. And further hee ſayde, that there was no greater Couetouſnes a great plague to Frēdship. plague in Freendſhyppe, then in the moſte ſorte of men, Couetouſnes of monye: and in the beſte ſort, ſtriuing for aduauncement and glorye. Whereupon manye tymes greate enemitye hath happened betwene ryght deare frends. Alſo hee recoumpted, that greate variaunces, and the ſame many times vpon good cauſes, did ariſe, whē as any thing was required of frendes, that was not honeſt: as eyther that they ſhould be miniſters of Luſte to others, or helpers to thē in doing of wronge. Whiche thinge they that refuſed to do, although in ſo do iuge they did but righte honeſtlye, yet ſhould they be reproued as forſakers of the law of Friendſhippe at their hands whoſe requeſtes they would not accompliſhe. And that they whiche had the face to requeſt any thing whatſoeuer, at

their frendes handes, did by ſuche their demaunde profeſſe, that they for theire Freendes ſake woulde do all thinges. And that through their inueterate ſuuffinge one at an other, not onely their familiarities was wont to be extinguiſhed but alſo greate and endleſſe hatred to growe betweene them.
                  Theſe ſo many thinges (ſayde hee) ouerthwarted & hanged (as who ſhoulde ſay) by deſtenie ouer Freendſhippe: in ſo much that to eſcape all theſe, ſeemed to him (as he ſaide) not onelye a parte of Wiſdome, but alſo of very Happineſſe.
                  Wherfore if it pleaſe you, let vs firſt Hovv far the boūds of frendeshyp ſtretche. ſee, howe farre Loue ought to ſtretche in Freendſhippe. As if Coriolanus had frends, whether they ought to haue ioyned ſides and borne weapon with the Cōmotiō of Coriolanus. ſame Coriolanus againſt their country? Whether Becillinus his freendes ought to haue holpen him, when hee aſpired to Soueraigntie? whether Sp. Melius his welwillers ought to haue taken part wt him or no? Wee ſawe that Tiberius Gracchus when hee diſquieted the Common wealth, was cleane forſaken of Q.
                     
                     Tubero, & other frendes yt were his cō
                     paigniōs. But Caius Bloſiꝰ ye Cumane, (a Gueſt of your family Scaeuola) when A manne muſt not for his fredes ſake do anye thing that is eyther vnlavvful or vnhoneſt. hee came and made ſute to me (ſitting in counſayle with Lenas and Rutilius the Conſuls) alledged this as a cauſe why I ſhoulde pardon his treſpaſſe: becauſe (for ſooth) he made ſuch ſpecial accoūpte of Tiberius Gracchus, yt if hee had but ſaid the word, & cōmaunded any thing, yt ſame be thought himſelfe bounde in dutie to doe. Sayye ſo (quoth I?) what & if hee had bid thee to ſet the Capitol on fier, wouldſt thou do it? Hee would neuer Capitol. (ſaid he) haue willed me to do any ſuch thinge: but if hee had, truly I woulde Bloſius deſperate aunſvver haue done it. You ſee what a villanous ſaying this was. And in deede ſo he did: or rather more then he ſaide: for hee not only folowed the heady raſhenes of Tiberius Gracchus, but alſo was a Ringleader: and ſhewed himſelfe not onelye a compagnion of his outrage, but alſo a Capitain. Therfore in this mad moode being afrayde of a farther examination, hee fledde into Aſia, and gotte him to oure Enemies, and in the ende for his

trayterous attemptes againſt our City, receiued a greuous and well deſerued Such a
                           •
                         vnexcuſable as do attempte any thing vnlavvful to pleaſure their frendes. puniſhmente. No excuſe therfore will ſerue for an offence, if a man offende for his freendes ſake. For ſithens the opinion of Vertue is the breeder of Frendſhippe, it is harde for Freendſhippe to remayn, if a man ſwerue from Vertue. Nowe if wee doe agree that it is honeſt and reaſonable, eyther to graunt to our Requeſ
                           •••
                         of frend
                           •
                         to frend. Freendes, what ſoeuer they wil haue, or to obteyue of oure Freendes, what ſo euer wee deſire, therein (trulye) we bee of a righte tryed wiſedome, if there bee no fault cōmitted in our dealings. But we ſpeake of thoſe frēdes, which be dayly in our ſights, whō we ſee or of whom we haue heard talke, or ſuch as in common dealings of life are throughly knowen. Out of the nūber of ſuch, muſt wee cull out examples, and namely of them, whiche approached neereſt vnto wiſdome. We certeinly know that Paulus Aemilius was very familier with C. Luciniꝰ, (as wee haue heard our forefathers reporte) and that they were twiſe Cōſuls together, & felowes in ye office of Cēſorſhippe.

We finde alſo in Hiſtories that at that time together with theym, M. Curius & T. Coruncanus were very great frēds. Therfore we cānot ſo much as one ſuſpecte that anye of theſe did earneſtlye requeſte anye thinge of his frende, that was cōtrary to their faith, againſt their oth, or preiudicial to the cōmon wealth. For to what purpoſe ſhould it be, to ſay that any ſuche thinges were in ſuche men as they were? If they had neuer ſo earneſtly requeſted any ſuch thing, I knowe they ſhoulde not haue obteyned their Sute, ſithens they were men moſt vertuous. But let it be alike heynous to requeſte our freend an vnreaſonable As greate an offēce to graunt an vnlavv full ſute, as to requeſte it. ſute, & to graunt the ſame beinge aſked. But yet Caius Carbo fauoured Tiberius Gracchus. and ſo did C. Cato, beinge at that time no backefreende to Caius his brother, but is now his moſte heauye enemie.
                  LET this therfore be the firſt decreed An vnhoneſt requeſt muſt be denied Law in Frendſhippe, that wee neyther requeſt thinges vnhoneſte: neither beinge requeſted, do anye. For it is a ſhameful excuſe and not to be diſpenced

withall, for a man, in any other faults, but namely in offences againſt the Common wealth, to confeſſe that be did it for his Freendes ſake. For wee are placed (O Fannius and Scaeuola) in that rowme and callinge, that it behoueth vs longe afore to foreſee the chaunces, yt may happen to the common wealth.
                  For the cuſtome that our forefathers vſed, is now ſomewhat altered and ſtepped There is not ſuche iuſte dealinges among mē novv a dayes as was in the olde tim
                           •
                        
                      aſide out of his olde courſe.
                  
                     Tiberius Gracchus wence aboute to vſurpe the kingdome: yea, he ruled as a King in deede for certaine monethes.
                  Hath euer the people of Rome heard or ſeene the like? His example alſo after his death did his freendes and kinſfolke folowe. What partes they played againſt P. Scipio Naſica, I am not hable withoute teares to declare. And as for Carbo (of whom I ſpake erewhile) wee did ſuffer and heare with him, becauſe of the late puniſhment of Tiberius Gracchus.
                  
                  But what my minde geeueth mee, will fall out in C. Gracchus Tribuneſhippe, I am not now diſpoſed to vtter.

for thence ye matter by litle & litle ſtylye By theſe tvvo lavves made by Gabimus and Caſſius, the goods of certein good Citizens vvere vvholy forfeited & proclamation made that they thē ſelues vvhere euer they vver foūd mighte lavvfully be ſlaine and a revvard a pointed for the ſleiar. creepeth forwarde, whiche fully tending to a further miſchiefe (when it once beeginneth) wil mainlye runne beadlonge. You ſee already aforehande in the rolle of Attaintes, what diſhonour hath enfued, firſt by the * Law called Gabinia, and within two yeres after by the law Caſſia. Me thinckes I already ſee the Cō
                     mo
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     ie of Rome deuided from ye Senate, and the waightie affayres thereof to be ordered after the willes of the cōmon multitude. For moe will learne howe to doe theſe thinges, then home to withſtand them. But to what end do I ſpeake this? Verelye becauſe no man goeth about any ſuche attemptes without mo partahers. * Therefore muſte a Couent be geuen to yt honeſt ſort, that if by any chaunce they light vnawares into ſuch Frendeſhippes, they ſhould not thincke theymſelues ſo tyed thereunto, If our frē
                        des conſpyre againſt the cōmon vvealthe vve ought to forſake them. but that they may lawfully geeue their frends the ſlip, namely when they practiſe any great matter, to the hurt of the cōmon wealth. And vnto the euil diſpoſed perſōs, muſt a puniſhmēt be deuiſed: & no leſſe for thē yt partake wt others, thē
                     
for thoſe yt bee the verye Ringleaders, & Capitaines of miſchiefe themſelues.
                  What Noble man was there in all Greece more renowmed thē 
                     Themiſtocles? Who was of greater power then We oughte not to ſeeke the ſpoyle of oure countrye, for anye iniury to vs done. he? who bring Generall in the warres againſte the Perſians, deliuered Greece from Bondage: and being afterwarde through enuy baniſhed, could not digeſt and ſuffer that Iniurye of his vnkinde Country, whiche his parte was to haue ſuffered. He playd yt like part as Coriolanꝰ did xx. yeres before, with vs. There was not one māfoūd yt would aid thē againſt Coriolanus. their coūtry: & therfore both of thē killed thēſelues. Wherefore ſuch cōſpiracy of naughty perſōs is not only not to be cloked wt any pretēce of Frēdſhip, but is rather wt al extremitie to be puniſhed: yt no mā may think it lawful to cōſent to his frēd yt warreth againſt his Coūtry: which thing (as yt world now beginneth to goe) I know not whether it will one day come to paſſe or no. Verely I haue no leſſe care, in what ſtate the Common A noble and moſte worthye care. wealthe ſhalbe after my deathe: then I haue of the caſe it ſtandeth in at this preſent day.
                  
                     
LET this therfore bee enacted as ye 
                     Lavvfull requeſtes, & graunts of frends, one to an other. firſte law of Frendſhip, that wee requeſt at our frendes handes, thoſe thinges that be honeſt: and that wee doe for our freendes ſakes, al thinges that bee reaſonnable: and that wee do not pinch curteſye in ſtayinge till wee bee requeſſted, but let vs euer haue an earneſt good will to pleaſure them: let all delayes be ſet aparte: and let vs bee glad in deede, freelye to geeue our freende good counſell. Frendes maye not flatter but freelye & boldlye aduertiſe & counſel one an other. Let the Aucthoritie of Freendes (geuing ſoūd counſel) beare great ſway and force in Frendſhip, and let the ſame be vſed to warne one another, not onely plainly, but (if occaſion ſo ſerue) ſharplye: and let ſuche aucthoritie ſo geeuen be throughly obeyed. As for thoſe good felowes, whom (as I heare ſay) were accoūted ioly wiſemē in Greece, I thinke they delited in ſome vncouth wonders. Epicures. But there is nothing wherupō they doe not deſkant wt their quiddities: as partlye that wee ſhould eſchew Frendſhippe with too manye, leaſt one man ſhoulde be driuen to be careful formanye: & that euerye man ſhoulde haue fully ynoughe

to doe, to care for his owne matters: yt it is a great trouble to be ouermuch encōbred with other mens dealings: & that it is a iolye matter to haue yt Reynes of Frendſhip at wil, eyther to plucke ſ
                        •
                     reit when a man is diſpoſed, or to let goe at large, at his own pleaſure. And that the principalleſt point of happy life is Quietneſſe: which the mynde cannot enioye, if one ſhould beare al yt burden and as it were) trauaile with childe for many.
                  Another ſort (they ſay) there be, whiche holde a more beaſtlye opinion then theſe aboue (as I brieflye noted a little before) affirming that Frendſhip ought to bee deſired for a ſtay and a helpe to be had thereby, not for any goodwil or hartie loue. Therefore by this reckening, as euerye one hath of himſelfe ſmalleſt ſtaye & abilitye, ſo ſhould he moſte ſeeke for Frendeſhippe. And by this meanes it happeneth that ſeelye women ſeeke the aide of Frendſhip more then men: and the needye more then the wealthye: and the miſerablie diſtreſſed, more then they that be accoumpted fortunate.
                  Oh paſſinge braue wiſedome. For they

ſeme to take the Sūne out of the world, whiche would take Freendſhippe, from among vs: then the which, we haue nothinge Frēdship is as the shininge Sun in the vvorlde. eyther better or pleaſaunter by the immortall Gods geuen vnto vs.
                  For what maner of Quietnes is this? forſooth, to ſee to: very pleaſaunt: but in deede, in many reſpectes to be reiected. For it ſtandeth not with reaſon, eyther not to take in hande, or beinge taken in hande, to leaue of, any honeſt cauſe or We muſte euer bee doinge of good. deede, becauſe thou wouldeſt not bee troubled. But if wee refuſe care, wee muſt then refuſe Vertue, which muſt of neceſſitye with ſome care deſpiſe and hate thoſe things that be contrary to it: as for example: Goodnes muſt hate Euilneſſe: Temperaunce, Ryotte: Fortitude, Cowardiſe. Therefore a man maye ſee the iuſt, greatlye greeued at matters vniuſte, the ſtout at the weake: the modeſt liuers wt pranckes vngracious. This therefore is the propertie of Propertie of a vvell ſtaid mind a well ſtayed mynde, to reioyce at good things, & to be ſory for the contrary.
                  Wherfore if griefe of mynde be incidēt to a Wiſemā (as in very deede it is)

excepte wee thincke that humanitie bee cleane diſlodged out of his minde, what cauſe is there, why wee ſhould vtterlye take away Frendſhippe from the life of man, becauſe we would take no paines, or troubles about it? For take awaye ye 
                     A man void of al affectiōs is like a logg or a ſtone. motions of the minde, and tell me what difference there is (I will not ſaye) beetweene a Beaſt and a man, but euen betweene a man and a Stone, or a Log, or any other ſuch like thing?
                  Neyther are they to be geeuen eare vnto, whiche holde opinion that Vertue is hard, & as it were pronlike: which ſurelye is in many things els, but eſpecially in Frendſhip, tender, & tractable: in ſo much yt at ye weale of his frend, it ſpreadeth itſelfe abroade, and at his miſhaps ſhrinketh in again. Wherfore this ſame trouble which muſt oftentimes be abyden for our frends, is not of ſuch force, yt it ſhould quight take away Frendſhippe frō amonge men: no more then Vertue ought to be reiected, becauſe it bringeth ſundrye cares and greuaunces. Seeing therefore yt Vertue cauſeth Freendſhip (as I afore haue declared) if any token or

ſignificatiō of vertue appeareth, wherū
                     to a mind ſēvlably diſpoſed, may apply & ioyne itſelfe: where this thing hapneth, ther (ſay I) nedes muſt Frēdſhip grow.
                  For what is ſo abſurd, as to bee delyted with manye vayne things, as Honor. Glorye, Houſes, Apparell, brauerye and deckinge of the bodye: and not to be exceedinglye A prepoſterous & abſurde delight. delighted with a Mynde endued with Vertue, ſuche a one as eyther can loue, or (as I may ſaye) afoord loue for loue againe? For there is nothinge more delectable, then is the requitall of good will: nothing more pleaſaunt then is the mutual entrecourſe of Freendlineſſe and curteſies. And if we adde this vnto it (whiche maye verye will bée added) Enterchaungeable requitall of curteſies. that there is nothinge whiche ſo greatly allureth & draweth anye thinge vnto it, as the likeneſſe of Conditions doth vnto Freendſhippe: then ſurelye muſt this bee needes graunted true, that Likenes of manners and delights cauſethe Frēdship. goodmē do loue them which he good, & haunt together in company as mē neere ly ioyned together by kinred & nature.
                  For nothing is more deſirous, nothīg is more eager & rauenous of his lyke, then Nature
                     
Nature.
                  Wherfore this in my iudgement is a One vertuous mā loueth an other. plaine caſe (Fannius and Scaeuola, that it cannot chooſe, but there muſt needes be amonge good men, one towardes an other, a freendly and hartie well meaninge: whiche is the Wellſpringe of Freendſhippe, appointed by Nature.
                  But this ſame goodneſſe apperteyneth Vertue diſdaigneth no man. alſo to the common ſort. For Vertue is not churliſh, not exempted, not ſtatelye, or proude: for her cuſtome is to preſerue all men in generall, and to doe the beſt for them that ſhee can: whiche thynge (doubtleſſe) ſhee woulde not doe, if ſhee diſoayned or thought ſkorne of the loue of the vulgar ſort.
                  Furthermore, me thinckes that they whiche for profite ſake feigne Freendeſhippe, do take awaye the louelyeſt knot Goodvvill of a Freende, is more to be reſpected, then the gaine that may be gotten by him. that is in Freendſhippe. For the profit gayned by a freende doeth not ſo muche delice, as doth the very loue of a freend. And then is that which commeth from a mans freende, pleaſaunt, if it proceede of an hartie loue, and good will. And ſo farre of is it, that Freendſhippe ſhoulde

bee deſired for needineſſe, that they which beinge endued with wealth & Riches and ſpeciallye with Vertue (wherein is moſt ayd) & not ſtanding in neede of any other, are men moſt liberal & boūtifull.
                  And I know not, whether it be expedient and meete that frendes ſhould neuer A frend is beſt knovven in time of neceſſity. want any thing at all. For wherein ſhould my hartie goodwill haue appeared, if Scipio had neuer ſtoode in neede, neyther at home in time of peace, nor abroade in time of warres, of my fauour, True frēdship ſekes not after gaine. coūſel, & aſſiſtaūce? Therfore Frendſhip prowles not after profit, but profit enſueth Frendſhip.
                  And therefore men yt ſlow in wealthe are not to be hearde, if at any time they diſpute of Frendſhip, wherof they haue neither by Practiſe, neyther by knowledge, anye vnderſtandinge. For what Al vvorldly treaſure vvithout a frēd is to no purpoſe man is hee (I pray you in good ſadneſſe) yt would deſire to wallowe in all wealth and liue in all abundaunce of worldlye Rycheſſe, and neyther hee to loue any body, nor any to loue him? For this were a life, ſuch as Tirantes lyue: to witte, A Tyraūts lyfe. wherin there can be no fidelity, no harty

loue, no truſt of aſſured goodwil: al thinges euermore ſuſpected & ful of care: & no place at al for Frendſhip. For who cā 
                     We cānot loue them of vvhom vve ſtand in feare, either loue him, whō hee feareth: or him of whō he thīketh himſelfe to be feared: Notwtſtanding ſuch perſons be honored & crowched vnto, by a coūterfeit ſhew of Frēdſhip, only for a time. But if it happen (as oftētimes it doth) yt they haue a downfal, thē is it wel perceiued, how bare & naked of frendes they were. Which Aduerſitie tryeth Freends. thing ye report goeth yt 
                     Tarquiniꝰ ſaid, yt at ſuche time as hee was baniſhed, hee throughly vnderſtood what faithful frē
                     des he had, & who were vnfaithful, whē as he was not able to require or gratify nether of thē. Howbeit I do meruaile, if in ye his proude & inſolent life, hee could haue any frend at al. And as this mans maners, whō I laſt mētioned could not procure any true frēds: ſo yt great welth of mē ſet in high power & authoritye do quite ſhut out al faithful Frēdſhip. For Riches blindeth men. Fortune is not onely blinde, but for the moſt parte alſo, ſhee maketh thē ſtarke Fortune. blinde, whom ſhee fauoureth.
                  And therfore commonly they are puffed

vp with diſdaynfulneſſe and ſelfe will: and there is nothinge ſo weariſome as a wealthye man, beeing fooliſhe.
                  And this may we ſee, yt ſome which afore time were of manners gentle & nothing ſqueimiſh, if they bee reyſed to rule, authoritye and wealth, are cleane chaunged: and vtterlie diſpiſinge their olde Frendſhippes, cleane vnto new.
                  But what fooliſher thinge is there, then for a man (to thende he maye beare greate Porte and Swaye throughe hys wealth, rycheſſe, and reuenues) to get Frendes the beſte treaſure. other things that are ſought for, as monye, Horſes, Seruauntes, Apparayle, Worſhippe and coſtlye Plate: and not to gette freendes being the beſt and (as I may ſay) the goodlyeſt furniture that can bee in this lyfe? For other thinges when they are gotten, they know not for whō they haue gotten thē, nor for whoſe vſe and behoofe they labour. For euerye whit of all theſe, is his, yt can winne it with maine ſtrengthe: but the poſſeſſion of Freendſhippe once gotten, remayneth and continueth vnto euerye man ſtedfaſt and aſſured: and although

theſe other thinges ſhould continue, whiche are but as it were the Giftes of Fortune, yet a clowniſh life, deuoide of freendes cannot be pleaſaunte. But of theſe matters hytherto.
                  Now muſt we ſet down the Bounds that are in Frendſhippe, & (as it were) Bounds of Frendship. Three opinions of Frendshippe. the Lymites, or Buttinges of Loue: whereof I doe ſee three opinions: of the which, I do allow neuer a one.
                  One is, that wee ſhoulde in the very ſame ſort be affected towardes our frēd, as wee be towardes our ſelues. 1
                  
                  An other is, that oure goodwyll towards our frendes, be likewiſe equally 2 correſpondēt to their good wil towards vs.
                  The thirde, that ſo much as euerye man ſetteth by himſelfe, ſo much hee 3 ſhould be ſet by, of his frendes.
                  To none at al of theſe three opinions do I agree. For the firſte is not true: that as euery man is towardes himſelfe, ſo alſo ſhoulde hee bee affected towardes his freende. For how many thinges do wee for oure Freendes ſake, which wee woulde neuer doe for our owne cause?

As to crouche & ſue in oure freendes behalfe to an vnworthye man: to bee ſore bent againſt any body, and to rattle him vp very ſharpely: which things to do in caſes of oure owne, ſtandeth not well wt honeſtye: but in our frendes behalfe, are moſt honeſt & cōmendable. And manye things there be, wherein honeſt men do abridge themſelues ſomewhat of theire owne gaines, and are well contented yt it ſhould ſo be, that their frendes rather then themſelues might enioy them.
                  The ſecond opinion is it, which defineth Frendeſhip wt equal Curteſies, & wills: but truly this were too ſtrict dealīg to cal Frendſhippe to accoūt, & reckning, how many pleaſures haue bene done, to thintēt ſo many may again be receiued. Me thinkes, that true Frendſhippe is a greate deaſe richer and plētifuller, and doth not ſo ſtrictly ſee to his recknings, that he graunt no more thē he receiued. For there is no ſuch feare to bee taken, leaſt there be any thinge loſt, or leaſte it We cānot do to mutch in frēdshyp. ſhould be ſpilt vpō the groūd, or leaſt we heap vp too much meaſure in Frēdſhip.

The third Bound or End is worſt of al: whiche is, that howe much euerye man ſetteth by himſelfe, ſo much hee ſhoulde be ſet by of his frends. In ſome there is manye times eyther a quayled courage, or a comfortles hope of amending their eſtate. Therefore it is not a freendes parte, to be ſuche vnto him, as hee is to Comfort & cheering of Frendes. himſelfe: but hee ought rather to ſtudy and deuiſe which way hee maye recomforte the appalied mynde of his freende, and to put him in good hope of a better amendement.
                  Wee muſt therfore preſcribe an other kind of true Frendſhip: but firſt I wyl tel you, what thing it was yt 
                     Scipio was wont moſt to find fault withal. He ſayd that there coulde not bee deuiſed anye worde more directlye againſte Freendſhippe: A ſaying repugnāt to frendshyp. then his was, which ſayde that a man oughte ſo to loue, as thoughe hee ſhould one day againe hate. And that hee could not bee perſwaded to thincke that this was euer ſpoken (as it was ſuppoſed) by Bias, who was accoumpted one of yt vii. wiſe Sages: but rather yt it

was the opinion of ſome lewde and ambitious perſon, or of one that would rule al thinges by his owne power and aucthoritie as he luſt himſelfe. For how can anie man be frend to him, whoſe enemie hee thincketh that hee ſhall one day bee?
                  Furthermore, nedes muſt he deſire & wiſh, that his freende might very often offend, to the end hee may thereby haue (as it were) the moe occaſions to finde fault with him. Againe, he muſt needes frette, ſorow, and ſpighte at his frendes wel doinges and commodities.
                  Wherfore this note (whoſe ſo euer it is) is ynough to take Frendſhip quighte awaye. This Rule rather ſhoulde haue bene preſcribed, yt wee ſhoulde employe ſuch diligence in the gettinge of freendes, that wee ſhould not at any time beginne to loue him, whom at anye time wee might after hate. Yea, beſides, if we haue not had good happe in the chooſing of our frendes: yet Scipio thought, that men ſhould beare wt that miſchance, rather then to ſeeke occaſion to quarell, & fall out.
                  Theſe bounds therfore I thincke are

beſt to be vſed, that when the maners of freendes bee well qualefied and honeſt, there ſhould bee among them, a communitie or participatiō of al their gooddes Among honeſte frendes al thinges should be cōmō. purpoſes and willes withoute anye exception. As if the caſe were ſo, that ſome dealinges of our freendes, beinge not verye honeſte, were to bee holpen: which concerned either theire lyfe and death, or their fame and credite: wee Novv and then vvee muſt not ſticke to ſtep a little aſide to ſaue our frendes life or credite. muſt ſtraine oure ſelues a little to ſteppe awrye, out of the waye, ſo yt vtter ſhame and diſhoneſtye enſue not therupon. For there is a ſtint, howe farre Frendſhippe may be pardonable. Neither muſt we ſlightly neglect our fame. We muſt alſo thincke, that the good wil of the people is no ſmal furtheraunce to that chieuinge Goodvvil of the people. of any dealinges: which with glaueringe & flatterye to get, is ſhameful & diſhoneſt. Therfore Vertue hauing harty loue folowing it, is not to be deſpiſed. But he, oftentimes (for now I returne to Scipio, whoſe whoole talke was of Frendſhippe) complayned, that men were in al other thinges more diligent: as, that euery man could tel how many

Goates and Sheepe hee had, but that bee coulde not recken howe manye frendes hee had: and that in compaſſinge and ſtoaring himſelfe with the one, he beſtowed greate care: but in the chooſinge of his frendes he was verye negligente and rechleſſe: neither that they had anye Tokens or Markes whereby to iudge what perſons were fitteſte for Freendſhyppe.
                  Wee muſte therefore chooſe ſuch as bee Sure, Stedfaſte, and Conſtante: of which ſorte there is greate ſcarſity: and an harde matter is it to iudge of them without tryall.
                  But we muſt in Freendſhyppe make tryall: for ſo Freendſhyppe precedeth oure iudgement, and taketh away the power of Tryall.
                  It is therfore a Wiſemans parte, ſo to ſtaye the vehement earneſtneſſe of his good wyll, euen as bee woulde ſtay his Tryal of Frendes. race in runninge: to the intent we may ſo vſe oure Frendſhippes, as men vſe to aſſaye their horſes: makinge ſomewhat a tryall of the manners of our frendes.
                  
                     
Some manye times in a ſmall paultringe monye matter, are perceyued, Money. howe diſcreditable and vnconſtant they bee. Some againe, whom a ſmall portion coulde not tempt, are in a great Summe knowen what they are. Now, if there be ſome men found, which deeme Money novv a dayes more ſet by thē Frēdship. it a berye beaſtlye thinge to preferre money before Freendeſhyppe: where ſhall we finde them that do not eſteeme Honour, Authoritye, Rule, and worldly wealth, more then Freendſhyppe? and that when theſe thinges bee ſette on the one parte, and the Vertue of Frendſhyp on the other, had not leyfer chooſe the firſte, then this latter? For mannes nature is frayle & weake to refuſe Authoritie, the which if they maye attaigne vnto, (although without hauing any regarde at all of Frendſhippe) they thinke themſelues to be excuſable: becauſe thei neglected and deſpiſed Frendſhippe not without cauſe.
                  Therfore true Frendſhippe is verye harde and rare to be found among them True frēdship hard to befoūd amonge great mē. whych are placed in Honour, and beare rule in the Common weale.
                  
                     
For where ſhal a man finde one, ye preferreth and ſetteth more by the honoure of his freend, then he doth by his owne?
                  What? (to let theſe thinges paſſe) how greeuous and how painfull do manye thinke it, to be partakers of others Men are loath to take parte vvith their freende in trouble calamities & miſeries? wherunto there is none lightly found, that will willinglye entre. Albeit Ennius verye wel ſayeth: A ſure Frend is tryed in Aduerſitye: Yet (notwithſtandinge) theſe two things do conuince moſt men of Inconſtancie and Lightnes: either if in Proſperitie A faithful frende in vveale and vvoe. they diſpiſe their frendes: or if in Aduerſitie they forſake them. He therefore whiche in both theſe caſes ſheweth himſelfe a man diſcrete, conſtant, & ſtable in Frendſhip: him ought we to iudge one of the moſte rareſt ſort of men, & almoſt as a God.
                  For the ground worke of that ſtablenes, & conſtancie, whiche we require & ſeke in Frendſhippe, is Faythfulnes. For nothinge is ſtable, which is vnfaythful.
                  Furthermore it is behoueful for vs, to Choiſe of a frende chooſe ſuch a one to our frend, as is ſimple and playne, good to agree withall,

and ſuch an one, as wil be mooued wyth the ſelfe ſame thinges that wee bee: all whiche thinges pertaine vnto faythfulneſſe. Neyther can a running heade, or A rūning head. wauering witte euer be faythfull. For why? hee that is not affected alike with the ſame thinges, that his frend is: neyther is of the ſame minde with him, in A frend muſt neyther be a tale bearer nor a tale credirer. matters by nature: can neither be faithfull nor ſtedfaſt.
                  Hereunto muſt be added, that a freende muſt neither delight in accuſing, nor be leeue any accuſations, beinge broughte vnto him: which thinges do belonge to that Conſtancie, wherof I ere while entreated. And thus, that falleth out to bee true, which I ſpake of, at the beginninge: that Freendſhip cannot be but among good men.
                  For it is the part of a goodman (whō alſo we may tearme a Wiſe man) to obſerue Good mē
                      theſe two pointes in Frendſhippe: Firſt that there be nothing feigned nor Diſſimulation. coūterfeited. For it is more honeſty, euē openly to hate one, then vnder a gloſing An open enemie better thē a diſſemblinge frende. coūtenance to hyde diſſimulation: & not onely to ſhift awaye and cleare his frēde

of accuſations, layde to his charge by any other, but alſo that hee himſelfe be Suſpicion not ſuſpicious, thinckinge alwayes that his frende doeth ſomewhat amiſſe.
                  There muſt alſo (beſides this) bee a certaine pleaſauntnes of talke and maners, Pleaſaunt talke. Curteous maners. whiche is (in deede) none of the worſt Sawces in Freendeſhippe. But lumpiſh ſadneſſe, and ſullen ſowerneſſe muſt in anye wiſe be abounded. Sullēnes.
                  
                  Certes it hath in it a certayn grauitie, but Freendſhippe ought to bee more at large, more at libertie, pleaſaunter and to all curteſie and gentleneſſe more diſpoſed.
                  And here in this place groweth a ſomewhat harde queſtion, whether new frē
                     des (being not vnworthy of Frendſhip) Whether nevv or olde frendes be better. ought to bee preferred and more ſet by, then the old: as we vſe to ſet more ſtore by younge Horſes, then wee doe by olde ones.
                  A doubt (doubtleſſe) vnſemely for a mā to ſtand vpon. For there ought not to be ſaciety of frendſhip, as there is of other thinges. The oldeſt (like olde Wynes) ought to be pleaſaūteſt: & true is the old

common Prouerbe, that wee muſt eate manye Buſhels of Salte together with Prouerbe thoſe, with whom wee ſhall throughlye perfourme all the partes of Freendeſhyppe.
                  But newe Acquaintaunces, if there bee hope that they wyll (as younge towardly ſhootes, and fructifying budds) Nevv acquaintance. Old Familiaritye. bringe foorthe fruict, are not (ſurely) to bee refuſed: but yet notwithſtāding old familiaritye muſte ſtill bee continued in his due place and eſtimation. For the force of Auncientneſſe, and Cuſtome, is exceedinge greate.
                  And as touchinge the Horſe (wherof I ſpake erewhile) if there bee no cauſe of lette to the contrary: there is no man but had leyfer occupie him whom hee hath beene vſed vnto, then one that is ſtraunge to hym, and vntamed.
                  And not onelye in this which is a liuing Creature doeth Cuſtome beare greate Swaye, but in thynges alſo that are Cuſtome. without Lyfe, is it of the lyke force: For euen in Hyllyſhe and Wyelde Countryes, wherein wee haue of a

long dwelled, we haue a pleaſure & delight, ſtill to continue.
                  But this is a very high pointe in Frēdſhyp, that the Superiour is equal with A chiefe point in frēdshipp the Inferiour. For there be oftentymes certain preheminences: as that was of Scipio, in our fraternitie. Hee neuer aduaunced nor preferred hymſelfe before Philus, neuer before Rutilius, neuer before Mummius, neuer before his other freends of baſer calling. But Q. Maximus his brother, a man (doubtles) right excellent, but yet nothing like him, beecauſe Reuerēce to our elder. he was his Elder, he reuerēced as his better: and was willing that all hys freendes ſhould fare the better by him. Which thing is both to bee done & to be imitated of all men: that if they ſurmount their freendes in any excellencye A notable leſſon of Vertue, Witte, and Fortune, they ſhould imparte the ſame to theyr freendes, and communicate it ioyntlye with their Familiers: as, if they bee borne of baſer parētage, if they haue kinredde of ſmaller power and abilitie, eyther in mind or ſubſtaūce, thei ought to enlarge & encreaſe their wealth: and to be an honour

and dignitie to their eſtate. As we do read in Fables, of ſome, which hauīg continued for a certaine time in the ſtate of meane ſeruauntes, becauſe their lignage & Stocke was not knowen, but after that they were knowen, and found to be the Sōnes either of Gods, or of Kinges, did yet ſtil beare a zealous goodwil towardes the Sheepeheardes, whom many yeares they tooke to be their own fathers. Which thing ſurelye is muche Loue tovvards parentes. more to be done towardes our true and well knowen fathers. For then ſpeciallye is the fruict of all witte, Vertue, & excellencie taken, when it is beſtowed on him, that is neereſt to vs alied.
                  Euen as they therefore which in the familiaritye of entier Frendſhippe, bee ſuperiours & higher in degree, ought to Inferiors, muſte not repine at their ſuperiors. abaſe & make themſelues equal wt their inferiors: ſo ought not inferiors to be greued, if their frends either in wit, ſtate, or dignity, do excell and go beyond them.
                  Of which ſort, many either are whyninge for ſomewhat, or els doe twighte & vpbrayde their Benefites, namelye, if they thincke they haue ought, that they

may ſay, they haue done for their freendes, curteouſly, freendly, and with ſome paynes and crauayle.
                  Theſe vpbrayders of pleaſures, are ſurelye an odious kinde of people: which Vpbrayding of pleaſures. pleaſures, he ought to remember, on whō they were beſtowed; not hee that did beſtowe them.
                  Wherfore as they which bee Superioures and of higher calling, ought in We ought to remember a good turne. Freendſhippe to abaſe themſelues: So after a force ſhould Inferiours aduaūce and put foorth themſelues. For there be ſome, which make Frendeſhyp vnpleaſaunt & yrkeſome, when as they thinck themſelues to be cōtemned; & not cared for. Which thinge happneth almoſte to none, but to ſuche, as thinck themſelues worthy to be contemned: whiche muſte not only by words, but alſo by deedes, be reclaymed from that opinion.
                  And firſt, a man muſt doe aſmuche for his frend as he is poſſibly able: & next, aſmuch as yt party whō he loueth & would further, is able to diſcharge. For a man A man cā
                        not aduaunce al his frēds, cannot bring al his frends (though he be neuer in ſuch high authoritie himſelfe)

to honorable aduauncemente: as Scipio was able to make Rutilius Conſul: but his brother Lucius hee could not. Yea Reſpect in preferment of freendes. admit, yt you could prefer your freend to what you luſt: yet muſt ther be a reſpect had, how he is able to diſcharge ye place of his preferment.
                  Wee muſt alſo thinke, yt Frendſhyp can not be, but in wittes & Ages, throughly ſtayed & fully growen. Neyther ſtādeth Frēdshyp to be iudged at ful grovven age. it vppon anye point of neceſſitie, yt they which in their boyes age, phāſied others for ſome common delighte whiche they had together in Huntinge, and Tenis playe: ſhould ſtill take them as their verye Playfellovves & compaignions in youth. deare Freendes, whom they then loued and fauoured, becauſe they tooke pleaſure in the ſame delightes, that thei themſelues did. For ſo ſhould Nurſes, and ouerſeers of Chyldren, by reaſon Nurſes. Tutors. of olde acquaintaunce, chalenge verye much: who (in deede) muſte not bee neglecttd, or ſleightly paſſed vppon, but yet are after an other ſorte to bee loued and regarded. For otherwiſe Freendeſhippe cannot long continue ſtedfaſt.
                  For vnlyke manners purſue vnlyke

delightes: the diſſimilitude whereof diſſeuereth Frendſhippes. Neyther is it for any other cauſe, that goodmen cānot bee freendes, with the naughty and wicked, Vnlike maners diſſolueth Frēdship then for that, there is ſuch greate oddes, and difference in maners, & affections, betwene them, as poſſibly can bee.
                  It may alſo be geeuen for a good leſſon in Frendſhip, that no man through Wee muſt not be too fond ouer our frends againſte their profite. a certaine intemperate and fonde goodwil, do binder (as many times it happeneth) the great profices, that mighte redound to his freend. For (to come again to Fables) Neoptolemus ſhould neuer haue wonne Troye, if hee wauld haue bene ruled by Lycomedes (with whō he was brought vp, going about with manye Fond loue 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      teares, to diſſwade and hinder him from that iourney.
                  And manye times there happen ſuch greate occaſions of waightye affaires, that Frendes muſt needes departe one from an other: the which, hee that would goe about to hinder, becauſe (forſooth) he can not wel forbeare his companye, is both a weakelinge & a Cockeney natured perſon: and conſequentlye

in Freendſhippe is vniuſte and vnreaſenable. And in al things, good conſideration muſt be had, both what thou doeſt Requeſts muſt bee vvarely vvaighed. requeſt of thy freend, and what thou ſuffreſt to bee obteyned at thy handes.
                  There is alſo ſomtimes (as it were) a certain calamity or miſhap in the departure from frendes, euen neceſſary: for nowe I turne my ſpeache from the famlliarities, that is among Wiſemen, to the Frendſhippe, that is among the vulgare Vulgare Frēdshyp ſorte of people. The faultes committed by frendes doe many times burſt out, partely vpon the freendes themſelues, and partly vpon ſtraungers: but y• infamie & diſcredite redoundeth to their Freendes.
                  Such Frendſhippes ther fore muſt be ſalued by leſſe vſinge theire company, and (as I haue hearde Cato ſay) muſte by little and little be cleanlye ſhifted of, rather then bluntly and groſſely brokē, vnleſſe there be ſo apparant euidence of ſome ſuch vnſufferable iniurye, that we can neither with honeſtie, neither credite, Hovv and vvhē vve muſt geue a frend ouer. neyther any way poſſible, other
                        ••
                     ſe chooſe, but preſently to make an alienation

and diſſeueraunce.
                  But if there bee a certaine chaunge in them of manners and diſpoſition (as commonly hapneth) or if there chaunce any farring or variaunce in ſome pointe touching ye Cōmon wealth (for I ſpeake Warines to be vſed. now (as I ſaid a litle before) not of wiſemens▪ Frēdſhips, but of vulgar a
                        •
                     ities) we muſt beware, leaſt Frendſhip ſeeme not onely to be layde aſyde, but Enemitie and mallice rather to be taken vp.
                  For there is not a more diſhoneſt thing, then to be at warre with him, with whō 
                     A dishoneſt part. afore time thou haſt lyued familiarlie.
                  
                     Scipio, for my ſake (as ye know) vntwined himſelfe from the Freendeſhippe of Q. Pompeius: and by reaſon of the Diſſention that was in the Common Wealth, was cleane aliened from our Fellowe in office Metellus. Hee did both theſe, diſcretely by authoritie, without Hovv clenly Scipio shifted himſelfe from the Frendship of ij. that had bene hys freends. any bitterneſſe or offence of mynde, to eyther partye.
                  Wherfore we muſt take no ſmal beede firſte that no diſſention nor fallinge oute amonge. Freendes doe happen: but if any ſuch thing do happen, that Freendſhyppe

maye ſeeme rather by little and little to goe out and quenche of itſelfe, then ſodeinly and raſhely to bee choaked and put out.
                  Wee muſt alſo beware, that Frendſhippe turne not into greate hatred: out of which, chydinges, raylinges, and reproachfull tearmes are engendred: which (notwithſtanding) if they bee any thynge tolerable, muſt be borne withal. And this honor is to be attributed to old Frendſhippe, that the fault is alway in him that doth, not in him that ſuffereth wrong.
                  Now, of all theſe vices and diſcommodities, A good caueat to be remembred. there is one caueat or Prouiſo to bee conſidered: whiche is, that wee neither beginne to loue too ſoone, ne yet, the vnworthye. For they bee worthye Who bee vvorthy to be loued. of Frendſhippe, in whom, there is good cauſe why they ſhould be loued.
                  It is a rare thing (for ſurely al excellent things are rare) & theris nothīg harder, then to finde a thing which in euery reſpect in his kinde is throughlye perfect. All excellent thinges are rare. But many ther be, which neither know any thīg, yt is good in this world, ſauing

that which is gainfull: and (lyke Beaſtes) The commō guiſe of the vvorlde novv a dayes. they loue thoſe Freendes moſt, of whom they hope to receiue moſt profite.
                  And therefore they doe lacke yt moſt goodly & moſt natural Frēdſhip, which is of itſelfe, & for itſelfe to bee deſired & ſought: neyther do they ſhowe in themſelues any example, howe greate and of what ſort, the force of this Frendſhip is.
                  For euerye man loueth himſelfe, not to thende to exact any rewarde of hymſelfe, for his tender loue towardes hymſelfe, but becauſe euery man is beare vnto himſelfe. Which thinge if it bee not ſemblably vſed in Frendſhippe, there cā neuer be found any true freend.
                  For he is a freend, which is (as it were Who is a frende. an other himſelfe.
                  Nowe, if theſe thinges appeare ſo euident in Beaſtes, Birdes, Cattall, Fyſhes, Swyne, and other Creatures, both tame and wilde, that they haue a loue to their owne ſelues (for this is naturallye engraffed in all lyuinge Creatures) and alſo that they deſire & luſte after ſome other of the ſame kind wherof they themſelues be, to company withall,

and that with a certaine longing deſire, and likeneſſe of humane loue: how muche more is the ſame apparaunt in Man, by nature? who both tenderlye loueth himſelfe, and getteth an other to whom hee may ſo francklye impart his mynde, as thoughe of two, hee woulde make (in a maner) but one.
                  But moſt men peeuiſhlye (I will not A peruers reckening ſay impudētly) would haue ſuch frēdes as they them ſelues cannot bee: & ſuch things do they looke for to haue at their freendes handes, as they themſelues do not yelde and geeue vnto them. But it is fitte, that he himſelfe ſhould firſt be a A freende muſt bee a good man good man: and then afterwards to ſeeke for another, like himſelfe.
                  In ſuch maner of perſons, maye that Stability of Frendſhip (which ere while wee reaſoned vpon) be confirmed, when as men ioyned together with goodwil, ſhall firſt rule and maiſter thoſe ſenſuall luſtes and affections, whereunto others do ſerue and obaye: and when they ſhall delighte in Iuſtice and equitie: and the one to vndertake and attempt al things for the other: & neuer the one to requeſt

any thinge of the other, but that which No vnlavvfull requeſt muſt bee made to our frends ſhalbe honeſt and right: & ſhall not onelye louinglye agree together, and loue one an other, but alſo as it were reuerēt lye feare & ſtand in awe one of an other.
                  For, hee that taketh awaye reuerent awe from Frendſhip, taketh awaye the Reuerent avve or modeſt bashfulnes in frēdshyppe. greateſt Ornament that is in it. They therfore nozzle thēſelues wt a very pernicious error, which thinke yt in Frendſhippe, the gate is ſet wide open freelye to purſue all licentious luſts and lewdeneſſe. For Freendſhippe is geeuen Frēdshyp an aide to vertue. by Nature to bee an ayde to Vertue, and not a Compagnion to vices: yt ſith, Vertue being ſolitarye, & alone, could not reache to thoſe thinges which are moſte excellente, yet beinge combined and cowpled with an other, ſhe mighte attaigne thereto: which felowſhippe if eyther it bee or hath beene, or hereafter ſhall happē to bee betweene any, (I ſay) their felowſhip & cōpany is to be accoū
                     ted (for the attainmēt of Natures chiefe goodnes) the beſt and happieſt yt can be. The right felovvship. This very felowſhip (I ſay) is it, wherin are all thoſe things, which men doe account worthy to be deſired, as Honeſty, Glory, Trāquillity of mynd, & pleaſantneſſe:

ſo that where theſe bee, there is the lyfe happye: and without theſe, it Happy lyfe. cannot bee happy. Which thing being the greateſt and the beſt thing that can be, if wee bee deſirous to obteyne, wee muſt applye our ſelues to vertue: without the which, we neyther can attaigne to Freendſhippe, ne any thing elſe yt is to be deſired. For who ſoeuer (deſpiſing Vertue, do think thēſelues to haue frendes, do then perceiue their owne errour, when any waighty plunge of neceſſitye A vvyſe & ſententious coūſel driueth thē to try thē. And therfore (for it is a thing often to be repeated) a man oughte to loue, when hee hath iudged: & not to iudge, when hee hath loued. But wheras we be in many things much puniſhed for negligence, yet namely & ſpecially in choſing & regarding our freendes. For we go prepoſterouſly to worke, & (contrary to ye aduiſe of ye old prouerbe) we ouerthwartly doe & vndoe, & labour againſt the grain. For being enwrapped too & fro wt buſines, either through ſom long familiarity & acquaintaunce or els through ſome kindeneſſe & curteſies, we ſodēly in ye middeſt of our courſe breake of our Frendſhip, when anye ſmall offence ariſeth.
                  
                     
And therefore ſuch careleſſe negligence of a thing ſo principally neceſſary is the more to be diſprayſed. For Frēdſhip Al men generally agree that Frēdshyp is moſte profitable is the onely thing in this world, of whoſe profitableneſſe all men with one mouth do agree: albeit Vertue itſelfe is of many men ſet at naught, and is ſaid to be nothing ells, but a bragguery and Vertue deſpiſed. oſtentation.
                  Manye which holde themſelues contented with a litle, and delight in ſlender fare and homely Apparel, doe vtterlye deſpiſe Rycheſſe. And as for Promotions, Ryches. (with ambitious deſire whereof ſome are greatly enflamed) how manye Promotion. mē be there, which do ſo much contemne them, that they thincke there is nothing vainer nor lighter? Likewiſe, other thinges which ſome doe euen wonder at, and bee in loue withall, there be very many which eſteme euen as nothing.
                  But of Frendſhippe al men generallye haue one minde and opinion, aſwell Frēdship, generally prayſed thoſe which are called to haue dealings in the cōmon wealth, as thoſe that haue their whole delight in learning & knowledge of thinges: and thoſe alſo whiche

quietlye tende their owne buſines. And finally euē they which haue wholly geuen themſelues ouer to Senſuality, do thincke that without Frendſhippe, lyfe is no lyfe: at leaſte wyſe if they meane any whyt orderlye to lyue.
                  For Frendſhip ſpreadeth (I wot not how) through the lyfe of al ſortes of mē: Euery ſeuerall mannes lyfe requireth frendship. neyther doth it ſuffer this lyfe in anye parte to be paſſed without it.
                  Furthermore if there bee any of that churliſh and ſauage nature, to eſchue & hate the companie and Frendſhipp of al men, (of which ſtampe and ſorte we haue heard ſay, that there was one Tymō
                      (I know not who) at Athens: yet cannot Tymon a hater of al companie. he chooſe, but ſeeke out one, to whō hee maye vomite out the poyſon of his ranckred mallice.
                  And this would eſpecially be iudged, if any ſuch thing mighte happen, yt God ſhould take vs out frō this companying with men, and ſhould place vs elſwhere in ſome wilderneſſe: and there geeuinge vnto vs abundaunce and ſtore of al thinges whiche nature deſireth, ſhould altogether take awaye & wholy debarre vs

from ſo much as the ſeeing of any man: All pleaſure and plentye vvithout companie vnpleaſāt who could be ſo ſtonye harted to abyde y• kinde of lyfe? or from whom would not that ſame ſolitarineſſe take awaye the fruict of al pleaſures?
                  True therefore is that ſayinge which I haue hearde our Oldmen tell, (and they Solttarines. of other Oldemen afore them) was wont to be ſpoken by Architas (I trow Architas Tarentinꝰ of Tarento: If a man ſhould climbe vp into Heauen, and take a full view of the nature of the worlde, and the beautifulneſſe of the ſtarres: the admiration therof, would be vnto him vnpleaſaunt, whiche woulde otherwiſe haue beene mo
                        ••
                      pleaſaunt, if hee had any to whom he
                        •
                      might make thereof relation.
                  Thus, Nature loueth no ſolytarines, and alwaies leaueth vnto ſome thing a
                        •
                      
                     Nature loueth no ſolitarines. vnto a ſtayes which in euerye freendli
                        ••
                      perſon is moſt delightfull.
                  But although the ſame Nature d
                        ••
                      by ſo many ſignes declare what ſhe m
                        ••
                     
                     neth, and ſeeketh: what ſhe coueteth and deſireth: yet do wee (I knowe not how waxe deafe, and geeue no care to thoſ
                        •
                     
                     
thinges, wherof wee are by her warned.
                  For the vſe of Freendſhip is ſundrye and manifolde, and manye occaſions of ſuſpicion and offences be geeuen, which partlye to eſchewe, partely to extenuate, and partely to heare, is a Wiſemās parte. And this one offence is to bee redreſſed, that both profitableneſſe and alſo faythfulneſſe in Frendſhyppe, may be Wee muſt frendlye admonish and chide our frend. ſtill retayned. For freendes muſt often times bee both admoniſhed and chidden alſo. And this is to bee freendly taken, when it is done freendlye and of goodwill.
                  But this is true (I cannot tel how) Flattrye getteth frendes which my verye Familier freende Terence ſet down in his Comedie, entituled Andria, that Soothing getteth Frē
                        des, but truth purchaſeth Hatred.
                  
                  Truth is gallinge and greuous, for oute of it proceedeth Hatred, which is vnto Frendſhippe a rancke poyſon: but Soothinge Truth. or Flattery is a great deale more gallinge, which by wincking at his frē
                     des faultes, ſuffereth him ſtyll to runne on headlonge in his wilfulnes.
                  
                     
But the greateſt blame is in him, who deſpiſeth ye Truth, and is caried by ſoothing into ſuch incōuenience & naughtyneſſe. Heerein therfore we muſt beſtow all care and diligence: firſt, that our admoniſhing be without bitterneſſe, & our chyding without ſpitefulnes.
                  But in ſoothinge (becauſe I delight to vſe Terence his worde) let there be Flattrye is to bee eſchued. a curteous gentilneſſe vſed withall, and let al flattery (the egger on of vices) bee ſet aparte, which (in deede) is vnmeett not onely for a freende, but alſo for anye honeſt man.
                  For after one ſorte do men lyue wyth a Tyraunt, and after an other ſorte wyth Truth muſt bee heard. a freend. But his recouery is to be deſpayred of, whoſe eares frō the hearing
                        •
                      of truthe bee ſhutte, that hee cannot abyde to heare that is true, at his frendes handes. For right wiſe is that ſame ſayinge of Cato: that ſharpe nippinge A vviſe ſaying of Cato. Enemies do more good vnto ſome, then thoſe freendes, which do ſeeme fawning Clawbackes. For they ſometime, but theſe neuer tel the truthe.
                  And this is a very abſurde matter, yt
                     
they which be admoniſhed, finde not thē
                     ſelues aggreeued at yt, which they ought but at that which they ought not. They An abſur de reckening be not ſory yt they haue done amiſſe, but they take it vnkindly to be chiddē, wher as cōtrarywiſe, they ought to be ſory for their faults, & glad of their chidinge.
                  Therfore as to warne our freend and to bee warned againe by him is the propertie of true Frendſhippe: and the one to doe it freely, not roughly, thother to Propertie of true Frèdshyp take it patiently and not frowatdlye: ſo muſt we make this reckening, that there is no greater Plague or miſchiefe in Frendſhip, then adulation, glauering, and flattrye. Albe it this vice muſt be for Flatterye the greateſt plage in Frendeshyp. many reſpectes noted to be the faulte of lewde and craftie perſons, ſpeaking all to pleaſure, and nothing to Truth.
                  But wheras Diſſimulation in all thinges is euill (for it taketh awaye the righte iudgement of truthe and corrupteth it) yet namely to Frendſhippe it is moſt repugnaunt. For it raſeth out the truth, without which, ye name of Frēdſhippe Diſſimulation. cannot continue. For ſithens the force of Frendſhippe ſtandeth vpon this

point, that there ſhoulde bee made as 
                        ••
                      were one mynde of many: how can tha
                        •
                      be brought to paſſe, if in one man there bee not one, and alwayes alike mind, but diuers; chaungeable, and wa
                        •
                     tringe? Firſt what thinge can there be ſo mutable & ſo wādering out of courſe as is the mynd of yt man, which ſwaieth not only at euery mans phanſie and wi
                        ••
                      but alſo at euery mans becke and looke? Say who naye? Nay, ſaye I▪ Say
                        •
                      who yea? Yea, ſay I. Finally I haue enioyned my ſelfe, to holde vp all mens ſayinges with Yea and Nay, as ſayeth In Eunucho. the ſame Terence▪
                      but hee ſpeaketh thoſe woordes in the perſon of Gnato: 
                     Gnato. which to vſe in the perſon of a Freend, were too too much lightneſſe.
                  But forſomuch as there bee manye Gnatolike perſons, in eſtate, wealth, & credite, aboue others: their Flatterye Hurtfull flatterye. is odious and yrckeſome, when as authority ioygneth with vanity.
                  Now, a flatteringe Clawbacke (if good heede and diligence be taken) may euen aſwell be diſcerned, and knowen, from a true freend, as all counterfei
                        •••
                     
                     
and feigned ſtuffe may from things ſincere and right. The aſſembly of the Commons, which ſtandeth moſt of vnſkilfull and ignoraunt perſons, is wone yet to iudge, what oddes and difference there is betweene a people pleaſer (that is to ſay a curryfauour, & lyght perſon) and betwene a conſtant, ſeuere & graue Citizen. With which kinde of Flattering, C. Papyrius ye Conſul, of late ſtuffed the peoples eares, at what time hee Papyrius. made a law, for the reſtoring of the Plebeian Tribunes. We diſſwaded yt matter. But I wil not ſpeake of my ſelfe: I wil with better will, ſpeake of Scipio. What pythines (good Lord) was there in his talke, what a maieſty was there in his Oration? yt a man might wel haue Pithy Oration of Scipio. ſayd, he had bene the leader & chieftain of the people of Rome, & not a fellow cō
                     paignion & comoner with thē. But you were preſent there your ſelues, and his Oration, is extant & abroade to be had. Therfore ye ſame populer Law was by ye peoples own voices diſanulled & daſhed.
                  And to returne againe to my ſelfe: you remēber whē 
                     Q. Maximꝰ ye brother

of Scipio, and L. Mancinus were Conſuls, how populer and people pleaſing ye lawe of C. Licinius Craſſus touchinge Prieſtes dignities, ſeemed to bee. For yt election & ſupplie of Sacerdotall rowmes, was conueighed ouer to the diſpoſition of the common people: & hee was ye firſt of al others, that brought into the place of Pleas, an order, to make any Oratiō to the people in verſe. But yet the Religion of the immortall Gods (I defending the matter) eaſely defeated that ſmothing Oration of his, ſo painted out to the ſale. And this was done, whē I was Praetor, fiue yeares before I was made Conſul. Therfore that cauſe was defended rather by ye goodnes of yt matter 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      itſelfe, then by the authoritie of the Pleader that had it in hand.
                  Now if in Stage matters, that is to ſaye, in Populer Audience, wherein feigned & ſhadowed thinges be often introduced, yet the Truthe preuayleth & beareth away the Bel, if ſo it be opened and ſet out accordingly: what ought to be done in Frendſhippe, which is conſidered and waighed altogether by truth?

wherein, except a man do throughly (as they ſay) ſee into the very bottome of his freendes hart, & likewiſe ſhew his own: bee cannot ſtand vpon any ſure ground, for truſt and tryall: nay, hee can neuer loue, nor be loued: ſithens hee knoweth They moſt 
                           •
                        oue flattry, vvhich be flatterers of themſelues not how it is done trulye.
                  Although this flattery be pernicious and hurtfull, yet can it hurt no man but him, that liſteneth to it, and is delighted with it. And ſo it commeth to paſſe that he moſt openeth his eares to flatterers, who ſelfely flattereth himſelfe, & moſte delighteth in himſelfe.
                  Vertue (ſurely) loueth herſelfe. For ſhee beſt knoweth herſelfe, and perceiueth Vertue how amiable ſhee is.
                  But I nowe ſpeake, not of Vertue, Manye vvoulde rather ſeeme honeſt then be honeſt in deede. but of the opinion, had of Vertue. For, not ſo many are willing to be vertuous, as doe deſire to ſeeme vertuous. Theſe kinde of perſons doth flatterye delight: They, when anye gloſed ſpeache is vſed to feede their humour, do ſtreightwais Men that ſet by thē
                        ſelues, are eaſy to beleeue flatterers. thincke, that the ſame vayne woordes be a teſtimonye of their prayſes.
                  This therfore is no Frendſhip, when

as the one wil not heare the Truth, and the other is ready to lye: neither would the glauering flattery of theſe Paraſits and Trencher Freendes in Comedies, be any whyt pleaſaunt or mery, if there were not ſome glorious Souldiers.
                  What Syrrha, did Thais geeue mee great thanckes? It had beene ſufficient Thraſo. for thother to haue aunſwered, Yea ſyr, Gnato great: but hee ſayd: Yea ſyr, very exceeding great.
                  Flattery alwayes encreaſeth, and ſetteth out to the moſt, that thinge, which Flatterye of a litle maketh a great deal the partye (for whoſe tooth it was ſpoken) would haue to be great.
                  Wherfore although this fawning vanitye bee moſt in vre and practiſe, wyth them whych do to thē allure & inuite it: yet are the Sager and conſtanter ſort of mē to be admoniſhed to take heede, that they bee not enſnared & maſhed wt this kinde of fly flattery. For euery man can perceiue an opē Flatterer, except he be a very Sotte, or Ideot: but we muſt very carefullye take heede, that this crafty & fly Flatterer do not winde or cloſe hymſelfe within vs. For hee is not eaſelye

eſpied: by reaſon yt euen by contrarying one, he many times flattereth: & feigning himſelfe to brawle and chyde, doth glauer: & in the ende yeldeth & ſuffereth himſelfe to be vanquiſhed, yt he which is flouted to his teeth, maye ſeeme to haue gottē ye victory. And what be aſtlier thīg cā there be thē yt? Which thing, yt it may not happē, we muſt take the more heede: as in ye Enterlude, entituled Fpicuraeꝰ: Today before almy old fooliſh Copeſmates you haue courſed and flouted me very myntōly. For in plaies, ye perſōs of old vnforcaſtful & credulous mē, are moſt fooliſh.
                  But my talke (I cannot tell how) is digreſſed from ſpeaking of the Frendeſhippes of perfect men, that is to ſay, of Wyſemen (I doe meane of ſuch Wiſedome as doeth ſeeme maye bee in man) vnto ſlyghte and tryfelinge Freendeſhippes. Wherefore let vs returne to that whiche wee ſpake of, and let vs cō
                     clude at length vpon it.
                  I ſay (O C. Fannius, & you Q. Mutius) 
                     Concluſion of this matter. Vertue. yt Vertue both getteth, and alſo kepeth Frendſhip. In it, is al agreement of thinges, al ſtability, al conſtancy. Who, whē
                     
ſhee hath aduaunced herſelfe & ſhewed out her light, & eſpied & knowē the ſame in an other, leaneth herſelfe to that alſo, and taketh likewiſe that which is in an other. Whereupon breedeth betweene ech other, an exceeding loue and Frendſhippe. Amor & Amicitia, ab Aman do. For both theſe two wordes haue their names of this word, To Loue.
                  
                  Now, to loue, is nothinge els, but to beare a goodwill vnto him, whom you To loue vvhat it is do hartelye fauour, not for any neede or any profite that is ſought. Which profit (notwtſtanding) ſpringeth out of Frendſhip, althoughe you haue not purſued it accordingly. With this kinde of goodwill, we (when wee were young Striplinges) loued thoſe worthy Oldmen. L. Paulus, M. Cato, C. Gallus, P. Naſica, & Tib. Gracchus, father in lawe to oure deare freend Scipio. This Frendſhippe alſo more euidently appeareth, amonge Equalles and perſons of lyke age, as betweene mee & Scipio, L. Furius, P. Rutilius, & Sp. Mummius.
                  
                  Semblablye alſo, wee Oldmen take great pleaſure in ye louingneſſe of yoūg men: as for example, I for my part, am

ſingulerly delighted in the familiaritye of you, and of Q. Tubero a very young Striplinge, and of P. Rutilius Virginius.
                  
                  For ſeeinge that the order of our lyfe and nature is ſo appointed, that one age muſt ſucceede after an other: it is verie Lyke delighteth vvith like greatly to be wiſhed, that wee may liue with ſuch, as be our Equalles in age: yt as wee came together into the worlde, much aboute one time: ſo alſo (as they ſay) wee might keepe together, tyl wee packe againe out of the world.
                  But becauſe the ſtate of the worlde is fickle and fading, wee muſt alwayes fynde oute ſome, whom wee maye both loue, and alſo bee of them loued againe. For once take away Loue, and goodwil: and all pleaſauntneſſe of lyfe is quighte taken away.
                  As for Scipio, although hee was taken away ſodeinly from among vs, yet The fame of a vvorthy man neuer dyeth (ſurely) to mee hee is ſtill aliue, and alwayes ſhalbee. For I euer loued the Vertue, of that man, which is not extinct: neyther is the ſame playne & apparaunt before mine eyes onely, who al

alwayes hadde the dayly feelinge of it, but alſo vnto all oure poſterity, ſhall it bee noble and notable.
                  No man ſhall euer enterpriſe anye worthye attemptes, eyther in courage or hope, which deemeth not the memory or image of this noble perſonage, worthye to be ſet before him for a Paterne. A true frend is the ſureſt poſſeſſion I truly among al the thinges yt Fortune or Nature hath beſtowed vpon me, haue nothing comparable vnto Scipio his Frendeſhippe. In it was a freendlye agreement betweene vs, concerninge the Common wealth: in it, was our conference for our priuate affayres: in it, was Effects of Frēdships my reſt, full of delectation. I neuer offended him (not in the leaſt matter that could be) that euer I could perceiue. I neuer heard anye thinge of him yt euer went againſt my minde. One houſe ſerued vs both, one fare and that euen common: Yea, not onely warfare, but alſo our trauayles, voyages, & ſoiourninges abrode, were alike common.
                  For what ſhoulde I ſpeake of our ioynet ſtudies, in alwayes ſiftinge out & learninge of ſomethinge: in the which,

when wee were out of the peoples ſight wee beſtowed all our leyſure and time? The recordation and memory of whych thinges, if they had dyed together with him, I could neuer poſſiblye haue borne the lacke of ſuch a freendly and louinge mā. But yet theſe are not extinct. Nay, they are rather nouriſhed & encreaſed by the cogitation and remēbraunce of thē.
                  And although I ſhoulde vtterly bee bereft therof, yet very Age it ſelf would bring vnto mee ſinguler comfort. For I could not very long continue in this lā
                     guiſhinge caſe. But all ſhorte thinges ought to be ſufferable, although they be greate.
                  Thus much hadde I to ſaye concerninge Frendſhippe. Now, am I to exhorte you, to haue Vertue in ſuch price, (without which Frendſhip cannot bee) that (it onely except) you deeme nothinge more excellent, then Freendſhippe.
               
            
            
               T. N.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ THE BOOKE of Oldage: otherwyſe entituled, the Elder CATO: written Dialoguewiſe, by M. T. Cicero, vnto Titus Pomponius Atticus.
            
            
               The Preface.
               
                  O Titus, if I eaſe thee of that payne,
                  
                  
                     And heauy care, which doth thee nòw annoye,
                  
                  
                     And makes thine heart, ful penſiue to remain,
                  
                  
                     Shal I herein my labour wel employe?
                  
               
               
                  FOR in ſpeaking vnto thee (Freende Atticus) I dare bee bolde to vſe the ſame verſes, which that worthye* Poet, 
                  Ennius. 
                  (not greatly wallowing in wealth, but fullye fraught with faithfulneſſe) vſeth in ſpeaking to Flaminius: albeit I am well aſſured (frend Atticꝰ) that thou art not ſo diſquieted night and daye, as Flaminius was: for I doe knowe the moderation, and quiet ſtay of thy mynde. And that thou haſt brought home with thee from Athens, not onelye thy* Syrname, but curteſie alſo, and Prudence. 
                  Becauſe he vvas called Atticus. 
                  And yet I ſuſpecte, that nowe and
                  
then, thou art ſore troubled in mynde, for the ſame* matters that I my ſelfe am.
               The Cōſolatiō whereof is great & therfore For the Ciuile diſcenſion. to bee differred till another time. At this preſēt, I thought it beſt to wryte ſome little Treatiſe vnto thee, cōcerning Oldeage: becauſe I would haue, both thee & my ſelfe eaſed of this heauye burden of Oldeage, which is commune and indifferent to mee, aſwell as to thee, and hath nowe eyther catched holde of vs alreadye, or elſe ere it bee longe, wyll come vppon vs.
               Notwithſtandinge, I well knowe that thou doeſt and wilt take the ſame modeſtly, and wiſelye as thou doest all other thinges.
               But when as I purpoſed with my ſelfe to wryte ſomewhat of Oldeage, thou cameſt into my remembrance, as a man worthy of ſuch a gyft, which both of vs, might ioyntlye and commonlye enioye.
               As for my part I promiſe thee, the penninge of this Booke, was ſuch a delectation vnto mee, that it did not onelye cleane wype away all the encombraunces and diſcommodities of myne Oldeage from mee:

but rather made myne Oldeage vnto me, pleaſaunte, and delectable. Therefore Philoſophy can neuer be ſuffyciently prayſed: whoſe Preceptes and Rules, who ſo euer obayeth, may paſſe the whole time of his Age, without anye griefe or trouble. But of thoſe other poyntes, we haue heretofore, and ſhall hereafter ſpeake.
               And wee doe attribute the whole dyſcourſe, not to Tithonus, as Ariſto Chius did, leaſt as in a fayned Fable the whole Diſcourſe ſhoulde carye the leſſe credite: but vnto Olde Marcus Cato: to the ende the Treatiſe might carye the greater Authoritie. With whom wee doe introduce Laelius and Scipio, meruaylinge to ſee him ſo patientlye to tolerate his Oldeage, and his aunſwere to them agayne. Whom if thou thincke more learnedlye heere to diſpute, then in his owne woorkes hee was accuſtomed, impute the cauſe to his ſkilfulneſſe in the Greeke Tongue, whereof it is well knowen that in his Oldeage he was verye ſtudious,
               But to what purpoſe, ſhoulde wee make anye moe woordes? For all that wee haue

to ſaye concerning Oldeage, the Diſcourſe of Cato himſelfe ſhall manifeſtly declare.
            
            
               
               
                  The Speakers Names.
                  
                     Publius Scipio.
                  
                  
                     Caius Laelius.
                  
                  
                     Marcus Cato.
                  
               
               
                  SCIPIO.
                  
                     OFtentimes both I, & my freend Caius Laelius heere alſo, are wont much to meruayle at thy excellente & abſolute wiſdome O Cato, aſwel in al other matters: as namely & ſpecially, becauſe I neuer yet perceiued thine Oldage to be burdenous vnto the: which to the moſt part of Oldmen is ſo odious, that they ſay they carye a burdē heauier then the Mount AEtna.
                  
               
               
                  CATO.
                  It is no great hard matter, (Scipio and Laelius) which you ſeeme ſo much to meruayle at. For they that haue in themſelues no helpe to lyue wel and bleſſedlye: vnto ſuch, euerye Age is comberſome: but vnto ſuch, as ſeeke all thinges at themſelues, nothinge can

ſeeme euil, which commeth by the neceſſitie of Nature.
                  Of ye which ſort is Oldage principally, whereunto to come, al men doe deſire, and yet when they haue their wiſhe, doe accuſe it: ſuch is their vnconſtancie, folly and ouerthwartneſſe: They ſaie it creepeth vpon thē ſooner then they thought it would. Firſt, who cauſed thē to imagin an vntruth? For why doth Oldage ſooner ſteale vpon Adoleſcencie, then Adoleſcency doth after Childhood? Furthermore, why ſhoulde Oldage be leſſe troubleſome vnto them, if they mighte reach to the Age of eight hundred yeres then it is when they be but eighty? For the age paſſed be it neuer ſo longe, when it is once gone, can with no maner of cō
                     ſolation mitigate fooliſh Oldage.
                  Therfore if you be wōt to haue my wiſdome in admiration (which I woulde God were correſpondent to youre opinion, and alſo aunſwerable to my * Syrname) ſurelye wee are in thys onlye For Cato by interpretacion ſignifieth a vvittye man pointe wiſe, becauſe we follow Nature being our beſt guid, as a god, & obey her. Of whom, it is not like to bee true, whē
                     
al other parts of age are wel deſcribed & ſet out, yt the laſt Act of all ſhould (as it were of a drowſy Poet) bee negligentlye handled. But in Age there muſt needes be ſome extreme or laſt End (& as in berries of trees & fruicts of the earth) when they com to their ful ripenes) a drowpīg downward and readynes to fall: which euery Wiſemā muſt patiently tolerate.
                  For what other thing is it, to warre To reſiſte againſte Nature, is to keepe vvarre againſt the Gods. with the Gods, as the Gyaunts did, but to repugne and goe againſt Nature?
               
               
                  LAEL.
                  But you ſhall do a ſinguler greate pleaſure vnto vs both, for I dare alſo in this caſe vndertake for Scipio (becauſe we both deſire, & alſo hope to lyuetyl we be Oldmen) if we might learne a good whyle before hand of you, by what means we may moſt eaſly ſuffer & beare out our olde Age when it cōmeth.
               
               
                  CATO.
                  I wyll (Laelie) with all my hart fulfill your requeſt, eſpecially if I ſhall thereby do ſuch pleaſure vnto you both, as you ſay I ſhall.
               
               
                  SCIP.
                  Right glad would wee bee, if it bee not too much paynes and trouble

for you, O Cato, ſith you haue (as it were runne a great race, & made a long iourney which path alſo we muſt go) to heare & vnderſtand what kind of thing yt is, wherunto you are already arryued.
               
               
                  CATO.
                  I will doe herein O Laelie, what I am able: for I haue oftentimes bene in place where I haue heard ye cō
                     plaints of my equalles & familiers (for, Like wt Like, accordīg to ye old prouerbe Like to like. will kepe cōpany & beſt agree together) when as C. Salinator, and Sp. Albinus, men of Conſular calling, and in maner of the ſame age that I my ſelfe am, were wont greatlye to be wayle their caſes, both becauſe they lacked pleaſures, wt
                     out which, they accoumpted their life as none: & alſo becauſe they were deſpiſed of thoſe, of whom they had earſte beene reuerenced.
                  But in myne opiniō, they blamed not that, which was blame worthy. For if ye cauſe and blame thereof, were in Oldeage, then ſhould the ſame diſcommodities, happen alſo vnto me, & to all other elderly mē beſides: of whō I haue knowen a great mainye, that haue lyued in

their Olde age without any whyning or complaint: who were wel pleaſed to bee looſed and deliuered, out of the yoake of their Senſuall Luſtes: and were neuer deſpiſed of their Freendes and acquaintaunce. But the faulte of all this repyning, is in the Maners & not in the Age. For diſcreete & temperate olde men, being not ſterne and churliſhe, doe lyue in their Oldage tolerably and well. But way wardneſſe and inhumanitie is vnto euery Age tedious and yrkeſome.
               
               
                  LAEL.
                  It is euen ſo, as you ſay O Cato: but there wil ſome peraduenture ſaye vnto you, yt your Oldage, ſeemeth vnto you tollerable ynoughe, becauſe of your great wealth, riches & dignity: but many cannot haue ſuch good hap.
               
               
                  CATO.
                  In deede Laelie, that which you ſay, is ſomewhat, but al thinges do not reſt therin. As, the report goeth that Themiſtocles, nippinglye aunſwered a Themiſtocles. certain Seriphian Paiſaūt, obiecting, yt he had not gottē ſuch great glory, and ſame by himſelfe, but rather through yt renowne of his noble coūtry: thou ſaieſt euen truth (ſayd he) for neither ſhould I

euer haue bene ennobled. if I had bene a Seriphian, neyther thou renowmed, if thou hadſt bene an Athenian.
                  
                  Which thing may euen in lyke manner be ſaid of Oldage. For neither in extreeme penurye, and want, can Oldage be eaſye, no not to a Wiſeman: neyther can it bee but comberſome to an vnwiſe perſō, although he haue neuer ſo great plentye.
                  The fitteſt weapons for Oldage (O Scipio and Laelie) are Artes and exerciſes of Vertues: which beinge all the Fitteſt vvepons for Oldage. time of mannes age embraced, bring vnto hym, when hee hath lyued a longe while, meruailous fruites & commodities. Not only, becauſe they neuer forſake or ſtart from him, no, not in the verye laſt puſhe of his age (which ſurely is a moſte excellente thinge) but alſo becauſe the Conſcience of oure former lyfe, well and vertuouſly led, and the remembraunce of our many good deedes, is moſt pleaſaunt.
                  Certes, I being a younge Striplinge, did ſo loue Quintus Maximus (euen be that recouered Tarento) being an Old

man, as though hee had beene myne Equal and of lyke Age vnto myſelfe. For in yt worthy man, there was a certeyne Grauity, ſeaſoned with Curteſy: neither had his Oldeage altered his manners: Albeit when I firſt began to honoure & reuerence him, hee was not verye olde, but yet pretily ſtriken in yeares.
                  For I was borne a yere after that he had bene the firſt time Conſull: And in that yeare that hee was the fowrth tyme Conſull, I being a very young man went with him as a Souldier vnto Capua: the fifte yeare after that, I was made Treaſorer at Tarento: Then I was choſen Aedile, & fower yeres after that, Praetor: which office I bare and executed, when Tuditanus and Cethegus were Conſulls. At that time hee beinge a very aged man, was a perſwader of ye Law By this Lavv, profeſſors of Rhetorik and pleaders of lavve might take no monie for their labor, but do it of a certe
                           •
                         nobl
                           ••
                        es of minde. 
                     Cincia, touchinge Giftes and Rewardes.
                  And bee beinge a man farre growen in yeares, was both a luſtye warriour, as though he had beene ſtill young, and with his forbearing cooled the courage of Hanniball, being all vpon the hoigh,

like a dapper yonker, whoſe commendation our familer trend Ennius excellētly blazeth out, thus:
                  
                     One man by protracting the tyme vvith delaye:
                     Hath ſaude our vveale-publike and reſtorde it agayne. Ennius.
                     
                     For hee neuer forced vvhat ill tongues did ſay
                     So that his country ſtil ſafe might remaine.
                     Therfore his renovvne and illuſtrious name,
                     For aye is enrollde vvithin the Booke of Fame.
                  
                  What vigilancy and what wiſedome vſed hee, when hee recouered Tarento? when as in my hearinge hee ſpake theſe wordes to Salinator (who after the loſſe of the Towne, fled into the Caſtle) making his vaunt & ſayinge thus: By my meanes (O Fabius) haſt thou regayned Tarento: *Your Maiſterſhip ſaith euen true (ꝙ Fabius) to him again, ſmyling: A taunt pretelye reboūded backe again. for if thou hadſt not loſte the Towne, I could not haue regained it.
                  Neyther was hee any whyt excellēter in warres abroad then in peace at home. For being the ſecōd time Conſul, while his fellowe in Office Sp. Caruilius, ſate ſtill & would do nothing, he withſtoode aſmuch as euer he coulde, C. Flaminius ye 
                     Plebeian Tribune, ſharing out to euery one, man by man, againſt the Authority

of the Senate, al the ground called Novv called Marca Anconitana. Gallia Ciſalpina, novv Lū
                        bardy. *Picaenū
                      & *Gallicum. And when he was Augur, hee durſt to ſay, yt all thoſe things were wt moſt fortunate luck takē in hand, which were done for the ſafetye and preſeruatiō of the common wealth: & that all thoſe things, which were preiudicially attempted againſt the cōmonwealth, were vnluckely done, and enterpriſed.
                  Manye and ſundrye notable qualities haue I knowen in this man, but none is more to be meruayled at, then howe bee toke the death of his ſonne Marcus, a noble Gentleman, & one that had bene Cō
                     sul. We haue extant abrode an Oration of the prayſe of yt man: which when wee read, what Philoſopher do we not contemne? Prayſe of Fabius Neyther was hee onely renowmed in the open ſight of all men abrode: but domeſtically within his owne dores at home, he was more noble. What profound talke vſed hee? what worthye preceptes? what great ſkil had hee in Antiquity? what exact knowledge in the Art of Diuination? There was alſo in him,

as in a Romane, very great learning: he perfectly remēbred & that by hart could recoumpt all the Warres, aſwel Ciuile and Domeſtical, as forreine and externall. Whoſe talke and conference I ſo deſirouſlye enioyed as though I had alreadye diuined and gheſſed that thing, which afterwarde chaunced: that he being dead, there would be none, at whoſe handes, I might learne ought.
                  But to what end ſpeake I ſo much of Maximus? Truly, becauſe you ſee that it is an horrible villany, to ſay that ſuche an Oldeage was wretched or miſerable.
                  But al men cannot be Scipioes or Maximi, to recoumpte what Citties they haue ſacked? what conflictes they haue had, both by Sea, and Land: what warres they haue atchieued: nor what Victorſouſe Triumphes they haue ſolemnized.
                  For when a man hath led his former lyfe quietly, vprightlye, and laudablye, Plato dyed as hee ſate vvryting. his Oldage is mild & gentle, ſuch as we haue heard that ye Oldage of Plato was, who in the Lxxxi. yeare of his age, died

as he ſate writing. And ſuch, as was the Oldeage of Iſocrates, who is reported, Which cō
                        teyned the prayſes of Minerua her feaſtes at Athens, vvherein all learned men shevved forth their Cunning that he wrate his Booke entituled *Panathenaicus, in the ninety & fourth yere of his Age, and lyued fiue yeres after: whoſe Scholemaiſter Leontinus Gorgias, lyued fullye an hundred and ſeuen yeares, and neuer faynted, nor gaue ouer his ſtudye and labour which he had in hande. And when it was demaunded of him, why hee woulde wiſhe to lyue ſo long: *I haue (ſayd hee) no cauſe where A vvorthy aunſvver. by to accuſe or miſlyke myne Oldeage. A notable aunſwere and worthy to proceede out of the mouth of a famous and learned man. For doltiſh fooles do laye all their owne faultes and blame vppon Oldeage: which thing the Poet Ennius (of whom I ere while made mention) did not.
                  
                     As Horſe which at Olympian Games, Ennius.
                     
                     ful oft hath borne the Bell,
                     And won the Price: in aged yeeres,
                     now reſts himſelfe ful wel.
                  
                  Lo, this man, whom you can very well remember, compareth his Oldeage, to

the Oldeage of a valiaunt & Victorious borſe. For the nynthe yeare after hys Death, theſe twaine, T. Flaminius, & M. Attilius were created Cōſuls, & hee himſelfe died whē 
                     Caepio & Philip were ye ſecōd time Conſuls, being Lxx. yeres old (for ſo long did Ennius lyue) at which time I being lxv. yeres old, wt a loud voice & earneſt ſute was a perſwader, yt the law By this lavv a mā hauing no Children but daughters, had his limitation hovv much hee ought at his death to bee queathe vnto thē, and al the reſt of hys inheritāce & goods to deſcēd to the next Iſſue male of his kyn. 
                     Voconia might bee enacted.
                  Thus he caryed two ſuch burdens as are ſuppoſed the greateſt that can be: to wyt, Pouerty and Oldage, and that in ſuch ſort, that hee ſeemed in a maner to be highly delighted therein.
                  For as far as I do remember I finde Four principal cauſes, why Oldage ſemeth wretched and miſerable. One is, becauſe it impeacheth and hindereth a man from dealing in matters: an other is, becauſe it enfeebleth and weakeneth Four cauſes vvhy old age ſemeth miſerable. the bodye: the thirde, becauſe it almoſt taketh away al pleaſures: & the fourth, becauſe it is not farre of from death.
                  Now let vs (if you pleaſe) ſee of what force, euery one of theſe cauſes be, & how iuſt, the allegation of euery of them is.
                  
                     
Oldage hindreth, and draweth a man * The j. diſpraiſe of Oldage. Oldage is no let or hinderāce to a man from dealing in offices or functions in the Cō
                           mon vvel the.
                      backe (for ſoothe) from taking a charge or function vpon him: from what charge or function I pray you? from ſuch as are by luſtineſſe of youth, & bodily ſtrē
                     gth acchieued? Are there no thinges appertayning to Old mē, which although their bodies be weake & feeble, yet may by the minde be done, and adminiſtred? Did Q. Fabius (I praye you) nothing? Did L. Paulꝰ thy father, O Scipio, & father in Law to yt worthy mā my Sonne, nothinge? and a greate ſorte of Oldmen Graue & vviſe coū
                        ſellours the chiefe ſtaye of a Cōmon vvealths. moe. The Fabritij, the Curii, the Corū
                        cani, when they meinteyned and defended ye weale publique, with their graue counſells, and authorities, did they nothinge? Appius Claudius beſides, his Appius Claudius Oldage, was alſo blinde: yet hee when all the Senate was of mynde to encline to a peace & league to bee made wt 
                     Pyrrhus, was not afrayde to ſpeake thoſe wordes vnto them, which Ennius in his Verſes recited:
                  
                     Hovv are your mynds vvhich earſt vvith vvitt vvere fraught
                     Thus fondly bent to bring all thinges to naught?
                  
                  And much more right grauely: for ye Verſes are knowen well ynough: And

yet Appius his Oration is to be ſeene, which he made leuenteene yeares after his ſeconde Conſulſhippe: and betwene his two Conſulſhips, there were tenne yeres, and he had borne the office of Cē
                     ſor before his firſt Conſulate.
                  Whereby it is well to be perceiued, yt in ye warres which wee had with Pyrrhus, hee was a man well ſtriken in yeares, & yet haue wee ſo hearde oure fathers reporte.
                  Therfore their reaſons are nothinge worth, which deny that Olde age is occupied in exploiting affaires of great importaunce. And they doe much like, vnto ſuch as ſaye that the Pylote or Mayſter of a Ship, helpeth nothing in Saylyng, when as ſome climbe vp into the Maiſter of a Shyppe. Maſt coppe, ſome walke vppon the Hatches, & ſome clenſe yt Pumpe: but he holdinge the Helme, ſitteth quietlye in the ſterne or Puppe: and although hee doe not the ſame things, which Youngmen doe, yet doeth he farre better & greater ſeruice then they.
                  For waightye matters are not done

with the ſtrength, nimblenes, and celerity of body, but with counſell, authoritie & aduiſe: wherof Oldage is wōt not onelye not to bee depriued, but rather y• better therwith encreaſed, & ſtored. Vnleſſe peraduenture you thincke, that I who haue bene both a Souldier, a Tribune, a Generall, an Ambaſſadour and a Conſul, and throughly tryed in diuers brunts of Warres, do nowe ſeeme altogether to loyter, becauſe I practiſe not the warres, as I was wont to doe.
                  But I do preſcribe vnto the Senate, what thinges are moſt expedient to bee done, and geeue certeine information to them before hand, how warre maye bee made vpon Carthage, which hath borne a canckred ſtomacke a great whyle towardes vs: of whom I ſhal neuer ceaſe to ſtand in feare, vntil I perfectly know it to be vtterly ſubuerted.
                  Which victorious conqueſt I pray ye Gods immortall to reſerue for thee (O Scipio) that thou mayeſt fully fyniſhe & purſue that which thy Who made Carthage Tributary to Rome: & this Scipio vtterly deſtroyed, it. Graundfather lefte behinde him vndone.
                  
                     
Since whoſe death, there are paſſed. 33. yeares: but the memoriall of that worthye man, God graunt that al poſteritye maye embrace and receiue mindfully.
                  Hee dyed the yeare before I was Cē
                     ſor, nyne yeares after my Conſulſhippe, There vvere alvvayes 4. Conſuls: 2. in Office for the yere preſent: & the other elected to ſuccede the next yeare folovvinge. when he had bene created Cōſul the ſecond time, my ſelfe then beinge Conſul. Thinke you that if hee had lyued tyl he had bene an hundreth yere olde, he wold haue bene wearye of his Oldage?
                  I graunte hee woulde neyther practize Skirmiſhing, nor nimble leaping, neyther toſſing the pykes a farre of, nor ſlaſhing with Swordes, hand to hand: but hee would vſe graue counſel, reaſon, and aduiſement. Which points if they were not in Oldmen, our Aunceſtors wolde neuer haue tearmed their high & moſte The Senate hath his name of Olde men. honorable counſell, by the name of Senate. And among the* Lacedemonians, they yt bare the higheſt Offices (as they bee) ſo alſo are they called Auncientes Lacedemonians. or Sages.
                  Now, if you be diſpoſed, to heare and reade forrayne Examples, you ſhal find

that noble and flouriſhing cōmon wealthes, haue bene vtterly ſpoyled by yoūg youthful heades. And the ſame by Old ſage fathers, to haue bene mainteined & recouered.
                  
                     Tell mee this, howe came it to paſſe that you loſte your mighty and noble common wealth in ſuch a ſhort ſpace? for to one that moued this Queſtion (as it is to be ſeene in the Booke of the Poet Neuius, entituled Ludus) many aunſweres were made and namelye this: Forſoothe, becauſe there ſtepped into Offyce, new vpſtart Oratours, fooliſh & light headed Yonckers. Lo, Raſhneſſe is incidente to youthfull yeeres, but prudence and wiſdome to Oldage.
                  But the Memory is empayred. I beleeue Memorie not minished in Oldmen. it wel, vnleſſe a man do exerciſe it: or if a man bee of nature ſlowe and blockiſhe. Themiſtocles perfectly knew the names of euery perſon in the Citye. Do Memorye of Themiſtocles. you thincke that hee, when he grew into yeres, vſed to call Ariſtides, by yt name of Lyſimachus? Surely I do know not only them yt be yet aliue, but their Fahers & Graundfathers alſo.
                  
                     
Neyther feare I any whyt leaſt when I read * Epitaphes vpō Tombes, I ſhould A foolish perſvvaſion that vvas in people of old time. (as they ſay) loſe my memory. For by the reading of them, I am brought into remembrance of them that are dead. Neither haue I heard of any * Oldman, that euer forgat in what place hee had layde vp his Treaſure. They remember No olde man ſo obliuious, to forget vvhere he layeth his purſe. well ynoughe all ſuch thinges as they make any accoūpt of: their Suretyſhippes, & Obligations of apparaūce at certayn dayes: to whō they bee indebted, and who to them.
                  What ſay wee to Lawyers? what to Byſhoppes? what to the Augurs? what to Philoſophers yt are Oldmen? How many thinges do they remember?
                  Their wittes ſtill remaine in Oldemen, freſh ynough, ſo that their ſtudy & induſtrye continue ſtill. And this not only in noble and honorable perſonages, but in priuate and quiet lyfe alſo.
                  
                     Sophocles made Tragedies, euen tyll hee was a very Oldman: who being ſo earneſtly vent to his ſtudies, yt hee was ſuppoſed not to take anye care of his

houſhold affayres, was cited to appeare Sophocles accuſed by his ovvn ſonnes, for do tag before the Iudges, by his owne ſonnes. That, as our maner and cuſtome is, whē any Parentes do negligentlye looke to their domeſticall dealinges, to ſequeſtre and defeact them, from the vſe of theire goodes: ſo alſo that the Iudges ſhould diſplace him from the vſe and occupatiō of his owne goodes, as an Old doating Ideot. Then lo, the Oldeman is ſayde to haue openlye recyted before the Iudges a certeine Tragedy, which he then had in hand, and had lately written, entituled Oedipus Coloneus: and after he had read the ſame, to haue demaunded of them, whether they thought yt Poeticall piece of worke ſeemed to bee of anye doatinge fooles doinge? After the recitall whereof, he was by all the Iudges Sentences acquite and diſcharged.
                  Did Oldage cauſe this man, or Heſiodus, or Simonides, or Stheſicorus, or (thoſe whom I named afore) Iſocrates, or Gorgias, or Homer: or the Prince of Philoſophers, Pythagoras: or Democritꝰ, or Plato, or Socrates, or afterward

                     Zeno, Cleanthes, (or him whom you alſo ſawe at Rome) Diogenes the Stoicke, to be nonſuited, or to quayle and fumble in their matters? was not the practiſe of the ſtudies in all theſe men, Equall to their lyfe?
                  Goe too: Let vs omit and paſſe ouer theſe deuine Studies. I can name vnto you, out of the coaſt of Sabine, huſbandmen my Neighbours and Familiers: whom being abſent, there is neuer lightlye, any great worke of huſbandrye done in their fieldes, neither in ſowing, in reaping, nor yet in inninge of their fruicts. Albeit in thē, this thing is not ſo greatlye to bee meruailed at. For there is no man ſo olde, but thinketh that hee maye No man ſo old but hopeth to lyue one yeere longer. lyue one yeare longer. But they alſo toyle about ſuch thinges, as they knowe doth nothing at all perteyne vnto them. They graffe Trees, which ſhall yelde Fruict, after a great whyle, to them that 
                     Men muſt do good for them that come after. 
                     ſhall come after them: as oure Statius in his worke, entituled Synephoebis, declareth. Neither would an Huſband mā (be he neuer ſo old) ſtick to make this aū
                     ſweer

to one, yt ſhould aſke him for whō hee planteth & ſoweth: I doe it for the Immortal Gods: whoſe pleaſure it was, that I ſhould not only receiue theſe thī
                        ges, at the hāds of my Predeceſſors, but ſhould alſo ſurrēder & deliuer the ſame agayn to my Succeſſors. Better a great deale hath Cecilius ſpoken, of an Olde mā, labouring & prouiding for his Sequele and poſteritie, then he doth in this folowīg: Certes, although Oldage whē it cōmeth had none other incōuenience or miſhap ioyned with it, yet is this one ynough, that by lyuing lōg, a mā ſeeth many things, which hee would not ſee.
                  
                  Yea, and peraduenture hee ſeeth many thinges, which he is right willing to ſee. And Adoleſcency many times hapneth to ſee ſuch thinges, as it would not ſee.
                  But this nexte ſayinge of the ſame Cecilius is a greate deale worſe. Thys alſo (ſayth hee) doe I accoumpte in Oldeage moſte miſerable, becauſe in that Age, a Man doeth feele
                     
himſelfe to be odious vnto others. Nay pleaſaunt rather then odious. For euen Old men take delight in tovvardly yoūgmen as Wiſe Oldmen take great delight in towardly and vertuous Young men: & their Oldage made a great deale eaſier, which are reuerenced & loued of Young men: ſo agayne Youngmen take greate An Olde mās good aduertiſement, very profitable and pleaſaunt to a yoūg man. ioye and contentment in the good leſſōs and Preceptes of Oldemen, whereby they are induced to the ſtudies of Vertue. Neyther doe I perceiue my ſelfe to be any whytleſſe welcome and pleaſaūt vnto you, then you are vnto mee.
                  But now you ſee, howe that Oldage is not only not ſaynt, ſluggiſh, nor drowſie, but is rather ſtill buſied & euer doing and deuiſing of ſome what: ſuch things (I meane) as euery one his delyte hath bene vnto, in his former life.
                  Nay, how ſay wee to this moreouer? that they are euery day learning ſomewhat. Solō vvaxed Olde, by learning euerye daye ſomvhat As we haue ſeene by Solon, who glorying in certayne verſes, ſayed, that be waxed an Oldmā, by learning euery day ſomwhat: as I my ſelfe alſo did: for I learned the Greeke tongue when I Cato learned the
                     
was an aged man: which I did ſo greedelye Greeke tong vvhē hee vvas an Oldmā
                      rake and ſnatche vnto mee, as one deſirous to ſtaunche and quenche a long thirſt: to the intent yt I might attaigne to the knowledge of thoſe things, whych you now ſee me to vſe for Examples. Which thing when I heard ſay that Socrates had likewiſe done in muſical Inſtrumentes, I was (verily) willinge to haue done therein ſemblably: (for men in the old tyme learned to play vpon Inſtruments) but in Learning (doubtleſſe) I tooke verye great paynes, and Dylygence.
                  NEither doe I now anye whyt more The Second diſprayſe of Oldage: alledged by them that ſaye Oldage is myſerable, becauſe it maketh the bodye vveake and feble deſire or longe to haue ye luſtines & ſtrēgth of a yoūg mā (for this was yt ſecond point of ye diſcōmodities belōging to Oldage) then I did beinge a younge man, deſire or long to haue the ſtrength of a Bull, or of an Olyphant. For that thing which naturallye is engraffed in man, it is conuenient and meete for him to vſe: & what ſoeuer he taketh in hand, to goe through ſtitche with it, & to doe it effectuouſlye.
                  
                     
For what more contemptible worde can there be, then that of Milo Crotoniata? who beeinge now olde, and ſeeinge certeine Champions, & Wreſtlers tryinge themſelues, in the place or fielde of Exerciſe, is reported, that hee looked vpon his owne Armes, and ſpake theſe wordes, weeping: Ah las, theſe Armes of mine are now deade. Ah thou pratling Milo reprehēded becauſe he bevvailed his lacke of ſtrengthe in his old age. Foole: thy armes are not ſo much dead, as thou art thy ſelfe: for thou neuer gotteſt any renowne of thy ſelfe, but by thy ſtronge Sydes, and brawny Armes. Sext. AElius neuer played the lyke part, nor manye yeares after that, T. Coruncanus: yea of late dayes P. Craſſus, neuer ſhewed the like prancke: by which men, Lawes were preſcribed to the Citizens: and whoſe Prudence continued with theym, euen till the laſt gaſpe of their lyfe.
                  But I feare, leaſt an Orator or Pleader, An other obiection drowpe and faynte in Oldage. For why: to his Function is requiſite, not onlye wytte, but durableneſſe alſo, and ſtrength. Aſſuredly, this ſame ſhrilneſſe

of voyce, doth gallantlye ſhyne and appeare (I know not how) euen in Oldeage: whych I my ſelfe haue not yet loſt, and yet you ſee my boarye haires. But yet not withſtanding, a quiet and mylde Speach is comelye in an Oldman: and the very neate and calme talke of an eloquent Sage, doth oftentimes of itſelfe, cauſe Audience and eare to bee geeuen vnto it.
                  Which thing if a man cānot throughlye doe himſelfe, yet maye hee inſtructe and direct Scipio and Laeliꝰ. For what To inſtructe & teach youth is a neceſſary and excellēt Function thing is pleaſaunter then Oldage guarded with the zealous affections of yoūg men? Shall wee not leaue vnto Oldage ſuch ſtrength and power as to teach and inſtruct Youngmen, and to trayne them to knowe euerye part of their Duties? Then which office, what can bee more excellent? Verelye, me thought that C. and P. Scipio. and thy two Graundfathers, L. Aemilius and P. Aphricanus were happye and Fortunate, throughe the attendaunce and company of young Gentlemen.
                  
                     
All Maiſters of Liberall Artes, are Learned men. alſo to bee accoumpted happy, although their ſtrength be decayed and gone: albeit this ſame decay and fayling of the Youth inordinate lye ledde maketh a feeble & impotent Oldage. ſtrength is oftener cauſed throughe the defaultes of Adoleſcency, then of Oldeage. For libidinous & diſſolute Adoleſcencie, bringeth vnto Oldeage, a bodye feeble and impotent.
                  
                     Cyrus in that talke which hee had vpon his death Bed, being a very Did mā, Luſty Oldage of Cyrus. (as Xenophon wryteth) denieth that euer he perceiued or felt his Oldage, any whytte weaker then his Adoleſcencye was.
                  I my ſelfe beeinge a Boy, remember that L. Metellus, who was made hyghe Byſhoppe foure yeres after his ſeconde Perfecte ſtrength of Metellus in Oldage. Conſulſhip, and executed that rowme of Prieſthoode xxii yeares, was of ſuch perfect ſtrength in the very latter end of his Age, yt he neuer wiſhed for his Adoleſcencye agayne, I neede not to ſpeake anye thing of my ſelfe: albeit it is an Oldmans part ſo to do, & allowed vnto vs, by the priuiledge of our Age.
                  
                     
Do ye not ſee, howe often Neſtor in Homer maketh vaunt of his owne vertues? Neſtor lyued three hundred yeres. For he had now lyued three mens Ages, and therfore needed not to feare, leaſt in telling of himſelfe, yt, whych was true, he ſhoulde eyther ſeeme too arrogant or too talkatiue. For there flowed from his tongue (as Homer ſaith) wordes Iliad. j. Agamemnon. and reaſons, ſweeter then hony: vnto which ſweeteneſſe, hee needed not anye bodily ſtrength, and yet that renowmed * General of Greece, neuer wiſhed to haue tenne perſons lyke Aiax: but hee manye times wiſhed to haue tenne Wiſdome excelleth ſtrength. ſuche as Neſtor. Whiche if it mighte ſo happē: he doubted not, but Troy ſhould in ſhort time be ruinated. But now I returne to my ſelfe.
                  I am now going on the Lxxxiiii. yere of myne Age: and glad would I be, if I might glorye and vaunte of that thinge which Cyrus did: but yet this can I ſay, that (in deede) I haue not that ſtrength which I had at the * Punique warres, Betvvene the Romaines & the Carthaginiās. or when I was Lieutenant in the ſame Warres, or when I was Conſull in

Spayne, or as I had iiii. yeares after, when as I beeing Tribune or Marſhall of the field, fought a Battaile at* Thermopylę, 
                     A mountayne in Greece through vvhich is a verye ſtreight and narrovv paſſage. in the tyme yt 
                     M. Attilius, and C. Labeo were Conſulls. And yet as you ſee, Oldage hath not altogether ſoaked awaye my ſtrength, nor weakened mee: the Senate houſe findeth no lacke of it in mee: the Iudicial place of Pleas miſſeth it not: my Friendes, Clientes, & Straungers, ſee no ſuch want in mee.
                  Neyther did I euer aſſent vnto that olde and much prayſed Prouerbe: which wiſheth a man to beginne to be Olde Enoughe ſuch Cockneyes novv a dayes. quickly, if he deſire to be Old long. But I (truelye) had leyfer, not to bee an Old man long, then to be an Oldman before I were old in deede. And therfore there neuer yet came anye man to talke wyth mee, but I was occupied.
                  But (in deede) I haue not ſo much Strength, as eyther of you twain hath: And agayne, neyther of you haue the Strength of T. Pontius the Centurion. What then? is hee therefore better then you?
                  
                     
Let there onelye bee a meaſurable moderation of Strength, and let euerie Let euery man meddle vvith no more then hee can vvell compaſſe man attempt ſo much as hee is able to compaſſe: and then I warrant him, hee ſhall not feele himſelfe greatly aggreeued for the lacke of his ſtrength.
                  It is ſayde that Milo at the famous Games of Olympia, caried an Oxe alyue, Milo caryed an Oxe aliue, vpō his shoulders, the ſpace of a furlong. vppon his ſhoulders, the ſpace of a furlong. Now therfore, whether haddeſt thou leyfer haue the Bodilye ſtrength of this Milo, or the notable fine wit and knowledge, that was in Pythagoras?
                  
                  To bee ſhort: vſe & take well in worth this gift of Bodily ſtrength, whyle it laſteth: and when it is gone, ſeeke not after it to haue it agayne: vnleſſe peraduenture, you wil ſay, that young Striplinges ſhould deſire to bee in their ſwathing bandes and Childhood againe: or being ſomwhat further ſtepped in yeres, ſhould wiſh to bee in their Adoleſcencye againe.
                  The courſe of Age is certaine, and yt 
                     Euery age hath his proper ſeaſon. waye of Nature is one, and the ſame

ſimple: and to euery parte of Age is his due tempeſtiuitie appointed.
                  For euen as weakeneſſe is naturally in young Childrē: wyeldenes in Yongmē: and Grauitie in full conſiſtent age: ſo is there naturallye in Oldage, a certeine Rypeneſſe, which ought to bee taken in his due tyme and ſeaſon.
                  I thinke Scipio, that you heare what youre Hoſte Maſiniſſa doth now dayes being 90. yeares old: who, if he begyn Maſiniſſa kinge of Mauritani at a vvorthye and a painfull Prince. anye Iourney on foote, will not in all yt Iourney come on horſebacke: and whē hee rydeth foorth, on horſebacke, will not alight: no Rayne, nor Colde can make him to couer his head: his Body is very dry: and therefore doth he in his owne perſon, execute all the offices and functions that appertayne to a Kinge. Therfore Exerciſe and temperaunce is able yet to cōſerue in Oldage, ſomwhat of yt former ſtrength, and youthful luſtineſſe.
                  In Oldage there is no great ſtrēgth. Why: Strēgth is not looked for nor required in Oldage. And therfore by the Obiectiō
                     
                     
Laws and Ordinaunces, our Age is exempt and diſpenſed withall, from thoſe affaires, & functions, which cānot without ſtrength, be diſcharged. And therefore, wee are not cōpelled to do yt thing, which wee cannot doe: nay, wee are not charged to doe ſo much as wee are able to doe.
                  But many Oldmen be ſo weake and feeble, that they are not able to execute Obiectiō
                      any office or function, belonging to Humane Dutie, or reſpecting mans lyfe. But ſurely this is not ye proper fault of Oldage, but the cōmune faulte of lacke of Health. How weariſh & weake, was the ſonne of P. Aphricanus, euē he, that adopted thee? what ſlender health or rather none at all had bee? which if it had not ſo bene, he (ſurely) wold haue prooued the ſecōd Light of our citie. For beſides his fathers haughtines and glory, he was alſo better furniſhed wt learnīg & Yoūgmē ſubiect to infirmities aſvvel as olde qualities of the mynde. What meruaile is it therfore in Oldmen, if they be ſomtime weakiſhe and feeble, ſithens euen Youngmen cannot eſcape it?

Wee muſt reſiſt Oldage (O Scipio and Laelie) and the faultes that bee in it, muſt by diligence be recompenced. And as wee would fighte againſt Sickneſſe, ſo muſt wee alſo againſte Oldage: wee muſt haue a ſpecial regard to our health wee muſt vſe moderate Exerciſes: wee Good leſſons to reſiſt Oldeage. muſt take ſo much meate and drincke, yt the powers of the bodye maye be refreſhed, and not vtterly oppreſſed. And not onelye muſt wee haue this ſpeciall care to our Bodye, but alſo to our Soule, & mynde muche more. For, theſe alſo The dyet of the bodye, aptly reſēbled to a Lamp (vnleſſe a man do obſerue a meaſure, as in feedinge a Lampe wyth Oyle) are quēched by Oldage, & entinguiſhed.
                  And the Bodies by defatigation and Differēce betvvene the povvers of the mynd and the bodye. Exerciſe, decaye and growe worſe, but the Myndes by beinge exerciſed, are holpen and bettered.
                  For thoſe, whom the Comicall Poet Caecilius calleth fooliſhe Oldmen, hee meaneth to bee ſuch as are credulous, forgetfull, and diſſolute: which are the faultes, not of right Oldage, but of ſuch an Oldage, as is ſluggiſh, ſlouthful, and drowſie.
                  
                     
And as Malapertneſſe and Senſuality, is more incidence to Youngmen then to Olde: and yet not to all Youngmen, but vnto ſuch as bee not of good diſpoſition: ſo this Oldmanlye fooliſhneſſe Dotage. (whyche is commonlye called Dotage) is not in all Oldemen, but in them onlye which be lewde, and of ſmall accoumpt.
                  
                     Appius beeing both old & alſo blind, gouerned and ruled his foure tall Sonnes, Blind Appius a paterne of a noble Gētlemā and good housholder. his fiue Daughters, his familye & houſholde, which was great, beſides his Patronage of a greate maignye of Clientes. He had his minde bent as it were a Bowe, and neyther did he ſhrinke nor yelde to Oldage. Hee reſerued and executed not onelye Authoritye, but alſo an imperious cōmaundmēt ouer al thē, that were vnder his charge. For his ſeruauntes feared him: his Children reuerenced him: all men tenderly loued him: in that houſe of his, there was a perfect patterne of the auncient faſhion, and diſcipline of our Country.
                  For herein is Oldage honorable, if it defend & maintein itſelfe if it ſtil retayn

his authoritye, if it bee not in Bondage What maketh Old age, honorable. to any man: if euen to the laſte breath, it exerciſe Rule and Commaundement ouer them that depend vpon it.
                  For as wee commend that Younge man, in whom there bee ſome pointes of Youthful Oldage. an Oldman: ſo alſo doe wee praiſe that Oldman, in whom, there is any of ye properties of an honeſt Youngman. Which Old yoūg age. thing who ſoeuer followeth, may be olde in Bodye, but neuer in mynde.
                  I am now in hande with my ſeuenth Booke of Originalles: I am collecting all the Monumentes of Antiquity: & now am I earneſtlye buſied with penning the Orations of all ſuch famous & notable cauſes as I haue in my time defended. I ſtudye the Augurall, Canon, and Ciuile lawe: I geeue my ſelfe muche to the ſtudye of the Greeke tongue: and (as Pythagoras his Scholers were wont to doe) to exerciſe my memory wt
                     all, I recoumpt euery Euening, all that The cuſtome of the Pytha thagoriās I haue ſayde, hearde, or done, daye by day.
                  Theſe be the Exerciſes of the wytte,

theſe are the feates, wherein the mynde is occupied. In theſe I paynfullye trauayling & ſtudying, finde no great lacke of the ſtrength of bodye. I am readye & able to helpe my freendes, I come often into the Senate houſe, and of myne own accord, I cary thither with me, matters throughlye debated and canuaſſed: and them doe I defend and mainteine wyth the ſtrength, not of Body, but of Minde. Whych thynges if I were not able in perſon to execute, yet ſhoulde I take great delectation lying in my Bedde, to thincke vppon thoſe matters, whiche I could not doe. But my age paſſed is ſuch, that I can doe them. For hee yt geeueth himſelfe cōtinually to theſe ſtudies and labours, feeleth not when, nor how Oldage creepeth vpon him.
                  Thus doth Age, by little and little, & without feelinge, waxe olde, and growe to an end: neyther is it ſodeinly broken of, but by continuaunce, and tracte of tyme quenched.
                  NOW followeth the third diſpraiſe The third Diſpraiſe of Olage: alledged or faulte that is founde in Oldage:

becauſe they ſaye it lacketh Pleaſures. by them that ſaye it is vvith out al pleſures. Oh worthy gifte of Age, if it take that thing frō vs, which euē in Adoleſcēcy is moſt beaſtly. For geue ye eare (my good Gentlemenne) and marke yee well an Olde Oration or diſcourſe of Architas Tarentinus, a right noble and excellent man, which was lent vnto mee, when I was a very yoūgman at Tarento with Bodilye pleaſure notablye inueigh ed againſt by Atchitas. 
                     Q. Maximus. He ſayde that there was not anye more pernitious plague, euer geeuen vnto men by Nature, then was this Pleaſure of ye Body. Which Pleaſure, mēs libidinous luſtes, inordinatelye deſiring, are raſhly and vnaduiſedly incited, and ſtirred to enſue and folow. Hence (ſaid hee) ſpring all Treaſons, & Trecheries againſt our Country, hence beginne all the euerſions of Common wealthes: hence are hatched all ſecrete conſpiracies, and priuye conſerences wt oure Enemies. Fynally, that there is no villany, nor anye notable enormitie, which the inordinate deſire of Pleaſure did not egge, and incenſe a man Pleaſures the Welſpring of al Miſchieues. to enterpriſe. And that Whoredome,

Adulterye, and all ſuch kinde of deteſtable deedes, were by none other lures, & enticementes, procured, but by Pleaſure.
                  And whereas eyther Nature, or ſome God, hath geeuen nothinge vnto man, of more excellency, then the mind, Dignitie of the minde. or reaſonable Soule:, there is no thing ſo much againſt this diuine Gyfte and bountye, as is Pleaſure. For where Pleaſure beareth ſwaye, Tempēraunce hath no place at all: neyther can Vertue abyde within Pleaſures kingedome.
                  For the playner vnderſtandinge of which thing, hee willed, and bade vs to A man addicted to pleaſure, moſte vn meete for al vertuous actiōs ymagine & in mynde to preſuppoſe ſome man, ſo greatlye plunged in this bodelye Pleaſure, as poſſiblye mighte bee: hee thought no man would doubt, but that ſo long as any ſuch man, wallowed in this Senſualitye, hee ſhould neither be able by witte, reaſon, deuiſe, nor cogitation, to cōtriue & compaſſe, any thing that were good. And therefore he ſayd that nothing was ſo deteſtable & peſtiferous as Pleaſure.
                  
                     
For it beeinge great and continuinge long, would ſone marre, and extinguiſh all the light of the Minde.
                  
                     Nęarchus our Hoſt of Tarento (a mā who had ſtill continued in Frendſhip wt the People of Rome) did then tell mee, that hee had hearde his Elders reporte, that Architas had al this diſcourſe with C. Pontius, the Samnite, father vnto him, by whō our two Cōſulles, P. Poſthumius, and T. Veturius were foyled & A shameful and reprochful ouerthro. ouercome in the Battaile at Caudium. At which Diſcourſe, Plato of Athens was alſo preſent: who (as I finde) came to Tarento, when L. Aemilius. and Appius Claudius were Conſuls.
                  But to what ende ſpeake I all this? Forſooth, to geeue you to vnderſtand, yt if wee cannot by wiſdome and reaſon, ſet Oldage qualifieth all il motions. at naught and diſpiſe Pleaſure: yet that wee may ſaye Gramercy to Oldage, by whoſe meanes it commeth to paſſe that wee haue no luſt to do that thing, which wee ought not to doe. For Pleaſure being a deadly Enemy to Reaſō, hindreth Pleaſure and Vertue are contraryes. conſultation, and (as I maye ſaye) dazeleth

& bewitcheth ye eyes of the minde, neither hath it anye Felowſhippe with Vertue.
                  Sore againſt my will was it, that I diſgraded and diſplaced L. Flaminius, 
                     Vice punished vvithout any parciahtie or reſpect of perſons brother of yt right valiaūt T. Flaminius, out of ye Senate, ſeuen yeres after yt hee had bene Cōſull: but I déemed it conuenient yt his inordinate Luſt ſhoulde by ſuch opē puniſhmēt be accordingly met wtal & reproued. For beinge Conſull in Gallia, hee was at a Banket entreated A diſſolute part cō
                        mitted by Flaminius to fulfill an vvhores requeſt by a cōmon Brothel or Curteſan, to behead ſome one of thē, which were in Priſon, and condēned to dye. Hee, ſo longe as his brother Titus was Cenſor (which was next afore mee) eſcaped vnpuniſhed: But I and Flaccus could not in anye wyſe allow of ſuch a Villanous and lewd Luſt, which beſides his owne priuate ſhame, and reproche, emblemiſhed alſo the Honor of our Empyre.
                  I haue oftentimes heard myne Aunceſtours tell, (who likewiſe ſayde that they had heard the ſame at Oldemens handes afore) that C. Fabritius was

wont much to meruayle: becauſe being Ambaſſadour to Kinge Pyrrhus, be had heard Cyneas the Theſſalian, reporte, that at Athens there was a * certeine felow, Epicure. profeſſing himſelfe to be a Wyſeman, who affirmed, that all thinges whyche wee goe aboute, oughte to be referred vnto Pleaſure. Whyche tale, M. Curius, and T. Coruncanus hearing him report, were wont to wiſh that the Samnites, and Kinge Pyrrhus hymſelfe, were fullye perſwaded to beleeue, and creedite the ſame: to thende they myght bee a greate deale more eaſelye vanquiſhed, when as they once addicted theymſelues whollye to Pleaſures.
                  This M. Curius. lyued with * P. Decius, 
                     This man valyantly died in the defēce his Coū
                        trey. who in his fourth Conſulſhyppe, fiue yeares before the other was Conſul, voluntarily offred himſelfe to death for his Country. Fabritius knewe hym well, and ſo did Coruncanus: who aſwell by their own lyues, as by the deede of this P. Decius (whom euen nowe I named) iudged yt there was ſomthinge

naturallye good and excellent: whyche was to bee deſired, euen for itſelfe, and which euery good and vertuous perſon (abandoning & concemning pleaſures) ought to enſue.
                  But, to what end ſpeake I ſo much of Pleaſure? becauſe (forſoth) it is not only no Diſpraiſe at all, nay rather a moſte high praiſe & cōmendation for Oldage, becauſe it greatlye careth not, for anye Pleaſures. It lacketh dayntye fare, curious diſhes, and ſundry drinckes. It Obiectiō
                      therfore lacketh Dronkennes, Indigeſtion, and phantaſticall dreames.
                  But if wee muſt needes yeelde ſome Hard to reſiſt pleaſures allurements what to Pleaſure, becauſe wee cannot eaſelye withſtand her allurementes (for the Diuine Philoſopher Plato calleth Pleaſure, ye Bayt of all Miſchiefe, becauſe mē are enſnared & caught therwt, as Fyſhes wyth the Hooke) I ſaye all though Oldage lack imoderat gluttīg Moderate Banquetting cōmedable and tolerable for Oldage. cheere, yet may it bee delighted in moderate Banquetting.
                  When I was a Boy, I oftentimes ſawe C. Duillius, the Sonne of M.
                     
euen hee that firſte vanquiſhed the Carthaginians by Sea) being an old man, comming home from Supper. Hee loued manye tymes to haue a Torche or Lyncke caryed before him, and a Muſicion alſo playing: which example or preſident, no priuate perſō before him euer ſhewed: his Glory & renowme emboldned him ſo farre, licentiouſly to deale. But what ſpeake I ſo much of others? Now come I agayne to myſelfe. Firſt I alwaies had Cōpanye & Felowſhyp. And Felowſhippes were firſt inſtituted when I was Treaſurer, at ſuch time as wee receiued the ſacred Rites of the Ladye* Greate mother of the Gods, out of Cybele 
                     Phrygia.
                  
                  I banquetted therefore with my Mates, but yet alwayes moderately. But there was in me then, a certayn galantiſe and heate of Age: which Age growinge Banquettinge and makinge merie vvyth honeſt cō
                        panye. forwarde, all thinges are euerye daye, more and more qualified. For I neuer meaſured my delite in thoſe Bā
                     quets, for any pleaſures of the body: but rather for the Companie ſake and talke

of my Frendes, and well willers.
                  And therfore our Aunceſtors dyd verye wel, in tearminge a feaſtinge aſſemblye of Freendes (becauſe it bath a coniunction of lyuinge together) by the name of Conuiuium: a great deale better Conuiuiū
                      then doe the Greekes, who call the ſelfe ſame thing, ſomtime a *Compotation, 
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      and ſomtime a * Concenation: wherein they ſeeme to allow of yt, which in thys kynde, is leaſt of all to be made accoūpt of.
                  Verily I doe take delight in ſeaſonable Banquetting, euen for the delight that I take in the talking & confereēce: and not with my Equalles onelye, who are now very fewe, but with your Age alſo, & euē with you yourſelues. And I hartely thanke Oldage, for that, it hath encreaſed in mee a greedineſſe of talke, and taken away the deſire of Meate and Drinke. Now yet, if any man take ſpeciall delight in theſe thinges (becauſe I Oldage not altogether vvithout vulgare pleaſures. wyl not ſeeme altogether to bee at open warre and defiaunce wyth Pleaſure, whereof there is peraduēture a certaine

meaſure Naturall) I doe not perceiue that Oldage lacketh a fruition and feelinge, no not in theſe Pleaſures themſelues. The Prerogatiues, and ſuperiorities at Feaſtes, inſtituted by oure Aūceſtours, do wonderfully cōtent me: and thoſe pointes or caſes, which by an aunciēt cuſtome amōg our Elders, are propounded at the Table by the chiefe Maiſter of the feaſt: and the Cuppes as in Xenophōs Treatiſe, entituled Sympoſiū) 
                     Xenophō
                      prety, ſmall, and clenly rynſed: & in Sommer ſeaſon a pleaſaunt cooling, & likewiſe in Winter, eyther ye warme Sonne, or a good Fyre, is vnto mee ſinguler delight. Which thinges when I lye at my Manor of Sabine, I am vſuallye wont to put in practiſe: and euery daye I throughly furniſhe my Boorde wyth my Neighbours: where we paſſe awaye the time together in talkinge of manye and ſundrye matters, euen tyll it be farre in the night.
                  But there is not ſo great tickling, & Obiectiō. as it were an itch of Pleaſures in Old men. I beleeue it wel: nay, there is not ſo much, as any deſire thereto. For nothinge

is greuous or beauilye taken of a man, which hee neyther deſireth nor careth for.
                  Very wel did Sophocles aunſwere a certayne man, which aſked him beinge Sophocles aunſvvere touching carnal cocupiſcēce now greatly ſtriken in yeares, whether hee vſed Venereall act or Carnal company with women? God forbid (
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      he) that I ſhould vſe any ſuch thing: for I haue willinglye renounced and fledde from all ſuch laſciuiouſnes, as from a beaſtly and furious Mayſter.
                  
                  For to them that are deſirous of ſuch thinges, the lacke and want thereof is peraduenture odious and greuous. But to them which are fullye glutted, and ſatiſfied therewith, it is more pleaſure to want, then to haue them: how be it, he that forceth not for athing, lacketh He that careth not for a thig, cannot be ſayde to lacke it. it not. And therfore not to care for it, I ſaye, is greater pleaſure, then to haue yt fruition of it.
                  Now if youthful Age, delight & enioy theſe foreſayd Pleaſures, the reaſon is, firſt becauſe it is more wylling to enſue ſmall matters, & of light importaunce,

as afore wee haue ſayd: and afterwards ſuch thinges as Oldage, if it fully enioy not, yet doth it not altogether lacke.
                  And like as hee which ſitteth vppon the firſt and chiefeſt Bench, doth better behold and is more delighted to ſee* Ambiuius Turpio: 
                     An excellente player of Comaedies and counterfeicter of mens geſtures. and yet is bee alſo delyghted, whych ſitteth vpon the hyndermoſt and laſt Bench of al: euen ſo Adoleſcency more néerely beholdinge Pleaſures, doth perhaps more frolicklye delite, and ioye in them. But yet Oldage beholding the ſame aloofe and farre of, hath as much delectation therein, as is ſufficient.
                  But what a ſinguler commoditye is this, that the Mind being as it were freed, and worne oute of the ſeruice & thraldome of Senſualitie, Ambition, Contention, Quarrelling, and all filthy Affections, kepeth itſelfe within his boū
                     des, and lyueth (as the Prouerbe ſayth) with itſelfe? But if it be furniſhed & as it were nouriſhed with the foode of ſome Study and learning: then truly is there What old age is pleſaunteſt. nothinge more pleaſaunt then is a quiet

Oldage.
                  Wee ſawe C. Gallus, the Familier C. Gallus Frend of thy father, O Scipio, continuallye to applye, and as it were to dye, in Oldman ſtudious his earneſt ſtudy of meaſuring of* Heauen and* Earth: How often hath yt next Aſtronomie. Morning, come vpō him ere he had fullye finiſhed that thing which he had begonne Geometye. to deſcribe the night before? How often did nighte ſurpriſe him, when as hee had begonne anye thing in the morning? What a ſinguler delighte was it vnto him, when as be long before prognoſticated, and foretolde vnto vs, the Eclipſes, both of the Sunne and Moone? What diligēce beſtowed hee in lighter matters and of leſſe importaunce, but yet verye quicke, and wittye?
                  How greatly did Naeuius reioyce in Naeuius. his Comedy, called the Punique VVarres? How ioyed Plautus in his Comedy Truculentus? How in his Pſeudolus? 
                     Plautus
                  
                  I alſo, ſaw old* Liuius, who hauinge ſet foorth a Comedye, ſeuen yeares beefore Liuius Andronicus I was borne, when Cethegus, and Tuditanus were Conſulles, lyued fyll

I was a pretye Stripling.
                  What ſhoulde I ſpeake of the profounde ſtudie of P. Licinius Craſſus, 
                     Licinius Craſſus. both in the Canon, and alſo in the Ciuyle Lawe? Or of this our P. Scipio, who was this other daye created highe Scipio. Prieſt? But yet all theſe whom I haue named, wee ſawe to bee Oldmen, & moſt earneſtly enflamed wt theſe kynde of ſtudies.
                  As for M. Cethegus, (whom Ennius doth verye well tearme the Marowe or Pyth of Lady * Suada) howe ſtudiouſly The God deſſe of Eloquence and gallāt ſpeach called in Greke Pitho. did wee ſee him buſied in Oratorie, beinge euen an Oldman.
                  What Pleaſures therefore of Banquettes, or Playes, or Harlottes, are comparable to theſe Pleaſures? And theſe are the ſtudies of learning, which in men of wiſdome, and good inclinatiō do grow, euen as they themſelues doe, in Age: ſo that, that ſaying of Solon is verified, which hee vttered in a certaine Verſe, as before I haue declared, That Wee vvax older by beeing vviſer. hee waxed older and older by learning euery day more and more.
                     
Then which Pleaſure of the mynde, there can none (doubtleſſe) bee greater.
                  I come now to the Pleaſures which Huſbandmen haue, wherewith ſurelie Huſbandrye. I am incrediblie delited: which neither are impeached, nor hyndered with any Oldage, and in my phanſie, do approch neereſt vnto the lyfe of a Wiſeman. For their dealing & trade is wt the Earth, wt neuer refuſeth to bee vnder their commaundement & ſubiection: and euer repayeth that which it afore receiued, wt aſurpluſage & vſury: albeit ſomtimes wt leſſe, but for yt moſt part wt greater gain & encreaſe. Albeit (in deede) not yt fruits only, but yt power & nature of ye Earthe itſelfe, is it, wt delyteth me: which when it hath receiued yt Seede caſt vpō it, into her lap, being by tillage wel ploughed, & manured, doth firſt for a time keepe it cloſely couered ouer wt barowing, whyth is therupō called Occatio: and afterwards being warmed wt moiſture, & her theriſhmēt, ſhe maketh it to ſprout and ſhoote vp. & bringeth out of it a greene blade, which being ſtrengthned & ſtaied wt the ſmal ſtringes at yt rote of ye ſtēmes

doth by lyttle and little, grow vp to a cō
                     uenient bigneſſe: and ſtanding vpright vpon a knottye ſtraw ful of ioyntes, is, when it draweth toward rypeneſſe, incloſed within Huſkes. Out of the whych when it peepeth, it bringeth foorth ye Corne handſomelye ſet in thorder of an Eare: and to ſaue it from being pecked out by ſmall Byrdes, it is rampyered & fenced with a Trench or Walle of the Awnes, or Beardes.
                  What ſhoulde I ſpeake of the Graffinge, ſpringinge vp, and encreaſe of Vynes? I cānot be ynough delighted therein: becauſe I would you ſhould know ye quietneſſe and delectation of myne Oldage. I doe omit the force and Vertue of al theſe thynges, which the Earth bringeth forth: how, out of one poore kernel of a Figge, or out of one ſeely grayne of a Grape, or out of the ſmalleſt ſeedes of other Fruites and Plantes, it doth procreate and bring foorth, ſuch great Boles, and Stemmes. The ſmall twygs, the Gryftes, the Stalkes, the plātable Vynes, the platted ſtayes, for theym to

runne along vpon, & the old Wyne ſtockes, doe not theſe cauſe any mā to delite therein with a kinde of admiration?
                  The Vyne whiche naturallye is fallinge, if it be not vnder propped, & ſhoared vp, lyeth flat vpon the ground: but the ſame, to rayſe vppe itſelfe, claſpeth and with his Tendrells (as it were with handes) holdeth faſte what ſoeuer it catcheth. The which creeping and ſpreading itſelfe ſundrye wayes, yt Huſbandmans ſkilfull Arte, doth with his pruninge toole reſtrayne and cut of, leaſt it ſhould with ſuperfluous Braunches, be ouer growen & ſpread too much euery waye.
                  And therfore at the beginning of the Spring, in that which was lefte at the ioyntes where thoſe twigges were cut of, there ſprouteth out a young Burgē or Budde: out of the which, the Grape comming foorth, doth ſhew itſelfe: which Buddes. encreaſing in bigneſſe, partly with ye moyſture of the Earthe, and partlye wt the heate of the Sunne, is at the firſte very bytter in caſt, but afterwards being

ripened, waxeth ſweet & tothſome: and being clad and ſhrowded with leaues, lacketh neither moderat warmth, and alſo defendeth the too much parthing heat of the Sūne. Then the which what thing can there bee, either for the fruiet, pleaſanter, or for the Eye, gorgeouſer and trimmer? whereof, not the profite onely, (as before I ſayde) but yt manuraunce and the ſelfe nature of the thinge highly deliteth me. The orders of the ſhoares or proppes, the tyinge & byndinge them together at the toppes, the ſhreadinge of the old Vines and the ſuperfluous Braunches (which before I mentioned) and ye placinge of others in their ſteedes.
                  To what ende ſhould I rehearſe the wateringe of the Plantes, the Dygginge and new renewing of the groūd, whereby the Earthe is made a greate deale rancker and fruitfuller? What Dygging ſhould I ſpeake of the profite that com, meth by the Dunginge and Compoſtinge of Land? I haue ſayde ſufficiently Dunging of it, in that Booke which I wrate of

                     Huſbandry: whereof the Learned Heſiodus in hys Woorke which hee wrate of Tyllage, ſpake neuer a worde? But Homer who was (as I take it) manye hundreth yeaces before hym: introduceth and maketh Laertes, longing Odyſſ. 
                           •
                        
                      and languiſhinge for the abſence of his Sonne, as an Huſbandman, tylling yea & Dunging alſo of the ground.
                  Neyther are Huſbandlye affayres Sundrye delightes of Huſbā
                        drye. onelye delectable and plentifullye ſtoared with greene Corne, Meadowes, Vyneyardes and Copſees: but with Orchardes alſo and Gardeines, Graſinge of Cattall, Swarmes of Bees and varietie of all ſortes of Flowers. And not onely Planting, but Engraffinge Planting Graffinge alſo is delightfull, which are as wittie, and as fine poſates, as any be in Huſbandrye.
                  Many delites of Huſbādry can I recken vp: but I ſuppoſe yt theſe which I haue already named, bee vnto you ſomwhat redious. But you ſhall pardon me: for yt great goodwil wt I beare to Huſbandry, hath caried me ſomewhat far in the

diſcourſe thereof: and alſo Oldeage is by nature, talkatiue and geeuen to many wordes: becauſe I wil not ſeeme to cleare it from all faultes.
                  And therfore M. Curius after he had Noblemē haue delyted to ſpē
                        de their time in Huſbandrye tryumphed ouer the Samnites, and Sabines, and ouer Pyrrhus, ſpent the later ende of his Age in this kinde of lyfe. Whoſe Ferme or coūtry Houſe, as oftē as I beholde (for it is not far frō mine) I cannot but greatlye wonder to conſider eyther the continency of this noble Gentleman, or the Diſcipline that was in thoſe dayes.
                  For vpon a tyme the Samnites bringing vnto this Curius ſitting by the fier a huge ſumme of Golde, were by him A noble aunſvvere of a vvorthy man Enemye to all bryberye. put backe and reiected; ſaying, he thought it more honorable to haue dominion and to be Lord ouer them that be ful of Gold, then to haue Gold himſelfe. Coulde ſuch a Noble mynde otherwiſe chooſe, but leade a pleaſaunt Oldage?
                  But now come I agayn to Huſbādmen, becauſe I recken my ſelfe one of their order and felowſhyp. Senatours,

that is to ſaye, Sage Seniors and Did Senators Oldmen. men, were in thoſe dayes Huſbandmen. For as L. Quintius Cincinnatus was The higheſt office in the cō
                        mon vvealth called alſo the Maiſter of the people: & for the time had the office of a king. holding the Plough in the field, newes was brought to him that he was made Lord * Dictator. By ye cōmaundment of which Lord Dictator, the maiſter of the Horſemen, C. Seruilius Hala, ſlewe Sp. Melius a ſpiring to be king, and goinge aboute by intruſion to gette the Crowne.
                  Out of their Fermes and Countrye Houſes, was Curius, and manye other Oldmen ſent for, and called into ye Senate: wherupon they that went to Sō
                     mon Noble Councellours choſen out of the countrye. and call them were named * Viatores, Purſeuauntes, or common Meſſangers. Was therefore the Oldage of theſe men miſerable, which thus delighted in Tyllage and huſbandrye? Currours or Purſeuauntes. Certes in my iudgement. I doubt whether there can bee anye bleſſedder lyfe then this is: and not onely for common Duties ſake, becauſe Tillage is expedient and cōmodious for all ſorces of men in generall, but alſo for the delectation

(which I ſpeake of) and for the plentifulneſſe and abundance, which both for In Huſbā
                        dry is both profite & pleaſure. the ſuſtenaunce of men, and honoure of the Gods are requiſitely belonginge. And ſithens ſome doe deſire this, let vs nowe reconcile oure ſelues vnto Pleaſures.
                  For a good and ſubſtantiall Huſbād hath alwayes his Cellors for Wyne, Oyle, Honye, and houſhold prouiſion, well ſtoared, and his whole Houſe well furniſhed. Hee hath ſtoare of Hogge, Kydde, Lambe, Henne, Mylke, Cheeſe and Honye.
                  Now, Huſbandmen themſelues doe call and tearme a Gardeyne, by the name Hortus altera Succidia. of an other Larder: and Hawkinge and Huntinge beeinge ſuperuacuous & vayne exerciſes, doeth ſeaſon the ſame thinges a greate deale better, and maketh theym more toothſome.
                  What ſhould I ſpeake of the greene verdure and hue of Meadowes, of the orderlye ſettinge of Trees, or of the goodlye beautye, and faſhion of their

Vyneyardes, and Olyueyardes?
                  I wyll in fewe Woordes declare my mynde. I ſay there can be nothing, eyther profitabler for vſe, eyther ttymmer for ſhewe, then is Ground, well manured and tylled: from the fruition whereof, Oldage doeth not onelye not hynder a man, but alſo rather inuiteth and allureth him thereunto.
                  For where may that Age better, yea or ſo wel, warme itſelfe, eyther by ſittinge in the Sunne, or by a good fier: or concrarye wiſe as the Seaſon of the yeere ſerueth, bee ſo holſomlye cooled either in ſhadye places, or pleaſaunte waters?
                  Let younger folkes therefore take to themſelues their exerciſes of deedes of Exerciſes for Yoūg men. Armes, of Horſemanſhippe, of toſſinge the Pyke and Speare, of handlinge ye Clubbe, and Ball, theire Practiſe of Swymminge and Runninge: to vs Oldemen, of manye other Games let theym leaue the Tables, and Cheſſe, Diſportes for Olde men.
                     
(yea and that no further then a man is diſpoſed) becauſe Oldage without theſe may be happye.
                  The Bookes of Xenophon are very Xenophō his booke of Houſeholde. profitable for ſundrye purpoſes, yt whych (I pray you) viligētly peruſe & read, as you do. How copiouſly doth he prayſe Huſbādry in his booke of Houſhold, entituled Oeconomicus? And that you may well vnderſtand how that nothing ſeemeth vnto him ſo Princelye and fitte for a Kinge, as is the ſtudye of Tyllage and practiſe of huſbandrye, hee introduceth Socrates in that Booke, reaſoning with Critobulus, and telling him that Cyrus the younger, King of Perſia, 
                     Cyrus. (a Prince both for profoundnes of Wytte, and for glorious Soueraigntye of Empyre, renoumed) when as Lyſander 
                     Lyſander the valiaunt Capitayne of the Lacedemonians, vppon a tyme came vnto him at his Cittie of Sardis, & had brought vnto him frō his confederates and freendes certeine Preſentes and Rewardes, did ſhew himſelfe in al pointes generallye curteous and freendlye towardes

the ſayde Lyſander, and namelye that he ſhewed vnto him a certeyne encloſed fielde ſette and planted with Trees righte orderlye.
                  Now when Lyſander had throughly viewed, and with admiration beheld both the heighte of the Trees, and the exact order, preciſely obſerued in ye placinge and ſettinge of them in a perfecte * Quincuncie, the ground well manured and pure withall, and the ſweete When Trees are ſo exactly ſet, that vvhiche vvay ſo euer a man loke they ſtand dyrectly one againſte another. ſmelles which the flowers yelded: hee told the king, that he wondered not onlye at the diligence, but alſo at the fyne wytte of him, by whom thoſe thyngs were meaſured out and deſcribed. Vnto whom Cyrus thus aunſwered. It is euē I my ſelfe, which haue by meaſure planted and ſet theſe Trees: the order of the Rowes wherin they ſtand, is my onely deuice, and no other mans: the platforme alſo & the deſcription hereof is mine: yea manye of theſe Trees were planted and ſet with myne owne handes. Then Lyſander well eyinge his purple Robe, and the rych Apparel

of his Bodies, and the reſt of his gallāt Brauerye after the Perſian guyſe, wrought & garniſhed with much Golde and manye pretious Stones further ſayde this: Now do I well ſee (O Cyrus) that for very good cauſe, thou art reported a Prince, Fortunate: becauſe vnto thy Vertue, Fortune alſo is 
                     Virtuti Fortuna comes. 
                     conioyned. This therefore may Olde men lawfullye enioye. Neither is age anye ſuch lett or Obſtacle, but that in other thinges alſo, and namely in Huſbandrye and Tyllage, wee maye continue oure Practiſe, euen tyll, the laſte poyncte of our Oldage.
                  Wee haue hearde ſaye, that M. Valerius Coruinus lyued tyll hee was an Valerius Coruinus hundreth yeares olde: and that when hee was verye aged, hee dwelled in the Countrye, and fell to Tyllynge of hys Land.
                  Betweene whoſe Firſt and Sixt Conſulſhippe, there were Fortye and Sixt yeares. Therefore ſo longe tyme of Age, as our Aunceſtoures appointed &

would haue to the beginninge of Oldeage, dyd he beare Office and Aucthoritye Authoritye the chiefeſt honor and ornamente of Oldage in the Common Wealthe. And herein was his extreeme and laſte Age bleſſedder then his middle age, becauſe it was honoured with more Authority: and of Laboure and Trauayle had leſſe then afore.
                  The higheſt Tytle and Honorableſt perfection of Oldage, is Aucthority. Oh, how great was it in L. Caecilius Metellus? how honourable in Attilius Calatinus? whoſe Prayſe and commē
                     dation is ſounded oute in this Honorable Teſtification: Many Nations with one mouth do agre, that he was the chiefeſt man of all the Cittye. The Epitaph yt was engrauen vpon his Tombe is well knowen. Worthilye therefore and by good right was hee called a graue Perſonage, of whoſe Prayſes all men by one conſente gaue ſo good a reporte generallye.
                  What a worthye man ſawe wee P. Craſſus, of late the highe Biſhop to be?

what a noble fellowe was M. Lepidus, who afterwardes was in the ſame Office of Prieſthoode? What ſhall I ſpeake of Paulus or Aphricanus, or (as afore) of Maximus? not onelye in whoſe diſcrete Counſels & Directions, but alſo in whoſe beckes there reſted Authoritie?
                  Oldage (namelye that, which is reuerenced and honored) hath ſo great What maner of oldage is commendable Authority, that it is much more worthe then all the Pleaſures of Adoleſcencie.
                  But in al this my diſcourſe, remember ye, that I praiſe that Oldage, whoſe foundation was layd and grounded in Adoleſcency. Whereupon that, which I wt all mens wel lyking haue ſo often ſpoken, is verefied: That the Oldeage which defendeth it ſelfe onelye wyth talke, is miſerable.
                  
                  It is not the graye hayres, nor the wrinckled face, that ſtraightwayes can bring Authoritie & Eſtimation: but a former lyfe vertuouſlye and honeſtlye ſpent, yeldeth the fruicts of Authoritye in the ende. For theſe thinges whiche

ſeeme light and of ſmall accoumpt, are (in deede) very honorable: to be ſaluted, to be deſired into companye, to haue the wall geeuen, to bee reuerented and ryſen vp vnto, to bee wayted on, home & from home, and to bee ſoughte vnto for counſayle: which thinges both among vs, and in all other wel gouerned & nurtured Cities alſo, are moſte diligentlye obſerued.
                  The report goeth, that Lyſander (of The beſt dvvelling for Olde age vvas at Lacedemon. whom I ere while made mention) was wont to ſay, that, The honeſteſt Lodging & honorableſt Manſion for Old age to dwell in, was in Lacedęmonia. For in no place els in the worlde, is ſo much reuerēce ſhewed to Age as there: in no place is Oldeage more honourable.
                  It is alſo left in written Hiſtories, yt 
                     Great reuerence among the Heathen shevved to Old age. a certayne Elderly man comming into the Theatre at Athens to ſee a Playe, had no rowme at al allowed vnto him, to ſit in, among his Coūtrymen in that great aſſembly: who afterwardes cō
                     minge to the Lacedemonians (whych

were there at yt tyme Ambaſſadours, and in reſpect thereof had a place accordingly appointed them where to ſitte) it is ſayd yt they all aroſe, and receiued the Oldman to ſitte among them.
                  Whereat when as all the whole aſſemblye for ioye, a greate while together clapped their handes, it is reported that one of the Ambaſſadoures ſpake theſe wordes * The Athenians knowe what is honeſt, but to doe the ſame, they wyl 
                     Too manye of the ſame ſtāp novv a dayes. 
                     not.
                  
                  Many excellent good orders haue we in our Colledge: but namely this, that as euerye one is in Senioritye and Elderſhippe of Age, ſo hath he a prerogatiue to vtter his mynde firſte. For the Aunciente and Aged Augurs are preferred and eſteemed, not onelye before them which bee in higher Office then they: but beefore theym alſo, which beare the chiefeſte Swaye, Aucthoritye, and Office, in the Weale Publique.
                  What Bodilye Pleaſures are there comparable to the rewardes and aduaunce

mentes of Aucthoritye? Wherein who ſo euer haue honourablye behaued theymſelues, they in myne Opinion haue notablye well played the Pageaunt of their Age: and not like bungling Stagiers, in the laſt Acte of al, to haue fumbled and geeuen it ouer in the playne fielde.
                  But many Oldmen bee wayward, Obiectiō
                      carefull, teſtye and ill to pleaſe: and if wee throughlye ſiſte the matter, couetous Faults of maners & not of age and nygardlye alſo. But theſe are the faults of Maners, & not of Oldage.
                  But yet this way wardneſſe, and the other faultes before rehearſed, haue ſome colour of excuſe, which althoughe not iuſt & rightful, yet ſuch as ſeemeth may bee allowed of.
                  They thincke themſelues to be contemned, deſpyſed, flouted and mocked: and furthermore in that frayle bodye of theirs, euery ſmall Offence is odious & captiouſly taken. Al which (notwithſtanding) throughe good maners & diſciplines are qualified and ſweetened: which to bee true, maye bee perceyued

aſwell by the common courſe of Mans lyfe, as alſo by the two Brothers in the Comedie Adelphi. What churliſhnes Terence. & rude behauioure is there in the one? what gentleneſſe and curteſie in the other? The caſe ſtandeth euen ſo. For as euerye Wyne by Age is not ſowred into Vyneiger: ſo neither is euery Oldage crabbed and eluiſh.
                  Seueritie in Oldage I well allow, but Seueritye in meſure alovvable in Oldmē
                      yet (as I do of all other things) meaſurable: but ſpightfull bitterneſſe I can not in any wiſe broke nor away withal.
                  And as concerning Couetouſneſſe in Oldemen, I am nothinge acquainted Couetouſnes in oldmen. ther wt, nether vnderſtād I what it meaneth. For can there be any thing more abſurd, or more repugnaunt to reaſon, then the leſſe way that a mā hath to go, the more prouiſion and coſtage to make and purueighe?
                  THE fowerth cauſe whiche ſeemeth moſt of all to greeue & diſquiet our The iiii. diſpraiſe of Oldage ſurmyſed by thē
                      Age, remayneth yet behinde to bee diſcuſſed: & yt is, the neereneſſe of Death: which (certes) cannot be farre of from

Oldage. O miſerable old Caytife, which vvhiche ſaye it is miſerable becauſe it is nere vnto Death in ſo longe a tyme as he hath lyued, hath not perceiued and learned that Death is to bee contemned: which eyther is vtterly to bee deſpiſed, if it altogether kill and extinguiſh the Mynd or Death not to be feared: & the reaſōs vvhy Soule: or els is greatly to be deſired, if it conducte and carye the ſame to ſome place, where it ſhalbe eternal. For (certes) there can no * third be found.
                  Therefore what ſhould I feare, if after For eyther the Soule lyueth or els dyeth death I ſhall bee eyther not miſerable, or els bleſſed? howbeit who is ſo fooliſhe, to a warrant himſelfe (althoughe he were neuer ſo younge) that hee ſhall lyue till the next Eueninge?
                  Furthermore that ſame Age is ſubiect to a great maigny mo caſualties of Yongmē more ſubiect to ſickneſſe thē Oldmen Death then oure Age is. Youngemen ſooner fall into Sickneſſe: they are ſorer ſicke, and are hardlyer recured: & therfore few lyue tyll they come to Oldage: which if it were not ſo, wee ſhould lyue together a greate deale better and wiſelyer. For Diſcretion, Reaſon, and wiſe Aduice reſteth in Oldmen:

and therfore if there were no Oldmen, Cōmon vvealthes & Cities gouerned and mainteined by Oldmen. there would bee no Citties at all. But now come I again to talk of imminent Death.
                  What faulte of Oldeage is this, ſithens you ſee yt ſame alſo cōmō to Yoūg age? I my ſelfe by proofe haue felt, aſwel in that worthye man my Sonne, as alſo in thy Brothers (Scipio) of whom great hope was generally conceiued to haue ſeene them aduaunced to moſt honourable Death ſpareth no Age. Dignities, that Death is alyke common to all Ages.
                  But a Youngeman hopeth to lyue a great whyle: which an Oldman maye Obiectiō
                      not looke to do. Hee (truly hopeth fooliſhly. For what foliſher thing is there, Anſvvere then to accoumpte thinges vncertayne for certayne, and thinges falſe for true?
                  An Oldeman hath nothinge to hope for. But hee is therefore in farre better Obiectiō
                      caſe then a Youngeman: becauſe Anſvvere hee hath alreadye enioyed and obteyned that, which the Yongmanne doth Old men haue already enioyed that but hope for. The one deſireth to lyue longe: the other hath alreadye lyued

long. Howbeit (O Lorde) what is vvhich younge men doe but hope for. there in Mans lyfe, long, or of any laſttynge continuaunce?
                  For admitte and graunt, that wee lyue euen tyll the vttermoſte of oure Age. Let vs hope to lyue as longe as euer Argantonius liued 120. yeres did the Kynge of the Tarteſsians. For there was (as I fynde in Hyſtories) one Argantonius Prince of the Iſles called Gades, who reigned Foureſcore yeeres, and lyued an hundred and twē
                     tye.
                  But to mee, there ſeemeth nothinge longe. wherein is anye Extreeme, or Ende. For when that Ende is once come, then is yt which is paſſed, quight gone: and nothing remayneth but only that, which a man hath by his Vertues and good deedes atchieued.
                  Houres paſſe awaye apace, and ſo do Dayes, Monethes, and Yeeres: neyther doeth the tyme once paſſed euer retourne: neither can yt, which is to come, Time paſſeth bee preciſelye knowen.
                  Therfore, euerye one ought to bee contēted with that time, which is graunted

him to lyue. For neyther needeth a Stageplayer, neceſſarily to play out ye Enterlude, tyl the very laſt end therof, We muſt haue a greater care to lyue vvell then to lyue long to bee cōmended therfore: but in what Act ſoeuer of the ſame he be, he muſt ſo hādle his part, that he may be prayſed: neither ſhould a Wiſeman lyue till the Plaudite bee ſtricken vp.
                  For a ſhort tyme of Age is longe ynough to lyue well and honeſtlye. But if you continue yet longer, you muſte no more be diſcontented thereat, then Huſbandmen be, after the pleaſauntneſſe of the Spring ſeaſon once paſſed, to haue Spring Sommer & Autumne to ſucceede. The Spring doth ſignifie and repreſent (as it were) Adoleſcencye, & ſheweth what Fruicts are lyke to enſue. All the other times and ſeaſons, ſerue to mow & gather in, the fruicts.
                  Now, the fruit of Oldage is (as before I haue often ſayde) the remēbrance and ſtoare of Goods, before tyme gotten. And al thinges which are done according Fruicts of Oldage. to the courſe of nature, are to be reckned in the number of good things.

And what is ſo agreable to Nature, as for Oldmen to dye? which thinge hapneth vnto Youngemen, euen Maugre Natures Goodwill.
                  Therfore Youngmen ſeeme vnto me ſo to dye, as when a raging flame of fyer Yongmē haue greater payne in dyinge then Oldmen. is with the great quantitye of water quēched. And Oldmē deceaſſe, euē like as Fyer, when it is all ſpent, is extinguiſhed of it owne accorde, withoute vſinge any force thereto. And as Apples when they bee greene and vnrype, are plucked from the Tree with violence: but being rype and mellowe, they fall downe from the Tree: euen ſo, violent force and painfull ſtrugglinge, taketh awaye lyfe from Youngmen: but from Oldmen, a rypeneſſe and maturity.
                  Which is to mee ſo pleaſaunt and comfortable, that the neerer I drawe to Death, the ſooner mee thinckes I doe (as it were) ſee yt land, & ſhall at length after a long Nauigation, arriue at the Hauen.
                  Of al other Ages, the certein terme is appointed how long ech laſteth: but of

Oldage there is no certeine terme limited: Oldage hath no certen nū
                        ber of yeres a pointed hovv long to laſt. and in it doth a man lyue well and laudablye, ſo longe as hee is able to execute and diſcharge his dutie and Function: and yet to contemne Death.
                  Whereupon it hapneth that Oldage is endued with greater Courage and animoſitie, then Adoleſcency and Youth is. Oldage ſtout and ful of courage. And this is it that was aunſwered by Solon, vnto Piſiſtratus the Tyraunte, demaundinge of him, vppon what hope Solons anſvvere to Piſiſtr atus the Tyraunt. and confidence, he durſte bee ſo bolde & preſumptuous, ſo deſperatelye to wythſtand and diſobey his proceedinges? Euen vpon the hope (quoth he) of mine Oldage.
                  
                  But the beſt Ende of lyuing is this: when as (the mynde beinge whole and perfect, and all the wyttes and Senſes ſounde & vnappayred) yt ſame Nature wt compacted and framed the worke together, doth lykewiſe diſſolue and lewſe the ſame. For as the Ship wright which made the Shippe, beſt knoweth how to vndoe and pull aſunder the ſame agayne: and as none can better vnioynte

down a houſe, then the Carpenter that framed it: euen ſo, Nature which ioyned and faſhioned together the Bodye, doth beſt diſſolue and end the ſame.
                  For euery Conglutinacion or glewinge, when it is new glewed together is hardlye pulled aſunder, but being olde and forworne, is eaſelye diſſeuered.
                  Thus, it commeth to paſſe, that this It is a vvicked thing for a man to murther or kil himſelfe. ſmall remnaunt of lyfe, is neyther gredilye to bee deſired of Oldmen, nor wt
                     out cauſe to be left and forſaken. And Pythagoras chargeth vs, not to depart out of the Garriſon, and Wardhouſe of this lyfe, without the commaundemēt of our high General, which is God.
                  There is a notable ſaying of ye Wiſeman Solon, wherein he proteſteth, that he would not haue his Death to bee vnbewayled, and vnlamented of his Frendes. Solon vvished to haue his death bevvailed. His meaninge (I thincke) is, that he would bee entierly deare vnto his Frendes. But I know not, whether Ennius hath a greate deale better thereof iudged:
                  
                     
                     Let no man at my death lament,
                     Nor weepe when I am laid in Graue: Ennius.
                     
                     For why? in lyfe aye permanent,
                     I ſure am laſtinge Fame to haue.
                  
                  Such death in his opinion, is not to be lamented and bewayled, which is Death not to bee bevvailed. exchaunged for Immortality. Now, as touchinge the Griefe or Agonies of dying (if there be any) certes, they endure but for a ſmall ſpace, eſpeciallye in an Oldman: and after Death the ſame Senſe is eyther ſuch as is bleſſed and optable, or els is it none at all. He that ſtil ſtandeth in feare of Death can neuer haue a quiet mynde.
                  
                  But Adoleſcencie ought to enure itſelfe in this Meditation, ſtill to diſpiſe Death: without which Meditation no man can haue a quiet mynde.
                  For ſurely dye we muſte, and vncertaine are wee whether euen this verye preſent daye. Therfore who is hee, Nothing more certaine then Death: Nothing more vncertaine then the houre of Deathe. which euery hower ſtanding in feare of Death, can haue his mynde in any reſte and tranquillitye? whereof there needeth no very long diſcourſe to be: ſith I well remember not onelye L. Brutus
                     
who in the quarell of his Country was ſlayne: the two Decij, who gallopinge Valiaunt knightes which dyed for the honor & ſafegarde of their countrye their horſes, voluntarily gaue themſelues to Death: M. Regulus, who willingly went and yelded himſelfe to puniſhment, becauſe hee woulde not forſwere himſelfe, but keepe touch & promiſe euen with his very Enemies: the two Scipioes, which ſtopped the paſſage and way of the * Carthaginians, 
                     Vnder the cōduct of Ha
                           •
                        druball. Terentius Varro. euen wt their owne bodyes: thy Graūdfather L. Paulus, who through the raſhneſſe of his * Copertner and fellowe in Office, was in that ignominious & diſhonorable ouerthrow at Cannas, ſlayne and manquelled: M. Marcellus whoſe dead Corps, his moſt cruell * Enemye ſuffered not to lacke honorable interrement: Hannibal but alſo how oure Legions and Not vvorthye and honorable Gentlemē only, but cō
                        mon ſouldiers & inferior perſons haue deſpiſed Death. common Souldiers haue couragiouſly and ſtoutlye aduentured manye tymes into ſuch places whence they neuer thought againe to returne alyue: as in my Boke of Originalles, I haue declared. Shall therfore Oldmen whych hee learned and ſkilfull feare that thing

whych young Striplinges, and the fame not onelye vnlearned but rude and ruſticall alſo, do contemne and ſette at naughte?
                  But a ſacietie of all thinges (in mine opinion) cauſeth a ſacietie of lyfe.
                  There be ſome delightes peculier to Childhood: Shal tall Striplinges & Youngmen addict themſelues thereunto Euery age hath his peculier delite and ſtudye. ſemblablye? There bee alſo ſome, appropriat vnto youthful Adoleſcency: Shall rype and conſiſtent Age (whyche is tearmed the Middle Age of man) deſire the ſame? And there bee of this ſame middle Age, ſome Studies, which Oldage careth not for: And there bee ſome, laſt of all, peculier to Oldage.
                  Therfore as the delightes of theſe former Ages do decay and come to an end, ſo do theſe of Oldage dye, and vaniſh awaye alſo. Which when it happeneth then doth ſacietye of lyfe, bringe a rype and conuenable tyme to dye.
                  For trulye I ſee no cauſe to the contrarye, but that I dare bee bolde to declare vnto you, al that I thincke & iudge

of Death: namely for that I ſeeme the deeper to ſee into it, becauſe I now approach & drawe ſomwhat neere vnto it.
                  And verelye (OP. Scipio & C. Laelie) 
                     A true lyfe. I do beleeue that, your noble Fathers, which were Gentlemen both right honourable, and my moſt deare Frendes, are yet ſtill alyue, and doe lyue ſuch a lyfe, as (in deede) is alone to be accoūpted Lyfe.
                  For ſo long as wee are encloſed with in the Priſon or frame of our bodyes we muſt needes diſcharge ſome actions euē 
                     The Body is the priſon or Iayle of the Soule of neceſſitie, and are dryuen to doe ſome ſuch Functiōs as are vnauoydable. For the mynd or Soule being heauenly, and inſpired into Mā from aboue, is depreſſed, & as it were forcibly throwen down to ye Earth: being a place to Diuine nature, & Eternitie quight contrary.
                  But I thincke that the Immortall Goddes inſpired Myndes into Humane Why the mind vvas inſpired into man. Bodies, to the ende there ſhould bee ſome, to inhabite the Earth: who beholdynge the Order of the Bodyes

Celeſtial, ſhould imitate the ſame in the courſe of their lyues and in Conſtancy.
                  And not onely reaſon and diſputatiō enforceth me ſo to beleeue, but the nobleneſſe alſo and Authoritye of renowmed Philoſophers.
                  For I haue beene in place where I haue heard yt 
                     Pythagoras and his Scholers Pythagoras. the Pythagorians, being dwellers here, & almoſt endenizoned among vs, (for they were once termed Italiā Philoſophers) neuer made any doubt in the matter, but that we had our myndes or Soules, tipped, and deriued from the very vniuerſall diuinitye of God.
                  There were moreouer ſhewed vnto mee, thoſe pointes, which Socrates (euen hee which by the Oracle of Apollo was adiudged the Wiſeſt man in the worlde) diſputed and ſpake the laſt day of his lyfe, concerning the Immortalirye of the Soule.
                  What needeth many wordes? I am thus perſwaded, and thus do I thinke, Immortalitye of the ſoule ſith there is ſo greate celeritye of mens Myndes, ſo good remēbrance of things

paſſed, ſo great inſighte and forecaſte of thinges to come, ſo many Artes, ſo manye Sciences, and ſo many inuentions, that the Nature which vnderſtandeth & conteyneth the knowledge of al theſe thinges cannot bee mortall. And ſith ye mynde is euer mouinge and hath no beginninge of motion (becauſe it moueth itſelfe) ſo ſhall it neuer haue anye ende of motion, becauſe it ſhall neuer leaue nor depart from itſelfe.
                  And ſith ye Nature of the mynd is ſimple, and hath nothinge annexed wyth it whiche is vnlike or diſcrepante from itſelfe, that therefore it is indiuiſible: & forſomuche as it is indiuiſible, therefore can it neuer dye. And that this ſerueth for a greate Argument to proue yt men know ſundry thinges, before they be borne, becauſe young Children, learning hard Artes, do ſo quickly conceiue and apprehend the knowledge of innumerable Plato his Reaſons to proue the immortality of the Soule thinges, in ſuch ſorte, that they ſeeme not then firſt to learne them, but to renew them freſh againe, into memory. Al theſe in a manner bee Plato hys

reaſons.
                  In Xenophō
                      alſo we read, yt 
                     Cyrus the Elder lyinge on his death Bedde, Lib. 8. de Cyri paedia ſpake theſe woordes: Do not thincke my deare chyldren, yt when I am gone frō you, I ſhalbe no where, or broughte to nothing. For in all the whyle that I haue beene with you, you did neuer ſee my Mynd: but yet by thoſe noble Acts which I haue atchieued, you did well ynough vnderſtand, that in this Bodye of myne, there was a Mynde.
                  Beleeue therefore that I haue the ſelfe ſame Minde ſtil, although viſiblie with youre eyes you ſee it not. Neither would the honourable memorialles of noble Perſonages remayne after their Deathes, if their worthy mynds ſhould atchieue no ſuch notable enterpriſe, for the which we ſhould the lōger celebrate the memorye of theym, when they bee dead and gone.
                  Trulye it woulde neuer ſinke in my brayn, yt mens Mindes or Soules, only lyued whyle they remayned in mortall Bodies, and that beinge departed oute

of them, they vtterly dyed. Neither that the mynde is Doltiſh and fooliſh, when it is ſet at libertye, and departed out of a fooliſhe Bodye: but when it beinge clerely rid, from all admixtion of ye Bodye, beginneth once to bee pure & ſound, then is it wiſe. And when Mans Nature is by Death diſſolued, it is apparaunt and plaine ynough, whither euerye one of the other partes do goe. For All thingesreturn to that vvherof they had their firſt begining all thinges returne to that, frō whence at the firſt they had their beginning: but yt Mynd only, neuer viſibly appeareth, neither whē it is in ye body, neither whē it goeth & departeth oute of the Body. Now, you ſee yt nothing is ſo like vnto Death, as Sleepe. And yet the Mindes of them that are a ſleepe, do notably declare their Diuinitie. For when they be quiet & free, they forſee many things to come. Wherby it is to be vnderſtanded how & after what ſort they ſhalbe, when Sleepe an Image of Death. they bee clerelye diſmiſſed out of ye Priſon of ye Body. Wherfore if theſe thinges bee true, then reuerence & honour mee as a God.
                  But if the Soule or Mynde doe dye

together with the bodye, yet you dreading the Gods, who maintein and gouerne al the beautiful furniture of this world, ſhall godlye and inuiolablye ſolemnize the memoriall of mee. Theſe wordes ſpake Cyrus, lyinge vppon his Death bedde. Now if you thincke it good, let vs ſuruewe and conſider oure owne.
                  No man (Scipio) ſhal euer perſwade me, yt eyther thy* Father Paulus, or thy Paulus Aemilius. Pub. Scipio. C. Scipio two Graundfathers Paulꝰ & Aphricanus, or the * Father of the ſame Aphricanus, or * his Vncle, or many other excellent men, which here neede not to be rehearſed, would euer haue enterpriſed ſuch worthy aduentures and attemptes (onlye to leaue a paterne & memoryall therof to their poſterity) if they had not wt the eyes of their mynds perceiued & ſeene that their Poſterity and Sequele might apperteine vnto them. Do you think yt I (for I alſo muſt ſomwhat boaſt & brag of my ſelfe as Oldmēs guiſe Noble mindes deſire to leaue a re
                      is to doe) would euer haue vndertaken ſo manye painful labours, day & night,

both in time of Peace & alſo of Warre if I had thought yt my glorious renowme ſhould extend no further then ye boū
                     des of my natural lyfe? For if it ſhould be ſo, were it not then much better for a mā to lead an eaſie & quiet lyfe, without entermedling in any labour or contentious dealing of the world?
                  But the Mynd (I wot not how) rayſinge vp and erectinge itſelfe, had euer ſuch a carefull reſpect to Poſteritye, as though when it were departed out of this lyfe, it ſhould then, and neuer tyll then, lyue & flouriſh. For if it were not ſo, ye Soules were immortal, the mynd of euerye good & Vertuous man, would not ſo earneſtly aſpire to immortal Glorye. Further more euery wiſeman doth right willingly and contentedly dye: cō
                     trarywiſe, The God lye deſire Death but the vvicked feare it. euery Foole, moſt vnwilling lye. Doe you not thincke yt the Mynd which ſeeth more and further of, doeth well percciue and knowe, that it goeth to a farre better ſtate? Agayn, that hee whoſe inſight is dymmer & duller, doth neither ſee nor conſider ſo much?
                  
                     
But verelye I haue a great deſire to ſee youre Fathers, whom I both reuerenced and loued. And not them onelye am I ſo earneſtlye affected to ſee, whom I myſelfe earſt haue knowen: but them alſo, of whom I haue both heard, read, & alſo haue myſelfe written.
                  Frō which my Iourney thitherward, no man ſhall (by my good wyll) bringe me backe, neyther rebound and rebutt me backward, as it were a Teniſe Bal: This place is tranſlated accordinge to ij ſundrye Latine Textes. yea although hee woulde vndertake to perboyle my old Bloud and renew my youth agayn as Pelias was.
                  Certes, if God would graunt to me beinge now in this Age to bee a Childe again, and as younge as a Babe yt lyeth cryinge in his Cradle, I woulde wyth all my hart, refuſe the offer. Neither would I willingly (when I haue as it were runne the whole race) to bee plucked backe frō the Gole or Endmarkes, to the Liſtes or place of firſt ſetting out.
                  For what Commoditie hath thys lyfe? Naye rather what moylinge This life ful of trouble and labour. and laboure hath it not? But admitte,

it had ſome commoditie: yet doubtleſſe it hath either ſome full ſacietye, or ſome finall Ende.
                  For I meane not to bewayle and deplore my lyfe paſt, as manye and yt ſame A vvorthye and vertuous man is not borne in vaine. right learned, Clerks haue often times done. Neyther do I repent that I haue lyued: becauſe I haue ſo lyued and led my lyfe, that I maye iudge of myſelfe, that I haue not beene borne in vayne. This life is no dvvelling place of continual abode but as an Inne or lodgeinge for a tyme, And I depart out of this life as oute of an Inne, not as out of a dwelling houſe. For Nature hath lente vnto vs a place for to ſtay & abide in, for a tyme, and not to dwell in continuallye.
                  Oh noble and luckye Daye, when as I ſhall take my voyage towarde yt bleſſed Crewe, and companye of Happye Soules: & when as I ſhall departe out of this trouble ſome worlde, and cōmon Syncke of all miſchiefe. For I ſhal not onely goe to thoſe worthye men (of whō I ſpake before) but alſo to myne owne Sonne Cato, a man of ſuch Vertue, & goodneſſe, as none more, of ſuch pietie and ſynceritie, as none better: whoſe

Bodye was * Burned by me, whereas The fashion then among the Romains vvas to burne their dead Bodies. it had beene, more agreeable to Nature, that my Bodye ſhoulde rather haue bene burned and enterred by him. But his Mynde or Soule not clearlye forſakinge mee, but euer loooking back and expecting my comming, is aſſuredlye gone before into thoſe places, whyther he perceiued yt I alſo muſt come.
                  Whiche my happe and chaunce I haue ſeemed ſtoutlye to beare: not becauſe I did take it ſo patientlye in deede: but I euer comforted my ſelfe, thincking that our abſence and beeing aſunder, ſhould not continue long.
                  Theſe hee the very cauſes O Scipio, (for you told me ere while, that you and Laelie were wōt much to meruaile therat) which make mine Oldage vnto me eaſie, and to bee not onelye without all greeueunce but rather verye pleaſaunt and delectable.
                  And if I doe erre in this poinct, beecauſe I am of opinion that the Soules of men are immortal, verelye I am wel contēted, in the ſame errour ſtill to continue:

neither will I recant this error (wherein I am ſo ſingulerly delighted) ſo long as I lyue. And if the caſe were ſo, yt when I am dead I ſhould feele nothinge (as certeine petite Philoſophers hold opinion) I feare not a whit, leaſt thoſe Philoſophers being dead, ſhould flout and deride this mine error.
                  Nay, admitte, that we ſhould not be immortal: yet is it good and optable for a man, in his conuenient tyme to dye. For Nature, as ſhe hath of all other thinges, ſo alſo hath ſhe her limitatiō & ende of lyuing. Nowe, Oldage is the finall ende or laſte parte of Age, much like vnto ye Concluſion or laſt knitting vp of an Enterlude: the wearyſomneſſe whereof, we ought to eſchue, ſpeciallie when we are, euen cloyed with ſaciety.
                  Thus muche haue I had to ſaye touching Oldage: wherunto (I pray God) that you may arryue: that thoſe things which you haue heard of me by month, you may by deede and trial find true accordingly.
               
            
            
               Thomas Newton.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            Sixe ſeuerall Themes of Stoicall Philoſophie, written by M. T. Cicero, vnto Marcus Brutus: and Entituled Paradoxe.
            
            
               The Preface.
               
                  
                     SVNDRIE times (freende Brutus) haue I marked thine vncle Cato, that whenſoeuer hee vttered his minde in ye Senate, he entreated of waighty matters taken out of Philoſophie, much dyffering from the Iudicial and publique vſe, which we vſe in our cō
                     mō Pleading. But yet not with ſtā
                     ding,
                  
                  he preuayled ſo much by Oratorious perſwaſion, that his wordes ſeemed vnto the people probable and allowable. VVhich was a thing farre harder and buſier for him to cōpaſſe, then it is either for thee, or for mee: becauſe wee are better enured and more vſe that kinde of Philoſophie, which bryngeth copie of Eloquence, & wherin thoſe thinges are declared, which doe not greatlye diſagree from the mindes of the People.
               
               
                  But CATO being (in myne Opinion) a perfecte Stoicke, doeth both thincke thoſe thinges whych of the Vulgare People are not greatelye allowed: and is alſo of that Secte, which ſeeketh no
                  
                  braue gallantiſe of Speache, nor Flowers of Eloquence, neither dilateth their Argumentes: but with little briefe Queſtions, and (as it were ſhort points) bringeth to paſse that thinge which hee purpoſed.
               
               
                  But there is nothinge ſo incredible, but by artificiall handelynge maye bee made probable: nothinge ſo rugged and rustye, but by Eloquence maye bee poolyſhed 
                  What learning and Eloquēce is able to doe. 
                  (and as it were glitteringly burniſhed.
               
               
                  VVhich thynge when I with my ſelfe conſidered, I aduentured ſomewhat further, and wente boldelyer to worke then hee, of whom I now ſpeake.
               
               
                  
                  For Cato his wont is, after the Stoickes guiſe, onelye to reaſon of Magnanimitie, of Continencie, of Death, of the whole praiſe of Vertue, of the immortall Gods, of the Loue that a man oughte to beare to his Countrye, without vſing anye colours or ornaments of Rhetorique.
               
               
                  But I, as it were in ſportinge ſort, haue cōpriſed and brought in to Common Places thoſe thinges which the Stoicks do ſcarcely permitt and allow in their Scholes of Exerciſe and priuate Studies.
               
               
                  VVhich poinctes becauſe they bee merueilous, and contrary to the opinion of all men, are alſo by them called* Paradoxa: and thereupon 
                  Paradoxa ſignifieth
                  
                  was I deſirous to aſsaye, whether they might bee publiſhed and 
                  Sentēces contrarye to the cō
                     mon opynion of moſt men 
                  brought into the Light, that is to ſay, into the Forum or place of Iudiciall Pleas: and ſo to be handeled, that they mighte bee allowed and liked: or whether I might vſe a learned kinde of Reaſoninge, proper to the ſkilful ſort, or els an other vulgare, after the capacity of the Common People.
               
               
                  And the willinger was I to write theſe things, becauſe theſe Concluſions and Pointes, which are called Paradoxa, do ſpecially ſeme in mine opinion, to bee Socratical, & moſt true.
               
               
                  Thou ſhalt therfore. receiue at my hands, this ſmal piece of worke
                  
                  by mee compiled by Candle lighte theſe ſhort nightes: becauſe that ſame * other VVorcke of myne, of 
                  Tuſculane Queſtions 
                  greater peines and studie, was publiſhed and wente abroade in thy name.
               
               
                  And herein ſhalt thou haue a taste of thoſe kinds of Exerciſes, which I customably vſe, when ſoeuer I tranſpoſe and bringe thoſe Poſitiue Groundes and Argumentes, which in Scholes be tearmed Thetica, vnto this our Rhetoricall kinde of Pleading and Oratorie.
               
               
                  Howbeit, I do not deſire that thou ſhouldeſte publiſhe abroade this piece of worcke: (for it is not of any ſuch excellencie, that it deſerueth
                  
                  to be ſet on ſome high Pinnacle in the Castle, as that notable Image of Minerua was, which Phidias made: but yet, that it may appeare, that it came out of the ſame ſhoppe, whence that other did: and that the Authour of the one, was Authour alſo of the other.
               
            
            
               
               
                  The firſte Paradoxe, wherein is proued, that nothing is good, but only that, which is honeſt.
               
               
                  I Feare, ſome of you wyll deeme, that this my Diſcourſe is not deuiſed and inuented by mee of mine owne Brayne, but borowed and fetched out of the Diſputations of the Stoickes.
               
               Yet neuertheleſſe I will francklye ſaye, what I thincke, and that in fewer wordes, then ſo great a thinge can well be declared.
               Trulye I neuer iudged nor thought, yt theſe mens Money, Sūptuous Buildings, Wealth, Dominions & Bodilie Pleaſures (wherein fooliſh Worldlinges ſett their chiefe delight) were worthy to be reckned in yt nūber of ſuch thinges, as are good and expetible. For I do ſee, that although they haue great plentie Mony, Riches, and ſuch like, are not to and foiſon of ſuch tranſitorie things,

yet they bee euer coueting and hunting after more, lackinge euen theſe thinges bee reckened in the number of Good thinges. wherin they do aboūd: for neuer is their greedy thirſt of couetouſnes ſtēched: neither are they only afflicted with an inwarde luſt and deſire to encreaſe & augmente that Subſtaunce which they alreadye poſſeſſe, but alſo with a Dreade and feare of looſynge the ſame.
               And in this point, I oftentimes find alacke of diſcretion, in our Aunceſtors, men of vertuous and continente lyfe: who by the bare and only name, demed and called this vncertaine Pelfe, and tranſitorie chaffer (which is commutable betwene man and man: by the name of Good things whereas in very deede. and in their dealings, they thought far otherwiſe.
               Can a thing that is ſimplie good, be in an euill man? Or can anye man, hauing great ſtoare of good thinges, be other then a good man? But all theſe wee ſee to bee ſuch, that both naughty men maye poſſeſſe them, and good men by them, may bee hurte and damnified.

Therfore let him ye luſt, mocke me and ſpare not: yet ſhall truth and ſound reaſon with mee bee euer preferred before the raſh iudgementes of the multitude. Neither wyll I ſay, that any man hath loſte his Good things, when hee hath loſt his Cattal or Houſhold ſtuffe. Neither can I choſe, but oftētimes to praiſe and greatly cōmend the wiſeman Bias, who (as I thincke) was reckened and accoumpted one the ſeuen wiſe Sages of Greece. For when his Cittie Priene was by the Enemie taken and ranſacked, all the Inhabitauntes ſhiftinge for themſelues, & carying with them much of theire Goodes & Stuffe, he alſo was aduiſed and counſayled by one of hys Freendes to doe ſemblably: I do (quoth hee) euen aſwel as they. For I carye awaye 
                  Bias his vviſe aunſvvere. 
                  with mee, all ſuch Goods & Poſſeſsions, as are mine. This mā thought not that the worldly Pelfe and tranſitorie Goodes, which are ſubiecte to variable chaunce & hazard of blynd dalyinge Fortune, were any of his: which (notwt
                  ſtanding) we doe call and terme Good.
               
                  
What is Good then (wil ſome ſay?) If whatſoeuer is don rightly, honeſtly, and according to Vertue, bee ſaid to bee done well and laudablye: then it foloweth, that whatſoeuer is righte, honeſt & accordinge to vertue, is (as I thincke) onlye Good.
               But theſe thinges maye ſeeme to bee ſomwhat obſcure, & not able to bee vnderſtoode of euery weake capacitie, foraſmuch as they are but coldelye and ſuperficially diſputed without any examples: theſe therfore muſt bee illuſtrated and beautified, with the lyues and worthy acts of noble Perſonages, ſith they ſeeme to bee diſputed more ſubtillye wt wordes, then is thought ſufficient.
               For I demaund of you, whether you thincke that thoſe noble and excellente men, which were the firſt founders of our Common wealth, & ſo left the ſame vnto vs, did ſeeme to haue anye care or mynde vpon the greedie and inſaciable The vvorlde is novv chaū
                     ged from that it vvas then deſire of Gold and Syluer, which tended only to auarice? or vpon pleaſures, leruing onely to concent the phantaſie:

or vppon newe fangled trickes of houſehold ſtuffe, being inſtruments of nycenes? or vpon ſumptuous fare and bellie Couetouſnes in old time abhorred. cheare, being the miniſters & occaſions of voluptuouſnes?
               Set before your eyes euery one of the Kings: wil you that I ſhall beginne wt 
                  Romulus? Or els wt thoſe valiaūt Gē
                  tlemen which deliuered our City from miſerable thraldome and ſlauery? By Romulus for his valiauncie & Vertue made a God. what degrees (I pray you) did Romulus aſcend into heauen & become Deified? by ſuch vayne Pleaſures as theſe groſſe Beetleheades call Good? or els by hys valiaunt actes and worthy Vertues?
               What ſay wee to Numa Pompilius? doe wee not thincke yt the Goddes were Numa Pō
                     pilius. aſwell pleaſed with his homely * Cruſes and earthen Pitchers, as wt the rich Wherein he offered Sacrifice. Goblets, & delicate Cuppes of others?
               I omit the reſt: for they were al egal one with an other, excepte Tarquinius Superbus.
               
               But if a man ſhould aſke Brutus, what hee did, or whereabout he went, whē he reſtored his Countrye to libertie: if a man ſhould aſke the reſt of his Felowes and Cōfederates, what marke they ſhot

at, and whereunto they had reſpect in thenterpriſing therof: can it be thought that anye of thē did it for Pleaſure ſake, or for Ryches, or for any other purpoſe, otherwiſe thē became men of approued Fortitude & Magnanimitie?
               What thing animated Quintꝰ Mutius 
                  Mutius Scęuola, priuily cō
                     ueighing himſelfe into Porſenna his campe, and mynding to haue ſlain the kinge miſſed him and killed an other in his ſted to hazard his lyfe without al hope euer to eſcape, in geeuinge the attempt to haue ſlayne King Porſenna?
               
               What valiaunce cauſed Horatius Cocles alone to defend the Bridge againſt all the armed rout of his Enemies?
               What inuincible Courage made Deciꝰ the father, & Decius the Sonne, volūtarily to bow & obiect thēſelues to death, by preaſing into the middle of their enemies hoſtes? What pretended the cōtinēcy of C. Fabritiꝰ? What ment ye homlye fare & ſlender theere of M. Curiꝰ?
               
               What ſay we to our ii. ſure & inuincible Buttreſſes at ye 
                  Carthaginian warres, C. & P. Scipio? who ſticked not euen wc their own bodies to ſtop ye paſſage of the Scipio. armie, yt came to ayde & ſuccour ye 
                  Carthaginians? What ſought the younger Aphricanus? what deſired the Elder?

What coueted Cato, who lyued betwen theſe two mens times? and innumerable Cato. others? For wee haue ſtore ynough of Domeſticall examples.
               Doe wee thincke that anye of theſe were euer in that opinion, to deſire or ſeeke for anye thing in their lyfe, but onlye that which they ſuppoſed & deemed to bee good, vertuous, and laudable?
               Therfore let all ſuch as mocke & deryde this opinion ſtep foorth and ſhewe theyr faces: let them euen themſelues Vertue much more to bee deſired then all pelfe or vvorldlye Riches. iudge, whether they had leifer be lyke to ſome of theſe ryche & fatte Chuffes, which haue ſtore of gorgeous houſes & Buildinges, garniſhed with the fineſt Marble ſtones, burniſhed and beſet wt Yuorye and Golde, beautified and adorned with Pictures, Cables, Plentie One vertuous mā more to be accoū
                     ted of and eſteemed then manye ryche and vveal thy Cobs that are euill. of Gold and ſiluer Plate, curiouſly chaſed and engrauen, and other precious, & artificiall Corynthian worckes: or ells bee like to C. Fabritius, who neuer had neither would euer haue any of al theſe?
               And theſe men commonlye are perſwaded to confeſſe, that theſe vncertain

Goods, which are poſted and turmoyled ouer from one man to an other, are not worthye to bee reckened amonge thoſe thinges, that are Good.
               But yet this poincte they doe ſtiflye maintein and earneſtly defend, yt Pleaſure is the greateſt Goodnes, & chiefeſt Senſualitie & pleſure. Felicitie. Which ſaying in mine opiniō ſeemeth rather to proceede oute of the mouthes of brute Beaſts, then of Men
               Wilt thou therfore ſo much abaſe & That is not to be reckened good vvhich bettereth not him in vvhom it reſteth. caſt away thy ſelfe, ſeeing that God or Nature (being the common Mother of all thinges) hath geuen to the a Mynd, (then which, there is nothinge more excellente and diuine) that thou ſhouldeſt thincke no difference to bee betweene thee, and a dumbe Beaſt? Is any thing Moſt praiſe due to moſt Vertue. Good, that doth not make him that poſſeſſeth it to bee better? For as cuerye man is moſt endued and garniſhed with Vertue, ſo is hee worthye of moſt prayſe. A man maye honeſtly reioyſe and glorye in himſelfe for good thinges. And there is no good thing, but hee that is therewith decorated, maye honeſtly reioyſe & glorye in himſelfe for it.
               But is any of all theſe in Pleaſure?
               
                  
Doth it make a man eyther better or more praiſable? Is there any ſo ſhameleſſe to extoll his owne lewdneſſe, or to attribute any honeſt praiſe to himſelfe, for enſuinge Voluptuouſnes, & Senſuall No man of any honeſty vvyl make vaūt and take pride in his ovvne filthy and leud lyfe. Pleaſure? Seeing therfore yt Pleaſure (in defence wherof very manye doe ſtifly ſtand) is not to bee accoumpted among Good things: but rather yt more that it is vſed, the more it doth alienate & remoue the Mynd, frō the ſtate wherin it was before: certes, to lyue wel and happily is nothing els, but to lyue vprightly, and honeſtly.
            
            
               The Seconde Paradoxe declaring that in whomſoeuer Vertue is, in him there lacketh nothing els to the leading of an happy lyfe.
               
                  NEyther did I euer think Marcus Regulus to bee miſerable, vnhappy or wretched. For his Marcus Regulus. Magnanimitie, and bautye Courage, was not tormented of the

                  Carthaginians, neyther his Grauitie, neither his Faythfulneſſe, neyther hys conſtācie, neither any of his noble Vertues: neither finallye could his worthye Mynde which was garded and fortified with a garriſon of ſo many Vertues, & on euerye ſide enuironed and accompanied with ſuch ſinguler qualities, be vā
                  quiſhed or made Captiue, although his Bodye was taken Priſoner.
               As touching C. Marius, wee ſawe in Marius a noble paterne of conſtancy and patience him ſuch a rare paterne of noble Patience, that when hee was af
                     •
                  ote in hys higheſt Proſperitie, he ſeemed vnto me, one of the happieſt and fortunateſt men in ye world: & in aduerſity, one of the nobleſt and ſtouteſt hearted men that euer was: thē which, there can nothing happen vnto a mortall Man more Bleſſed or Fortunate. Pa
                        •
                     t
                        •••
                     
                     l
                        ••
                     lye in neighing againſt Antonius but generally al others of his diſpoſition.
               
               Thou little knoweſt thou fooliſh and brainſick man, thou litle knoweſt I ſay, what great power and efficacie Vertue hath: thou doeſt onlye vſurpe the bare name of Vertue, but thou knoweſt not the excellencie, & force of Vertue.
               
                  
That man cannot bee but moſte happye, whoſe Mynde is wholye ſetled and accuſtomed to Vertue, and which putteth and repoſeth all thinges in himſelfe alone.
               But he that putteth all his hope, cō
                  ſidence, He that leaneth altogether to biynde Fortune, and hap hazarde, hangeth in doubtfull ballaunce. reaſon, and cogitation in fickle Fortune, and altogether dependeth vpon vncertaine hazarde, can haue no certaintie of any thing, neither can hee aſſure himſelfe, that hee ſhall haue the fruition of any thing, not ſo much as yt ſpace of one daye.
               Terrifie and affray ſuch a one, if thou canſt catch any ſuch in thy daunger, wt 
                  Hee that is armed vvith vertue and a good conſcience feareth not the threates of the vvicked. thy threateninge menaces, eyther of Death, or ells of Baniſhment: but for my part, what chaunce ſoeuer betydeth mee, in ſo churliſh and ingrate Citye, I am fully reſolued patiently to ſuffer it, and not to refuſe it: much leſſe not to repugne or reſiſt it.
               For to what Ende haue I employed all my trauaile, to what effecte are all my deedes, or for what purpoſe ſerue al my former cares, and ſtudious cogitations,

if I haue not gotten ſome what therby, & learned in ſuch ſort to lead my Learning comforteth a mā
                     in al extremities, & armeth him againſt al aſſayes. lyfe, that neither the raſhneſſe of fickle Fortune, nor the enuious hartburning and iniurious hatred of mine Enemies, ſhould bee able once to cruſhe, or daſhe me out of countenaunce?
               Is it Death that thou doeſt threaten mee withall, by whoſe meanes I ſhall departe out of this miſerable world altogether from among Men: or ells it is Baniſhment, whereby I ſhalbe ryd out of the companye of Naughtie packes & Villaines?
               Death is terrible to thoſe, whoſe Death. life and cōuerſation hath bene ſuch, that when they dye, all other thinges dye, & take an Ende, with them alſo: but not to them, whoſe prayſe & renowme can neuer dye, nor be forgotten.
               As touching Baniſhment, it is terrible and dreadful to them which, thincke Banishement. themſelues to be circumſcribed and encloſed within a certaine limite & place of Dwelling: not vnto thē, which think and accoumpt the whole World as one

Citye.
               Thou arte ouerwhelmed in all miſeries, thou art plunged in Calamities, thou art enueigled & ledde in a Fooles Tormētes of a vvicked and guiltye Cōſciens. Paradiſe, thinckinge thy ſelfe to bee a man happye & in Fortunes good grace: thine owne libidinous Luſtes do vexe & trouble thee: thou art Night and Day tormented: thou neither thinckeſt that ſufficient and ynough, which thou preſētly poſſeſſeſt, & alſo thou ſtādeſt in cō
                  tinual feare, leaſt yt which thou haſt, wil not long continue with thee. The Conſciēce of thy wicked dedes pricketh the: thou ſtandeſt in feare of Seſſiōs, Iudgementes, and Lawes: which way ſoeuer thou glaūceſt thyne eye, thy wrongfull dealings, like helliſh furies, do occurre and reſorte into thy remēbraunce, and wyl not ſuffer thee to take any reſt.
               Wherfore, as a naughty, fooliſh and diſſolute perſon cannot be hapyye: ſo a A vertuous and vviſeman can neuer bee miſerable. good, wiſe, and valiaunt man cannot be miſerable. Neither can his life be other wiſe then good and prayſeable, whoſe Vertuous manners and honeſt conditions

are Godlye and commendable: neither furthermore is his lyfe to bee deteſted & eſchued, which deſerueth praiſe: which were vtterly to bee auoyded and fled, if it were wretched and miſerable. And therfore I conclude, that whatſoeuer is laudable, the ſame alſo oughte to ſeeme bleſſed, flouriſhinge and expetible.
            
            
               The Thirde Paradoxe, wherein according to the opinion of the Stoickes, hee proueth all faultes to bee equall.
               
                  THe thinge (will ſome man The Stoickes doe not conſider and reſpecte vvhat is done, but vvith vvhat minde and entent it is done ſaye) is ſmall and of lyttle value: But verily the Offence is great. For Offences, and faultes muſte bee waighed & conſidered, not by the euente of thinges, but by the vicious intent and naughtye diſpoſition of the Parties.
               One offence (I graunt) may be greater

or leſſe in value, then another is: but as touching the nature of the offences, and By negligence hee that drouneth a Shippe laden vvith Chaffe, is aſmuch to bee blamed in reſpect of his vnſkilfulneſſe, as though it vvere fraught vvith golde. reſpecting them ſimplie, which way ſoeuer thou ſhifteſt and turneſt thyſelfe, they are all one.
               A Pylote or chiefe Mariner whych negligently drowneth a Shyppe, whether the ſame be fraughted with Gold, or with Chaffe, is aſmuch to bee reprehended & diſallowed, for the one, as for the other. For, although there be ſome oddes and difference in the worth & value of the thinges, yet his Ignoraunce and vnſkilfulneſſe is all one.
               If a man through inordinate Luſt, do deſlour a woman that is vnknowen, and Adulterie and fornication cō
                     mitted vvith a pore mayden as heinous in itſelfe as vvith a Damſell of vvorshipful parentage of pore eſtate and Degree, the griefe of that villayny doth not (in deede) appertayne to ſo manye, as if hee had laſciuiouſly conſtuprated a noble Damoyſel, deſcended of ſome honorable Houſe, and Pedagrewe. But the offence was of itſelfe neuer a whit ye leſſe. For Sinne is nothing els, but a tranſgreſſing and paſſinge of the lymites & boundes of Vertue. Which when thou haſt once done,

the fault or treſpaſſe is committed: and it ſkilleth not howe farre thou runneſte forwarde in aggrauating or encreaſing the ſame tranſgreſſion wyth any more.
               Certainly, it is not lawfull for any man to ſinne.
               And whatſoeuer is vnlawfull to bee done, is in this one poinct conteyned: in challenging it not to be lawful: which can neyther be made more or leſſe: For if it be not lawful, it is Sinne: which is alwayes one, and the ſame: And therefore the Vices that ſpring and procede out of them, muſt needes bee equall.
               Alſo if Vertues bee equall one with another, Vices alſo muſt bee equall.
               But it may moſt plainly & eaſily be perceiued & vnderſtanded, yt Vertues are al equall one wt another: foraſmuch as there cānot be any mā better thē a good mā: nor any more tēperate, then he that is temperate: neither any ſtouter & valiaunter then hee that is ſtout and valiaunt: nor wiſer then he that is Wiſe.
               Wylte thou call him a Good man, y• whereas he might gayn clearlye and wt
                  
out daunger of Lawe, detaine to himſelfe Tenne poundes of Gold being cō
                  mitted to his keepinge and cuſtodye in ſecret, without any witneſſe, yet faythfullye and trulye redeliuereth the ſame to the owner thereof: wouldſt thou (I ſay) thincke him a good man, if he wold Aſmuch right in a peny, as in a poūd. not doe ſemblablye in Tenne thouſande poundes? Or woulde you repute and take him to be a temperate man, which can brydle his affections, from ſome one Luſts and affections muſt bee brideled not once but alvvaies. licencious Luſt, and letteth go the Reines of al diſordered outrage in another? Onely Vertue is agreeably with reaſō and perpetuall Cōſtancie. Nothing can be added therūto to make it to be more a Vertue: nothing can bee taken awaye Vertue a greeable vvith Reaſon & Cō
                     ſtancie. from it, but the name of Vertue ſhall ſtraight wayes be taken away & ceaſſe.
               For if thinges well done, bee rightlye and vertuouſly done, and nothing can be Nothing can be better then good. anye thing bee found that is better then Good. It foloweth therfore, yt vices alſo are equall, ſithens the naughtineſſe and prauities of the Mind are aptly termed

Vices. But ſith Vertues are equal, Vertuous deedes alſo, (becauſe they procede and come of Vertue) ought to be equal. Sēblably Sinnes becauſe they ſpring and aryſe out of Vices, muſt needes bee equall.
               Yea ſir (wil ſome ſay) you take & groūd this opinion vpō the Philoſophers doctrine. Obiectiō
                   I was afrayde, leaſt you woulde haue ſayd, I had borowed & gathered it Anſvvere of Ribauds & Verlets, Socrates his vſe and maner was to diſpute after ſuche a Socrates. ſort. Surely I am wel apaid therof: for aūcient Hiſtories do record & witneſſe, yt bee was a profoundlye learned, & alſo a right wiſe mā. But yet I demaūd this queſtion of you (ſeeing we do quietly reaſon the matter wt gentle words and not wt ſturdye Buffets) whether when wee Men of profoundeſt vvitt and learning fit teſt to decide controuerſies in opiniō. diſpute of good thinges, wee ought rather to ſeeke the Mynd and Opinion of rude and ignoraunt Tāckerd bearers & drudginge labourers, or els of the approued learned & famous philoſophers eſpecially, ſith ther is no ſētēce & opiniō,

either truer or more auaylable to Mans lyfe then this. For what power or force doth more terrifie men, from commyttyng all kind of Wickedneſſe, then whē they know that there is no difference in offences, & that they doe offend aſmuch and as heynouſly, in laying violent hā
                  des Equalitie of faultes vpō priuate Perſōs, as they ſhould, if they did the ſame to Magiſtrates?
               And what houſe ſoeuer they do pollute with bawdry and whoredome, that the diſhoneſtie and ſhame of the lecherous fact is equall and all one.
               What? is there no difference (wyll ſome ſay) whether a man kyll his owne Father, or els ſome cōmon Seruaunt? If you meane theſe two compariſons barelye and ſimplye, it is harde to bee iudged of what ſort they bee. For if it Who after nyne monethes ſiege, and extreeme famine rather then they would yelde to Anniball and come into ſlauerye, burned all their ovvne goodes in the market place and ſlevvtheir ovvne fathers, vvyues and children. and laſt of al thē ſelues. Liuius. Lib. i Dec. 3. be of itſelfe & ſimplie, an horrible offence, for one to kil his Father then the *Saguntines (who had leyfer their Parentes ſhould dye being free and vnbā
                  quiſhed, then to lyue in ſeruitude and ſlauerye) were Parricides. Therfore in ſome caſe the Sonne may vereue ye Father

of his lyfe without offence: & many times a poore drudge or ſlaue, maye not be brought to his death, without great wrong and iniurye. The cauſe therfore and not the nature of the fact, maketh the difference herein: which when it is occaſioned by the one, then is the ſame committed more readilye: but if it bee conioyned to both, then muſt the faults be needes equall.
               Notwithſtanding herein they do differ, that in killinge a Slaue, if it be don iniuriouſlye, there is but one ſingle offence commited: but in killing & taking awaye the lyfe of a Father, there are many faultes: for therein is an vnnatural dealing ſhewed to him that begatte thee, that foſtered and brought thee vp, that inſtructed and taught thee, yt placed Diuers r
                        •
                     
                     ſons to ſtrike a reuerence in vs to vvardes our Parē
                     tes. thee in good ſtate, to lyue in the cō
                  mon Wealth, and furniſhed thee wyth houſes and neceſſaries. Hee is notoryous for ye multitude of Offences, which taketh away frō his Father, yt, which hee himſelfe, receiued of him, and therefore deſerueth a great deale more puniſhmente.
               
                  
But in the rare and courſe of our lyfe, wee oughte not to wayghe and conſider what puniſhment is meete and due for euery faulte, but to looke and perpende what is lawful and permitted for euery man to do. To do that which behoueth To doe a miſſe is of fēſiue, but to do any thing that is expreſly forbiddē, is heinous and deteſtable. not to bee done, wee ought to thinck to bee an offence: but to doe anye thinge which is prohibited and vnlawfull, we ought to iudge and accoumpt a deteſtable and curſed deede.
               Is this to bee ſo preciſely taken, for euery light matter and ſmall treſpaſſe? Yea trulye, for wee cannot ymagine a meane of the thinges: but wee may bridle our affections, and keepe our Myndes in a meane and meaſure.
               If a Stage player do neuer ſo lyttle in his geſture miſſe and tranſgreſſe the notes of meaſure, or erre in pronouncing ſome one ſyllable in a Verſe, long, which ſhould bee ſhort: or contrary wiſe that, ſhort, which ſhould be long, he is hiſſed at, and with clapping of handes driuen from the Stage: and wilt thou

ſaye, that thou ſhouldeſt erre and offend ſo much as in one ſyllable, in thy lyfe, We muſte bee ſo preciſe in the direction of our life that vvee should not trip ſo much as in a Syllable. which ought to be more moderate then anye geſture, and more inculpable, then anye Verſe?
               I cannot abide to heare a Poet make a fault in his Verſe, though it be but a trifling matter, and ſhall I heare a Citizen ſkanne vpon his fingers, his faultes, which in the ſocietie of Lyfe hee hath committed? Which if they ſeeme to bee ſhorter, yet how can they ſeeme to bee lighter, ſithence euerye offence and ſinne commeth by the perturbation of Reaſon & order beeing perturbed, all vertue goeth to hauocke. reaſon and order? For Reaſon & Order being once broken and perturbed, there can nothing bee added, whereby it may ſeeme that the Offence may any whitte more bee encreaſed.
            
            
               The Fourth Paradoxe, wherein is proued, that all Fooles bee madde and diſtraught frō their right myndes: couertly taunting Clodius, and by him all others of like maners and conditions.
               
                  
                  BVt I will manifeſtlye & by neceſſary Argumēts prooue thee, not a Foole as thou art often: not a wicked Villayn, as thou art alwayes: but a franticke Sotte & a ſtarke madde Ideot.
               Shall the mynd of a Wiſeman which is garded and on euery ſide fenced in, wt 
                  The mind of a vviſeman, vnconquerable. graue counſell, and aduice, patient bearing & ſuffering al ſuch chaūces, as are incident to mā, contēpt of Fortune, & finally wt al other Vertues (as it were) wt a Rāpier or a wall, bee vanquiſhed and ouerthrowen, which cannot be ſo much as exiled and baniſhed out of the Citie?
               For what call you a Citye? Is it an whole aſſemblye of ſauage and brutiſhe lyuers? or is it a rabbling rout & multitude of Rennegates, and Cutthrote Rome. Thieues, congregated into one place? Certes, you will ſay, no. Then verilye Where tyrannye oppreſſion, and contempt of Lavves be practiſed no city nor Commonvvealth can rightlye be termed. was not it to bee called a Cittye, when as the Lawes were diſanulled, and abrogated, when Iudgementes were

layed aſide and contemned, when the aunciente cuſtomes of the Cittye were ceaſſed and extinguiſhed, when the Magiſtrates were with ſweard and ſtrong hand depoſed and diſfraunchiſed, and ye honourable name of Senate no more vſed in the Weale publique.
               Was that flocking rout of Theeues, and Ruffians, and that ſwarme of Robbers and Murderers, which vnder thy conduct were broughte and ſet in the *Forum, and the reſidue of the Conſpiratours The common place vvher Courtes vverekept and Lavv matters pleaded. which after the ſedicious Furies & trayterous vprores of Catiline, turned & cōformed themſelues vnto thy vngracious villany & madnes, any city?
               Therfore I was not baniſhed out of the Citie, which was then none: but I was called home, & reſtored into yt city, when there was in the cōmon Wealth a Cōſul, which* then was none at all: & So longe as Clodius ruled the ro
                        •
                     t. when there was a Senate, which while thou bareſt the ſwaye, was quight decayed: when the people might francklye and freelye geeue their voyces, and conſentes: and finallye, when the xecution

of Iuſtice, Lawe, & Equitie, which bee the Lincks and Bondes of a Citie) were reuiued and broughte agayne into freſh remembraunce.
               But behold, how little I ſet by theſe weapons, where with thou mainteineſt thy murderous and thieuiſh lewdneſſe. I euer made accoūpt, that thou diddeſt meane great & miſchieuous iniurye towardes mee: but I neuer thought that it euer raught or came neere to mee.
               Vnleſſe peraduēture when thou diddeſt beat downe the walles of my Houſe, or when thou diddeſt moſte wickedlye ſet my Manſion on fier, thou thoughteſt yt ſome of ſuch things as were myne, were ſpoyled ranſacked and burned. But Worldlye pelfe and tranſitory goods are not rightlye to bee tearmed anye of ours. I doe recken nothing to bee myne, neyther can anye Man els, cal anye thinge his owne, whych may bee taken away or ſtollen, or by anye other meanes loſte.
               If thou haddeſte berefte mee of my longe continued Conſtancy of Mynde, of my prouident cares, of my watchful paynes, and my ſage counſayle, whereby

the ſtate of this publique Weale is and hath beene honourablye conſerued and mainteined, or if thou haddeſt aboliſhed Tyraun
                        •
                     es & bloudſuckers haue no maner of povver ouer the mind of the vertuous. & blotted out the immortal Fame that ſhall eternallye redound to me for theſe worthye benefites, or (which is more) if thou haddeſt bereft mee of that Mind, out of which al theſe Counſailes proceded: then woulde I confeſſe that I had receyued a Wronge, at thyne handes.
               But foraſmuch as thou neyther diddeſt, neyther yet couldeſt do this: therefore hath thy iniurious dealing toward Vireſcit vulnere virtus. mee, made this my retourne ioyful and glorious, and not my departure wretched and miſerable.
               Therfore I was euer a Citizen, and then eſpeciallye, when the Senate dyd wryte to Foraine Nations for my ſafegard, and gentle intertainment, as for one that was both a worthy and a vertuous Citizen.
               But thou euen now at this preſent, arte no Citizen, vnleſſe peraduenture it bee poſſyble for one, and the ſame

perſon both to be a deadly Enemy, and a friendlye Citizen.
               Doeſt thou make the difference beetweene a Citizen, and an Enemie by Nature and diſtaunte of place, and not by inwarde wyll, and playne deedes of the mynde? Thou haſt committed murder in the Forum, thou haſt intruded in to the Temple, and forciblie kept yt poſſeſſion thereof, with thy armed Cutthroates. Thou haſt fiered the houſes of pryuate menne, and holy Churches. Why is *Spartacus proclaimed a Rebell A notable Fencer, vvho gathering an hoſt of Bondſlaues, made vvarres againſt the Romains. and Traytour, if thou be a Citizē? Canſt thou bee a Cytyzen, ſithence through thy lewdneſſe, the Citye was once no Citye? And doeſt thou call mee (by thyne owne name) a baniſhed man, ſith there is no good mā but he thought yt at my departure the Cōmon wealth was baniſhed and departed alſo?
               O thou fooliſh and franticke Dolte, wilt thou neuer bee reclaymed to goodneſſe? wilt thou neuer looke about the? wylt thou neuer cōſider what thou doeſt and ſpeakeſt? Doeſt thou not know

that Exile is the puniſhment of wycked and ſcelerous dealing? and that this my Iourney was takē in hand for my moſt notable and noble Actes, before by mee atchieued?
               Al miſchieuous and naughty perſōs (of whom thou doeſt profeſſe thy ſelfe Captayne and Ringleader) whom the Not the chaunge of ſoyle & Countrie vvhich maketh the banished man Lawes will to be baniſhed mē, are Vagarauntes and baniſhed men in deede, although they neuer ſtirre foote oute of their natiue Countrye. When by all order of the Lawes thou art denounced an Outlawed & Baniſhed perſon, wilt thou not bee a Baniſhed man?
               Is not he called an Enemie, that is found with Weapon about him, & beehold thy Falchion was takē euē before the Senate? Shal he that ſlaieth a mā bee puniſhed, and thou eſcape, who haſt murthered a great maignie? Shal hee that ſetteth fier on the Citie, bee adiudged an Enemie, and thou wincked at, which with thine owne hand haſt burned Cloiſters and Churches, dedicated to the Nymphes? Shall he be puniſhable,

which forciblye ſurpriſeth yt Tē
                  ples of the Gods, and thou go ſkotfree, who haſt pitched thy Campe euen in yt 
                  Forum?
               
               But what meane I to recoumpte & declare the common Lawes, by al whiche thou verily art a Baniſhed man?
               Thyne owne familier freende Cornificius made a ſpeciall Lawe for thee, that if thou diddeſt preſume to come into the ſecrete Shrowdes of Bona Dea, thou ſhouldeſt be ſent into exile. But thou (notwythſtanding) arte accuſtomed to make thy vaunt, that thou haſte done it. Seeing therfore thou art denoūced a baniſhed man, and throwen into exile by ſo many laws, doeſt thou not tremble at, and feare this odious name of a Baniſhed man?
               But I am here in Rome (thou wylt ſaye) and therfore how canſt thou proue mee to bee a Baniſhed man? Yea mary Sirre: and ſo were you in the Shrowdes alſo. Therfore a man is not demaū
                  dable to haue the benefite and protectiō of the place where he rouſteth and barboureth,

if the Lawes doe not allowe him there to bee, and remayne.
            
            
               The Fyfte Paradoxe, wherein hee inueigheth againſt the inſolencie & voluptuous liuing of Marcus Antonius, and proueth all VViſemen to bee free: and al Fooles to bee Slaues and Bondmen.
               
                  DEſerueth this worthy capitaine Antonius to be prayſed, or to bee named & thought worthye of ſuch an honourable name? How? Or what honeſt Hee can ill rule another, that can not rule himſelfe. Freeman can hee bee a ruler ouer, which cannot rule his owne affections? Let him firſt brydle his owne Senſuall Luſtes, let him renounce and deſpiſe Pleaſures, let him qualifie his furious and fumiſhe anger, let him forſake Couetouſnes, let him vtterly expell & abā
                  don al other corrupt & naughty vyces: &

thē let him beginne to exerciſe his rule and Authoritie ouer others, when he Vices ſpecially emblemishing there novvme of noble men and magiſtrates. himſelfe hath ceaſſed to bee enthralled, as a Bōd ſlaue vnto two moſt vile mayſters, to wit, Shame and Diſhoneſty: For ſo long as hee is the Bondſlaue of thoſe two, hee ſhall not onely be accoū
                  ted no Emperour, nor cōmaunder ouer others, but rather not ſo much as a freman.
               For this is very excellentlye agreed vpon, amonge the beſte learned, whoſe authoritie I would not vſe and alledge if the caſe ſo laye, yt I ſhould make this diſcourſe before an audience of blunt & ignoraunt perſons. But ſeeinge that I do ſpeake vnto them, that are moſte wiſe and diſcreete, vnto whoſe hearing theſe thinges are not ſtraunge, why ſhould I diſſimule, and fayne yt I haue loſt all the paynes and labour which I haue beſtowed in theſe ſtudies?
               Therfore right learned men do hold opinion, that no man is Free, but onlye Libertie vvhat it is a Wiſemā: For what is Libertie: Forſooth, a Leaue and power to lyue as a

man luſte. And who lyueth as he luſte, but hee which embraceth and diſcretely frameth to lyue, in an orderly and prouident trade: who is obediēt to Lawes not for feare, but ſtandeth in reuerente Honeſt men obey Lavves, not for feare but for loue of Vertue awe of theim, becauſe hee thincketh it a thinge expediente, and holeſome ſo to doe: who ſayeth nothinge, doeth nothing, thincketh nothing, but voluntarilye and freelye: whoſe whole counſels, and affayres, what ſoeuer they bee that A freemā deſcribed hee taketh in hande, doth procede from himſelfe, and to the ſame are referred: neither is any thing of ſo great force wt him, as is his owne will and iudgemēt: vnto whō Fortune herſelfe, who is reported to haue a meruailous great power, Fortune. and to beare a greate ſwaye in all thinges, yeldeth and geueth place: accordinge, to the ſayinge of that wyſe Poet: Shee is faſhioned to euerye mā after his owne maners.
               
               Therfore only a Wiſeman hath this preeminence and good chaunce, that be doth nothing againſt his wyll, nothing grudginglye, nothing by compulſion.

Which thing to be true, although wee muſt bee fayne in manye wordes to dyſcuſſe and declare, yet thys in fewe wordes muſte needes bee confeſſed, that no man is Free, ſauing he onely, which is thus diſpoſed and affected. And therefore Who bee Free. all naughtye perſons are Slaues, and Bondemen.
               Neyther is this ſo inopinable & merueilous, in deede, as it is in wordes. For they doe not terme and call theym Slaues, after ſuch ſort as they do Bōd men, who ſerue for drudgerye and vile ſeruice, beinge bound to their Maiſters by Indentures and Couenauntes obligatorie, Who bee Bond or by ſome order of Ciuile law: But if the vile obediēce of an effeminat and abiect mynde, lacking any ſure ſtay or Iudgement of itſelfe, bee (as it is in deede) a Bondage, who will deny, but that all light felowes, Couetous perſons, and finallye all naughtye Folkes, bee Slaues and Bondmen?
               Shall I thincke him to bee a Free man, which is vnder the rule of a* Woman, ſubmitting himſelfe to her becke, Cleopatra.
                  
and Pleaſure: ouer whom ſhee exerciſeth Authoritie, and vnto whom ſhe enioyneth and preſcribeth Lawes: commaundeth and coūtermaundeth, at her owne pleaſure? If ſhee commaunde anye ſeruice to bee done, hee dare none otherwiſe doe, but goe aboute it: if ſhee would haue any thing, hee dare not denye it: if ſhee aſke or requeſt any thing, hee muſt geeue it: if ſhee call, hee muſte come: if ſhe caſt him of, there is no remedie but to be packinge and trudging awaye: if ſhee ſtorme and threaten, hee muſt tremble & quake for awe & feare. Verilie I iudge ye mā wc is in this caſe, worthy not only to be called a Slaue & Bondman, but a moſt wicked Paſſaunt & Drudge, yea although he were deſcēded of honorable ſtocke & Lignage. And as in a great Houſhold of Fooles, ſome ſeruaunts bee (as they thincke in their own conceipts) brauer & coper, thē their other Felowes: as being Porters & Vſhers of ye Hal, & yet they are no better but ſeruāts & fooleſhaken, aſwel as thou: ſo are, they alſo teinted wt ye like follye &

Sott
                     •
                  ge, which are too too curious in ſettinge all their delighte in Pictures, Tables, Plate richlye engrauen, Corynthian 
                  Fond delightes. worckes, & ſumptuous Buildinges.
               But wee are (wyll they ſay) the chief Obiectiō
                   heades of the Cittie. Truelye you are not the chief Maiſters, not ſo much as ouer your own felow Slaues. Anſvvere
               
               But as in a great Family, they which handle and goe aboute Vyle offices of drudgerie, as Scowringe, Greaſinge, Wyping, Bruſhing, Sweping, ſtrawinge Ruſhes & Flowers, haue not the honeſteſt place of ſeruice: ſo in a Citye, they whych haue enthralled and addicted thēſelues to y• deſires & luſts of theſe things, haue almoſt the loweſt & baſeſt rowme of al, in ye ſame Citie. But thou wilt ſay agayne: I haue valiauntly behaued my ſelfe in battayles, & exployted Objectiō
                   worthie aduētures in Martial affayres, and I haue had the Gouernaunce and chiefe rule, ouer great Empires & prouinces. Then cary about with thee, a Mynde garniſhed with ſuch Vertues Anſvvere
                  
and Qualities, as bee prayſe worthye. But thou art ſtupefied with ſome excellent An excellent painter. A Cunning Image maker. Table of * Echion his workemanſhip, or els wt ſome Picture of * Polycletus.
               
               I omitte to ſpeake whence thou purloynedſt them, and how thou cameſt by them. But when I ſee and behold thee ſo affectionately ſtill to gaze and toote vppon theim, to meruayle and muſe at them, & to make exclamations for wō
                  der of them, truly I muſt nedes iudge thee to be the Slaue & Bondman of all Dotage and Fooliſhnes.
               But are not theſe thinges prety and trimme? Yes mary are they: for we alſo haue learned Eyes, able to diſcerne thinges.
               But I pray thee, let theſe be reputed and deemed fayre and beautiful, in ſuch ſorte, that they be not made as Gyeues and Fetters, to ſhackle and bynd Men: but taken as toyes and conceipts, to delight Children. Who vtterlye razed Corynth and caried avvay all the pretious ſevvels & coſtlye vvares thereof to Rome.
               
               For what do you thincke, if * L. Mummius ſhould haue ſeene any of theſe men

greatly enamoured, and very deſirouſlye delighted to handle the fine Pottes and Vrinalles of Corynthian woorke, whereas hee himſelfe cared not for the whole Cittie of Corynth: whether would hee, thinke him to bee an excellent Cittizen, orels a diligent ouerſeeing Seruaūt? Suppoſe yt * Curius were aliue againe: or ſome of thoſe worthye Who van quished the Samnites, and draue Pyrrhus oute of Italye. Perſonages, in whoſe ſimple Fermes & Coūtry Graūges, there was nothing gorgeouſly decked, glittering, & beautiful, but thēſelues. If hee or any of theſe mē, ſhould ſee one (which by yt election & fauor of the people, hath bene greatly benefited & promoted) catching younge Barbilles out of a Fiſhpond, or nicelye bādling thē: or reioyſing in himſelfe, for hauing ſtoare & abūdance of Lāprayes: woulde not hee Iudge this man to bee ſuch a Slaue, that in a Houſholde, hee would not thincke him worthy to intermeddle in any greater Charge?
               Doth any man doubt, but that they are in moſt beaſtly ſtate of Seruitude, Vyleſt Slauerye. who, for couetouſnes of worldly mocke,

refuſe no maner of moſt vyle Slauerie, Drudgerye, and Bondage?
               What vnreaſonable Bondage is that Perſon well contented to ſuffer, which gopeth for the Goods and Inheritance of an other man? When doth the Olde Gapers for other mens Death. Rych Childleſſe Cobbe, eyther beck or nodde, but he is ready at his Elbow, & preſt at an ynche, to doe his will & pleaſure? He ſpeaketh euery word to pleaſe the old Churles humor: he knoweth ye right bent of his Bow, & how to pleaſe him: what hee willeth to bee done, hee doeth: he holdeth him vp with yea and nay: he ſitteth by him and prayſeth him.
               What poinct of a Freeman is in any of theſe? nay rather, what poinct of a Seruile and drowſie Drudge is not herein?
               Nowe, that ſame ambitious deſire of Ambitiō and deſire of Honor Honoure, Principalitie, & Prouinces, (which ſemeth to maſke vnder a better ſhew of Honeſtie) what a hard and Rigorous Mayſtreſſe is it? Howe Imperious, how Stately, & how Vehemēt is it? This was it, yt cauſed the chiefeſt

perſons in the Citye, and thoſe whiche were coumpted the beſte, and moſte ſubſtantialleſt mē in Rome, to become Suters, and to crowch and kneele vnto Cethegus, (a man not of yt beſt honeſty) & to be vnder him: to ſend him gifts: to Cethegus. come home to him in the night: to deſire him to be good vnto theim: and finally, ſuppliauntlye to proſtrate themſelues before him, and beſeech his fauour.
               What calle you Seruitude & Thraldome, if this may be thought to bee Libertie and Freedome? What ſhall we ſay? when the rule and Domination of Affections hath exceeded, doeth there not enter into their harts, an other heauye Mayſter, proceeding and growinge Feare and remorſe of Conſcience. of a remorſe of Cōſcience, for yt crymes before committed, which is Feare?
               What a miſerable and hard Seruitude is this? They muſt obey and folowe yt fancies of prating Young lings. All they that ſeeme to haue any ſhadowe of knowledge, are feared as thoughe they were Lordes.
               As for the Iudge, what domination Iudge.
                  
hath he? In what feare of him, do guiltye Perſons ſtande? how do they which know themſelues guiltye of anye offence, feare and dreade him? Is not all kynde of feare, a Bondage and Slauerye?
               Therfore to what purpoſe ſerueth L. Craſſus reproued for his daſierdlye fearefulneſſe. that coptous, rather then wiſe Oration of that right eloquent man L. Craſsus: Deliuer and ryd vs out of Seruitude. What Seruitude is this to ſuch an excellent and noble Man? For faintharted, cowardly & abiect fearfulnes of the Minde, is Seruitude. What Slauery is
               
               
                  Let vs not (ſayth hee) be in Bondage to any man. Deſireth hee to bee enfraunchiſed and reſtored to Libertie? No. For what doth he adde afterward? To none but onely to you all, vnto whom wee may and ought to ſhew our dutyfull allegiaūce. He would but chaūge his Landlorde: hee deſireth not to bee free.
               But wee, if wee bee endued with a loftie and valiaunt Minde, garniſhed & fraught with Vertues, neyther ought,

neither may bee in ſeruile Subiection. But ſay thou, O Craſſus, yt thou canſt doe ſo: for why: thou canſt do it, and be as good as thy woord: but ſay not that thou oughteſt ſo to do: becauſe no man oweth any thinge, but that, which were a diſhoneſtye not to paye.
               But of this hytherto. Now let this iolye * Felow looke wel about him, and Antonius ſee, how hee can bee an Emperoure, or Commaunder, ſith verye Reaſon and Truthe do moſte plainly proue him, not to bee ſo much as a Freeman.
            
            
               The Syxte & laſte Paradoxe, wherein hee proueth none to be Rych but only wyſe & Vertuous Mē: priuily nipping Marcus Craſſus, who ſaid, that none was worthy to haue the name of Rich, vnleſſe with his Reuenues, hee were able to furnish and mainteine an Armye.
               
                  
                  VVhat an inſolent bragging and oſtentation is this that thou makeſt about the tellinge of thy Money & Ryches? Art thou alone Rich? Oh immortall Gods, may not I reioyſe in my ſelfe, that I haue hearde & learned ſomthing? Art thou alone Rych? What wilt thou ſay, if I can proue the not to be rych at al? Nay, what wylte thou ſaye, if I proue thee to bee poore & beggarlye?
               For, what is he, whom we call Ryche, or vppon what maner of man maye wee beſtowe this woorde? Verilye I Who may rightly be termed Rich. thincke that is beſt agreeth, and maye fitlieſt be applied to him, who poſſeſſeth ſo much, that he thincketh himſelfe very wel & cōtētedly ſtoared with ynough to lyue vertuouſly and honeſtly withal, who ſeeketh & prowleth after nothing, coueteth and wiſheth nothinge more then he hath.
               
                  
For it is thy Mynde, that muſt examine and iudge itſelfe, whether it bee Rich or no: and not the rumour & talke of the People: neither thy Ryches and Poſſeſſions.
               Hee which thinketh himſelfe to lack nothing, and careth not for heapinge & boording vp of any more: but is ſatiſfied and well contented with his preſent Who is Rych. wealth, (I graunce) is Ryche. But if for filthye lucre and inſaciable greedineſſe of Money, thou thincke no maner of gayne diſhoneſt and reprochfull, and careſt not which way nor how thou getreſt thy goodes, (whereas no gayne at al, can bee honeſt and commendable in one of that order, wherof thou art one) if thou daylye defraude and vndermine thy Neighbours: deceiue & circumuēt them: exact vnreaſonable demaunds of them: entangle and lap them in preiudiciall bargaines and couenauntes: poll and pyll them: ſpoyle and vndoe them: Levvde shiftes togather vvealth. ſteale from thy felowes: robbe the common Treaſury: gape & looke for Legacies to bee geuen the, by thy frendes in

their laſt Teſtamentes: or perhaps, doeſt not wayte and tary the tyme, but by forgerye and falſitie doeſt craftelye intrude and put thy name in ſteede of an other: whether bee theſe, the tokens & pranckes of a rych wealthie Man which aboundeth, or of a needye poore perſon that lacketh?
               It is the Mind of a man, that is wōt to bee called Rich, and not his Coffers. It is the mynde & not the full Coffers that make a man rich. Althoughe thy Coffers bee full ſtuffed with money & worldly pelfe, yet ſo long as I ſee thy ſelfe emptie & voyd of Vertue, I wil neuer thinke thee to be rich. For men do eſteeme and recken ye meaſure of riches, to conſiſt in Sufficiencie. Sufficiencie is vvealth ynough. Hath a man one Daughter? Thē hath hee neede of Money? Hath he two? He hath nede of more Money. Hath he moe then two? Hee hath neede of greater Hee that hath much to doe vvith Money, hath neede of much Money. ſtore then afore. If he haue fifty Daughters (as the Poets do ſay that king Danaus had) he muſt prouide ſo many Dowers to geeue with them in Mariage, which wyll aſke a greate maſſe of Money.
               
                  
For according as euerye one hath nede, ſo is the meaſure of Ryches (as before I haue ſayde) conſiderable and appliable. Therfore that man which hath not many Daughters, but (natheleſſe) The Purſute of fōd Affectiōs and fleshly Luſtes cōſumeth vvealth, bee it neuer ſo much. hath innumerable Affections, and an infinite number of beaſtly Luſtes, (which are able in ſhort ſpace to conſume verye greate wealthe and foyſon of Ryches) how ſhall I call him Rych, ſithence he feeleth and perceyueth himſelfe to lacke?
               Manye haue heard thee ſaye, that no man was Rych, vnleſſe hee were able with his Rents and Reuenues to maintayne What mā Craſſus iudged to be called Rich. and furniſhe an whole Hoſte of Men: which thing the Romayne Nation hath of longe tyme beene ſcarcelye able with all their Trybutes and Rentes to doe.
               Therfore thyne own Reaſon and Argumente beeinge true, thou ſhalt neuer hee Ryche, vntill thy Poſſeſſions bee ſo augmented and encreaſed, that A Legion containes 12500. Souldiers therewith thou mayſt be able to mainteine Syxe * Legions of Souldiers: beſide

a greate number of Horſemen, and Footemen, which come to ſuccour and ayde.
               Now thou canſt not chooſe, but cōfeſſe thy ſelfe not to be Rych, ſithence thou lackeſt ſo much, that thou canſt not accompliſh and fulfill thy wiſhed deſire.
               Therefore thou diddeſt neuer diſſemble and hyde thys thy Pouertye, or rather Needynes and Beggerye.
               For, as wee wel vnderſtand and know that thoſe Men, whych honeſtelye ſeeke to encreaſe their Wealth, by Enter courſe and Traffique of Merchaundize, by Letting out Woorckemen for Hyre, by helpinge one an other: and by Ferming Cuſtomes, and Publique Tolles, haue neede of the thinges whych they ſeeke for: So hee that ſeeeth at thy Houſe the Flockinge Companyes of Accuſers, Complaynaunts, and Iudges, all at once: he that marketh the Defendauntes and Guyltye Perſons, beeinge full of Money, goinge aboute and Practiſinge wyth Brybes, and Rewardes (which they

(which they learned of thee) to peruert and defeate the due courſe of Iuſtice & Shiftes vvhereby Craſſus gatte all his vvelth Iudgement: he that noteth thy Legierdemaine and craftye Bargaines yt thou makeſt with thy Clients: what reward thou ſhalt haue for thy Patrocinie and counſayle in their Cauſes: for what ſū
                  mes of Money thou doeſt indente wyth thoſe yt bee Cōpetitours or Suters for Office in general aſſēblies: be yt calleth to memory, how thou ſendeſt abrode & letteſt out thy Slaues & Seruants for hyre, to ſhaue and exacte vnmeaſurable gaynes by vſurye of the Prouinces: he that marketh how thou threateneſt thy poore Neighbours & Tenauntes out of their Houſes and Fermes: he that conſidereth thy open Robberies abroade in the fieldes: hee that calleth to mynde how thou vſeſt to be partaker and Copertener with poore Slaues, Libertes and Clyentes, & al for money: Hee that beholdeth the Houſes and Poſſeſſions left voyd and vnhabited, by reaſon that the poore Fermers bee expulſed: the Proſcriptions, & Attendours of wealthye

Perſonages: the Slaughter and Ranſacking of incorporate Townes: Hee that perpendeth, the lamētable hauocke & generall Spoyle, practiſed in Sylla his vſurped Principalitie: hee yt recordeth ye forged Willes and Teſtaments: & the great nūber of Perſons caſt away & manquelled: & finally how all thinges were then ſolde for Money: Muſtring of mē: Decrees & Statutes: his owne, and other mens Sentences alſo: Iudiciall matters: his owne Houſe: his goodword & Voyce: yea his ſylēce & forbearing to ſpeake: & al theſe ſold for Money: who is he, but wil thīk, yt this mā muſt confeſſe, yt he hath neede of thoſe thinges which hee ſeeketh?
               And whoſoeuer hath nede of that thing which hee toyleth to gette and gayne, who can euer truelye call him a Ryche man? For, the Fruicte of Ryches is in Plentie: which Plentie, the Sacietie of things, and Abundaunce of Wealth Hee that hath nede is not rych bringeth: the which for aſmuch as thou ſhale neuer attayne vnto, thou ſhalt neuer bee Rich.
               
                  
And becauſe thou doeſt contemne my Subſtaunce & Wealth, and well too, (for it is after the Vulgar Peoples Aſſeſſemēt, meane & indifferent: in thyne Opinion, in manner nothinge: in myne owne iudgement, competent and meaſurable) I wyl ſay nothing of myſelfe, but ſpeake of thee.
               If wee ſhall throughlye waighe and cōſider the thing as it is, whether ſhall wee more eſteeme the Money whyche King Pyrrhus ſent to * Fabritius, or els Who beeing veryepoore refuſed greate Sūmes of Money ſent in revvard to him from King Pyrrhus. yt Continencie of Fabritius, who would not receiue the ſame, being frely offred vnto hym?
               Whether ſhall wee more waighe the great Maſſe and Summe of Golde, of the Samnites: or els the Aunſwere of * M. Curius, to the Meſſengers that brought the ſame to hym? the Inheritaunce of L. Paulus or els the liberalitie Who refuſed agreat maſſe of Golde, ſēt vnto hym from the Samnites. of Aphricanus, who gaue his parte and Portion of Lyueloode, to his Brother Quintus Maximus?
               
               Verilie, theſe notable Examples being chiefe and principal points of moſt

excellent Vertues, are more to be eſteemed, then thoſe that bee the Members of Wealth, and Money.
               The cauſe therefore ſtandinge thus, yt hee which poſſeſſeth yt thing which is moſt of all others to be eſteemed, is cō
                  ſequentlye to bee accoumpted the Rycheſt and Worthyeſt Man: who doubteth but that the True Ryches doe True Ryches conſiſt in vertue. cōſiſte onely in Vertue? For no Poſſeſſion whatſoeuer, no Maſſe of Golde and Syluer, is to bee preferred or ſo much No vvorldly treaſure comparable to Vertue. to bee eſteemed as Vertue. Oh immortall Gods Men do not perceiue and vnderſtād, what a great Reuenue & Rent, moderate Expences & Parſimony is.
               For now wyll I leaue to ſpeake of this Magnum vectigal Parſimonia. beggerlye Lickepeny yt prowleth al for Gaine, & ſpeake a litle of prodigal Spē
                  ders & vnmeaſurable Waſters. There is ſome one, yt may yerely diſpēd in Lands & Rents. 600. Seſtertia: My Reuenues amount ſkantly to one hundreth: Euery Seſtertium is in value 25. Frēch Crovvnes to ſuch one, gorgeouſly Seeling & gilting the roofes of his Manours & Coūtry Houſes, & pauing his floores wt
                  
fine Marble, and ſtill deſiringe and infinitely couetinge Pictures, Furniture, Implementes, and gallaun: Apparell, Immoderate expē
                     ces & nede leſſe charges, about the fedīg of affections. all the aforſaid Summe of Money wyl not only be too litle to diſcharge ye ſame, but alſo wil ſcanclye ſuffice to paye the Annuall vſurye, for the loane thereof.
               I do ſo qualefy and brydle myne Affections vnder the Reynes of moderate Expences, that out of my finall yerelye Lyueloode, ſomwhat remayneth at the Meaſurable ſpending beſt. yeres ende.
               Whether of vs is ryther therefore? Hee that lacketh, or els hee that hath more then he ſpendeth? He that is needye, or hee that hath plentie? hee whoſe poſſeſſions, the greater they be, the more is required to the maintenaunce of hys Ech man muſt ſpēd according to his degree and calling. Porte and ſtate: or els he, that poyzeth his expences and charges, according to the rate of his habilitie?
               But what meane I to ſpeake of my ſelfe, who peraduenture alſo throughe the iniquitie and corruption of tymes & maners, am not altogether cleare from the infection of this Errour? Marcus
                  
                  Manilius who lyued of late yeares, euen in our Fathers dayes and remembraunce (becauſe I will not alwayes ſpeake of ſuch preciſe Felowes, as the Curij, and the Lucinij were) was a verye poore man: for hee dwelt in a ſmall A Rovv of houſes ſo called becauſe they vver built like to the heeles of shippes. Cotage
                     •
                  , in the Streete called * Carinae, and had a little plecce of Ground in Lycopum. Are we therfore which haue greater poſſeſſions, rycher then hee? Would God wee were.
               But the meaſure and conſideration of Money & Ryches, is not to bee made by the eſtimatiō and value of Wealth, but by cōueniēt Meate, Drinke, Cloth, and orderly lyuing.
               It is a greate Fee and Penſion, not to bee Greedye and Couetous of Money: and not to bee a Buyer, a Purchaſer, or a Common Chapman, is a great Reuenue. But to bee contented wyth a mans Lotte, and Vocation, and Contented lyfe is the Rycheſt life. to lyue quietiye and contentedly in hys Calling, is the greateſt and ſureſt Ryches in the Worlde.
               For if theſe Lurkinge and Craftye

Pryceſetters of thinges doe ſet an high price vpon their Meadowes and Spare Roumes, becauſe ſuch kinde of Poſſeſſions, cannot lightlye take any harme: How much more is Vertue to be eſteemed, Cauſes vvhy Vertue is chieflye to be eſteemed. which can neither be forciblye taken, nor priuilye ſtollen awaye from a Man: which alſo can neither be loſte by Shipwracke, nor yet by caſualtie of Fyre: and is neuer chaunged by any alteration of Tempeſtes or tymes? wher with whoſoeuer bee endued, are onlye Rych.
               For they onely do poſſeſſe the things that are both Fructuous, Perpetuall and Permanēt: and they alone (which is the verye Propertie of Ryches) are contented with their Subſtaunce and State, whereunto they bee called. They thinke yt, which they preſently enioy, to bee ſufficient: they couet nothinge: they lacke nothinge: they feele not themſelues needye of anye thinge: they craue and require nothing.
               But wicked Perſons, and couetous Pinchpenies, becauſe their Poſſeſſions

are vncertayne and caſuall, and are euer deſirous to gather & ſcrape more: (in ſo much that there was neuer yet anye of them found which thought himſelfe contented and pleaſed with his preſente Store) are not onelye not to be reckened Wealthy and Rich, but rather very Poore & garly.
            
            
               T. N.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               A Philoſophicall Diſcourſe of M. T. Cicero: entituled, SCIPIO HIS Dreame.
            
            
               AFter my cōming into Aphrique, beeing Marſhal or Trybune to ye fourth Legion of Souldyers (as you know) vnder Anitius Manilius the Conſull: I deſired nothinge ſo much, as to viſite Kinge * Maſiniſſa: a King of Nun. dia Prince for good cauſes & iuſt reſpectes, bearing moſt vnfayned goodwill to our Houſe and Familye. Vnto whom whē I came, the good olde King embracing mee, fell into weepinge: and within a whyle after loking vp toward Heauen, ſayed theſe Wordes: I render thanks vnto thee, O Soueraigne Sunne, and vnto

all you other celeſtiall Creatures, that before I departe out of this lyfe. I doe Ioy of frē
                  des at their Meeting. ſee within myne owne Territorie and Kingdome, yea, and vnder the Roofe of myne owne Houſe, my deare Freend P. Cornelius Scipio, with whoſe verye name, I am ſingulerlye refreſhed and comforted. For the remembraunce of yt moſt noble and inuincible Man, neuer departeth out of my Mynde.
            Then began I to queſtion with him, concerning the ſtate of his Kingdome, and hee me of our Common wealth: & ſo, with much talke too and fro had, we ſpent all that Daye.
            But afterwarde beeing entertayned with Princely furniture and Curteſie, wee continued our talke til farre in the night: ye old King ſpeaking of nothing els, but of Africanus, & recoumptinge not onelye his valiaunte Actes, but alſo his wyſe and pythye Sayinges. After this, we went to Bedde, where I beinge both wearye with my Iourney, & hauinge ouerwatched my ſelfe before, ſlept more ſoundlye then I was wont &

accuſtomed to doe.
            Here mee thoughte (and I verilye Dreames, cōmonlie repreſent to vs in Sleepe, thoſe thinges vvee moſt earneſtlye delighted in and deuiſed vvaking. thincke that it ſo hapned throughe the talke which we twaiue had afore: For it is commonly ſeene, that our Cogitations and Talke, doe repreſent and cauſe ſome ſuch thīg in our Slepes, as Enniꝰ wryteth of Homere, that is to ſay, ſuch, as the Mynde wakinge vſed ofteneſt to thincke, & talke on) Africanus appeared and ſhewed himſelf vnto me, in ſuch a maner of Shape, whereby he was better knowen of mee, by his Image, then hee coulde haue beene by his owne Perſon. Whom after that I knew, truely I ſhynered and was ſore afrayd. But (quoth hee vnto mee) bee of good Cheere, and lay aſide all feare O Scipio, and committe well to Memory, ſuch thinges as I ſhall tell thee.
            Doeſt thou not ſee yōder * City, which hauing been once heretofore cōpelled by mee to yeld obeyſaunce to the Romaine Carthage people, renueth old Grudges, ſeeketh new Warres, & cānot be quiet? & there wtal he ſhewed Carthage vnto me, frō an

high & ſtelliferous, cleare & lightſome place: to ye Beſieging & Conqueſt wherof, Being not aboue 28 or 29 yeeres old. thou now comeſt, beeinge little more thē out of thy ſeruice or time of * Souldier. This ſame ſhalt thou being Cōſul ſubuert, & deſtroy, wtin theſe ii. yeeres, & ſhalt therby purchaſe & wyn a * Surname To be called Africanus. to thy ſelfe, which thou haſt as yet of vs, by diſcent of Inheritaunce. And whē thou haſt ſpoyled & ouerthrowen Carthage, Solēnized a Triumphaūt Victory, borne ye office of Cēſor, & bene Lieutenaūt General into Egipt, Syria, Aſia, & Grece,: thou ſhalt beinge abſent, be choſen & elected ye ſecōd time Conſul, & ſhalt be ye victorious General of a mighty Battaile, & ſhalt Sacke, & Scipio vvon Carthage and Numātia. vtterly Ruinate Numantia. But when thou ſhalt at thy returne enter into the Capitol, ryding in a Chariot, thou ſhalt find yt Cōmon wealth merueilouſly fr
                  •
               
               ſhed & diſquieted through the ruflinge Styrre, and Procurement of my * Nephewe. Tib. Gracchus.
            
            Herein O Africanus, it ſhalbe very expedient and needeful, that thou ſet to,

thy helping hande, and ſhewe foorth for thy Countreys ſake and behoofe, the haultie courage and vndaūted proweſſe of thy Mynde, Witte, and Counſayle. But of that tyme, I do ſee (as it were) the way of Fate and Deſtinie to be very doubtfull. For when thou ſhalt come to bee Seuen times Eight Winters, & 56 yeeres olde. Sommers olde, and that theſe two nū
               bers (wherof both are accoumpted ful, the one for ſeueral cauſe frō the other) ſhall accompliſhe and conſummate the fatal terme of the Yeares, whych thou ſhalt lyue, with a naturall Reuolutiō: the whole Cittie ſhall leaue and repoſe her whole truſt vpō thee only, and vpon thy name: Thee ſhal ye Honorable Senate reuerence: thee will all good Men A valiaūt & vvorthy Peere in a Realme is the ſure Piller and ſtay thereof. honour: the will all Felowes and Confederates of the Romaine People regarde: thee, will the Latines, loue and obaye: in thee onely, ſhal the ſauegarde and preſeruation of the City conſiſt. And to be ſhort, thou being enſtalled in the office of Dictator, muſt nedes redreſſe the Abuſes of the Common

wealth, and ſet the ſame in good order: if thou mayeſt eſcape the curſed hands of thine owne kynred and Lignage.
            At this laſt talke, Laelius with pityfull ſcritches, crying out, and all the reſidue greatlye ſorowing, Scipio myldlye ſmyling, ſaid: I pray you do not awake me out of my Sleepe, but be quiet and ſtyll, and heare the reſt.
            But to the ende (Africane) that thou ſhouldeſt haue the more wil and animoſitie to defend ye Weale publique, make thy ſure accoumpt of this: that vnto al thoſe which haue beene Mainteiners, Mainteyners and protectors of their coūtry▪
                Ayders, and Encreaſers, of their Coū
               try, a certaine and definite place is here in Heauen appoincted, where they in bleſſed ſtate ſhall lyue euerlaſtinglye.
            For there is nothing (namely done here on earth) which more pleaſeth God (the moſt high Prince of all, who protecteth and gouerneth all this World) then the Congregatiōs and Aſſemblies of men, lawfully linckinge and lyuinge together with faythfull ſocietie & Brotherly What a Citye is Felowſhippe, one with an other:

which are called by the name of Cities. The vprighte Magiſtrates, and Mainteyners whereof, departing thence, ſhal hither retourne.
            Here, albeeit I was fore afrayde, & not ſo much for dread & feare of Death, as for the Treacherous Conſpiracie, of ſome of myne owne Kinſfolkes: yet did I demaund of him, whether my father Vertuous and vvorthy perſōs do lyue after death. 
               Paul, were yet lyuing, and others mo, whom wee ſuppoſed, and thought to bee dead. Yea vndoubtedly (quoth bee) they are alyue, which hee ryd out of ye Bendes of their mortall Bodies, as out of a Priſon. But that which you call Lyfe, is Death. Yea, beholde where thy Father This Life is no lyfe 
               Paul commeth towardes thee.
            Whom when I ſawe, certes, I ſhed greate Abundaunce of Teares. But bee embracinge and kiſſing mee, vadde mee ſurceaſſe my Blubbering.
            Aſſone as I had lefte Weepinge, and was able to ſpeake: I beſech you, moſt holy and worthye Father (quoth I) ſeeing this is the true Lyfe (as I heare Africane ſay) why do I linger and tarye

on Earth, and not haſten & make ſpeede to come byther to you? Not ſo (quoth hee) For vnleſſe God, who is the Owner We muſt not haſtē our ovvn Deathes, before our apointed tyme. of al this Temple which thou ſeeſt, diſmiſſe and diſcharge the from ye cuſtodye of thy Bodye, there cannot bee anye Entry or Paſſage, open for thee to come hyther.
            For Men be created to this ende and condition, that they ſhould manure and Why men vvere created. inhabite yonder round Globe, or Ball, which thou ſeeſt in the Middle of this Temple, called the Earth. And to thē is infuſed and geeuen a Mynde out frō theſe euerlaſtinge Lightes, which you call Planets and Starres: which beeinge perfect round, and Bowlewiſe, inſpired wt Diuine and heauenly power, doe finiſhe and execute their Reuolutions, Quicke motion of the Celeſtial Spheres. Circles and Ordes, with merueilous Celeritie and Quickeneſſe.
            And therfore Public, it behooueth both thee, and all other godlye Perſons to keepe ſtyl your Mindes within the cuſtody or Wardhouſe of your Bodies, & not to depart out of your mortal life, wt
               out the

commaundement of him that firſte gaue & inſpired the ſame into you: leaſt Til God apointthe time, vvee muſt not ſeeke to shorten the dayes of our life in ſo doinge, you ſhould ſeeme to refuſe and ſtart from the Function & office yt is vnto you, by God, appointed & aſſigned.
            But Scipio, ſee that thou embrace and mainteine Iuſtice, and Pietie: euen as thy Graūdfather here before thee, & I thy Father which begatte thee, haue done. Which, although in our Parentes & Kinſtolkes, it bee greate: yet namelye and eſpecially is it greateſt in Loue to our Coū
                  trye. our natiue Country: for that Lyfe is ye right way into Heauen, and into this Felowſhippe and Companye of them, which haue now alreadye finiſhed their natural race on Earth, and beeing diſmiſſed out of their Bodies, do inhabite this place of Ioye which thou ſeeſt.
            The place was a very white & ſhininge Circle, reſplendaunt among Flames, The Milk vvay, called novv adayes of ſome Watling ſtrete & of ſome the vvaye to S. Iames. (which you, as you haue hearde of the Greekes) doe terme and cal the Milkye Circle.
            Whereupon I peruſinge and viewinge ech thing, al ye reſidue ſeemed both

excellent and wonderfull. And they were thoſe Starres, which wee neuer ſawe from this place: and the greatnes & Magnitude of them, was ſo bigge, as wee neuer thought they had beene. Among whom, * that was the leaſt, which The Moue hath no Lighte but of the Sunne. The leaſt fixed ſtar perfectlye ſeene is as big as the vvhole Earth. Alfraganus. beeing furtheſt of frō Heauen, and neereſt to the Earth ſhyned with borowed Light. And the Globes of ye Starres were a greate Deale bygger then the whole Earthe. Now the Earth itſelfe ſeemed vnto mee ſo ſmall, that I was euen aſhamed of our Empyre & Seigniorye: beeing ſo little, that wee enioye & occupie, (but as it were) a ſmall prick or poynt of it. VVhich when I had behelde, and looked on more ſtedfaſtlye, I pray thee (quoth Africane) how longe wyll thy Mynde bee pooring & fixed to the Groundward? Markeſt and conſidereſt thou not, into what Temples thou art come and arriued? Behold al thinges are compacted and framed wt Nyne Orbes, or rather Globes, wherof one is the vttermoſt Heauen, which compaſſeth and contayneth al the other

within it: the moſt Soueraigne & omnipotent God, holding and contayning the others, in whome are fixed thoſe Starres, which rolle about and are caryed with perpetuall Reuolutions.
            Vnder whom, are Seuen, whyche Saturne the higheſt & ſlovveſt of the 7. Planets finisheth hys courſe in 30 yeres. Iupiter in 12 yeres. make their Courſe backeward, wyth contrarye motion to the Heauen. Of whom, that poſſeſſeth one Globe, which on the Earth is named * Saturne
            
            Then next vnto it, is that proſperous and luckye Brightneſſe to Mankinde, which hath to name *Iupiter.
            
            Next is hee, that is Ruddy & dreadfull Mars in 2. yeres. to the Earth, whom you cal * Mars.
            
            Then euen almoſte vnder the middle Region, the Sunne raigneth as chiefe, The Sūne in 1. yere. the Guyde, the Prince, and the Gouernour of all the reſidue of the Lightes, yt 
               Venus in 9. months Mercurye in 80. dayes Life geeuer, the Mynde and Temperature of the World: beeing ſo great and ſo bygge in quantity, that it ſearcheth & filleth all thinges, with his Shyning. Theſe ij, laſt bee alvvais nere vnto the Sunne
            
            Hym as Wayters and Companiōs do ſtil follow, * Venus and * Mercury in their Courſes.
            
               
And in the loweſt Circle or Orbe, ye 
               The Moone endeth hercourſe in 28 daies and hath no Light but of the Sunne. Moone lightned wt the Rayes or Beames of ye Sunne, hath her Reuolution. Beneath this Globe of ye Moone, there is nothing but yt, which is mortal, tranſitorie, and corruptible, ſauing onelye ye Myndes or Soules, which Almighty God hath geeuen & inſpired into Mankinde. Soules immortall.
            
            Aboue the Moone all is Eternall & incorruptible. For the Earth whiche is middle and the Nynth, is not moued All heauye thinges do ſvvaye dovvnevvard. and is loweſt of all others, and vnto it are all ponderous and heauye thinges, euen with their owne ſway, caryed.
            Which thing when I (as one greatlye aſtonied) much muſed and merueyled to ſee: after I was come to my ſelfe agayne: what ſweete noyſe and melodious The ſvveete harmonye in the motion of the Celeſtiall Bodies. Harmonie is this, (quoth I) that thus delighteth and filleth myne eares? This is (quoth he) that Tune cōpact wt vneuen Diſtances (but yet according to yt rated proportiō of yt partes, diſtinct, & different) whiche is cauſed and made through the ſwift Reuolutiō & mouing

of theſe ſame Orbes: which tempering Sharpes wt Flattes, proportionallye, cauſeth ſundry tunes of Harmonie. For (trulye) ſuch great and ſwyft Motions, cannot bee mooued and incited wyth Sylence: and natural Courſe & Order requireth, that the Extremes on the one ſide ſhoulde geeue a Flatte ſound, & on the other, a Sharpe.
            For which cauſe, the higheſt Courſe of the Starry Heauen, whoſe whirling aboute & Reuolution is ſwifter & quicker, Starry Firmament. is moued wt a Sharpe and Shrill ſounde: But this loweſt Courſe of the Moone is moued with a very Baſe and Flat ſound. Moones heauen.
            
            For the Earth beeing the Nynthe, is lumpiſhe and vnmoueable, and ſticketh Earth. faſt alwayes in the loweſt Seate, compaſſing and veciſpping the middle place of the World. And thoſe Eight Courſes, in which is one ſelfe ſame Venus & Mercurye ſtrength and time of * twayne, do make notes diſtinct with Seuen Stoppes & Diſtances, which* nūber is (in a maner) The Septenary nū
                  ber hath tn it many and myſticall concluſiōs. Aul. Gel. the Knot of al thinges. VVhych,

Learned men with Stringes and ſonges perceiuinge and imitating, haue opened a waye to theimſelues to haue acceſſe into this Place: as there likewiſe haue bene ſome others, who being men of moſt pregnaunt & excellent wyttes in their lyfe tyme, honored and applied diuine Studies.
            This ſound ſo filled mens eares, that ther with they became dunch and deafe. Neither is any Senſe in you blunter or duller: as it is in them which dwel neere where the Riuer Nilus at the place called Nilus. 
               Catadupa, falleth downe from very highe & ſtiepe Mountaynes with a moſt Catadupa violent and headlong fal, in ſuch ſort, yt the people which dwel and inhabit nere there about, forthe incredible greatnes of the noyſe and ſound, are generally al deafe. And this noyſe of yt whole World, by reaſon of his moſt vehement & quicke conuerſion and mouing is ſo great, that the eares of men are not able to conceiue and comprehend it: like as you are not able to looke ſtedfaſtly vpon the Sunne direct againſt you with your eyes: but wt
               
the rayes & beames thereof youre ſighte dazeleth and your Senſe is ouercome.
            Although I greatly wondered hereat, yet did I now & then caſte myne eyes Worldlye things are to be contemned, & heauenlie thinges to be deſired toward the ground. Then ſpake Africane vnto me, ſaying: I perceiue, that yu yet ſtil caſteſt an eye towards yonder ſeate and habitation of Men: which if it ſeeme vnto thee (as it is in deede) very little and ſmall, caſt thine eyes alwayes towards theſe Heauenly thinges, & contemne thoſe mortall and humaine matters. For what celebrity of fame canſte thou obtayne by the talke and report of Men, or what Glorye canſte thou there wynne, worthy to be deſired? Thou ſeeeſt the dwellinges and habitable places which men haue on earth, be in ſere places and narow corners: yea & in ye ſame alſo (which are but as it were certayne ſpots or prickes, where they do inhabit) thou ſeeſt great Deſertes & waſt Wyldernes to bee layed betweene and interiected. Alſo thou ſeeſt theym whiche Hovv the vvorld is habitable dwell vppon the Earth, bee not onelye ſo interrupted and diſſeuered in ſituatiō
               
that nothinge betweene them can paſſe from one to another: but partlye they dwel awrye frō you, partly ouerthwart This is becauſe of the roundnes & globoſity of the earthe to you, & ſome directlye againſt you, at whoſe hands you can not loke to receiue any glorious Fame & Renowne. Thou ſeeſt alſo the ſame Earthe enuironed & compaſſed about, as it were with certen Gyrdles, whereof thou ſeeſt two, moſte diuers, & contrarily diſtaunt, one from the other, lyinge vnder the * Poles, of Heauen, on both ſides, to bee euer ſtiffe Arcticke and Antarcticke. with extreme chilling & Froſte. That which is in the middle, and is the greateſt, is broyled with continuall and exceſſiue heate of the parching Sunne.
            Two are habitable, whereof the one Antipodes vvhich in reſpect of the roundnes of the vvorld ſeeme to dvvel vnderneathe vs, & to ſet their feete againſte ours. is Southward, and they that dwel therin, do ſet their * feete againſt yours, and belong nothinge to your kinde. The other whiche lyeth towarde the Northe wherein you dwel, marke how ſlender a Portiō therof cōmeth to your ſhare. For al the Earth which is inhabited of you, being narow at the Poles, & broder at yt
               
ſides, is a little ſmall Iſland enuironed with that Sea, which you on earth call the Atlanticke, the Great, & the mayne Nothinge deſerueth to be called greate in this vvorld. Ocean Sea. Which notwithſtandinge theſe his glorious names and greate titles, how ſmall it is, thou ſeeſt.
            From theſe inhabited and knowē Landes, was eyther thy name, or the name of any of vs, able to reache eyther beyōd The greateſt hyl in the vvorld called alſo Taurus. this hyl * Caucaſus which thou ſeeſt, or els to ſwimme ouer yōder Ryuer * Ganges? Who in the reſte of the vttermoſte and furtheſt parts of the Eaſt, or Weſt, North or South, ſhal heare tell of thy A ryuer in India viij. miles ouer in the narrovveſt place, xx. in the brodeeſt, & an 100. foote diepe in the shalovveſt place name?
            Theſe beinge amputated and cut of, certes, thou ſeeſt in what narrow ſtraytes your glory is able to extend & ſtretche itſelfe. As for them that ſhal ſpeake of you, alas, how long ſhal they ſpeake?
            Furthermore if your Succeſſours, & they that ſhal come after, were deſirous and willing to blaze abroade and leaue to their Poſterity the worthy prayſes of euery one of vs, which they haue heard Worldlye fame, renovvne, & glorye, is but vanytye and to no purpoſe. of their fathers, yet by reaſon of the Deluges,

and Inundations of waters, and the burninges of Lands which of neceſſitie muſt happen at a certayn time, our glory which we may attaine, ſhalbe not only not eternal, but alſo not ſo much as of any continuaunce.
            And what ſkilleth it to be talked of & remembred by them, which ſhalbe born hereafter, ſithens there was no reporte made by them which were borne before: who (doubtleſſe) were neyther fewer in number, and certes, were better Men a great deale? Eſpecially ſith among thē vnto whō the report of our Fame may be hearde, no man is able to beare anye thing in memory, the ſpace of one yeare. For cōmonly men do recken a yeere onlye by the courſe and Reuolution of the Sunne, that is to wyt, of one Planet.
            But in very deede when al the Sygnes & Starres of the Fyrmament are come agayne to the ſame point, from whence they once ſet out, and begin anew their former deſcription of the whole Heauē, after long ſpace and tract of time: then may that be truly named the Turning
               
               yere, wher in how many mens Ages are cōteyned, I dare ſcarcely report. For as the Sunne earſt ſemed to be eclypſed & dimmed at that time, when the Soule of Romulus aſcended into theſe Temples: ſo when ſoeuer the Sunne in the ſame part, and in that ſame tyme, ſhal agayne A ful and complete yere after Plato. bee obſcured and darckned, then (al the Starres and Signes beinge reuoked back to their ſelfe ſame firſt beginning) accoumpt thou & recken it, for a ful, complete & perfect Yeare. And this knowe further, that the twentith parte of thys Yeare, is not yet expyred and runne out.
            Therefore if thou diſpayre of thy returne into this Place, wherein al thinges are for Noble and worthy Perſonages, how much worth then is this fading glory of Men, which can ſcarcelye laſt and reache, euen vnto a ſmall parte of one Yeare?
            Therefore if thou wylte lift vp thyne eyes on high, and view this Habitation The diepe conſideration of heauen & heauenly ioyes eaſelye dravveth a godlye man from the loue of this vvorlde. & eternal Manſion, thou ſhalt neither be affectioned to geue thy ſelfe to the talke of the vulgar people, neyther repoſe thy

hope and confidence in worldly promotions, & aduaūcement. For it muſt be only Vertue herſelfe, which muſte with her allurementes draw thee to the true Honour & renowne.
            What others doe ſpeake & talke of the, let they themſelues looke: but yet talke True honor muſte be gotten by vertue onelye they wyll. But al their talke is both encloſed within the ſtraites of yonder Regions whiche thou ſeeſt: neyther hath their talke talke bene of any man perpetuall: it both dyeth when the Men dye, and is vtterlye quenched wyth yt obliuion of Poſteritie.
            When he had thus ſaid, certes (ꝙ I) O Africane, if to the well deſeruers of their Countrye, there lyeth as it were a path, open to thentry of Heauen, albeit from my childhood, walking in my Fathers ſteps & yours, I haue ven nothing behinde with my dutie, to atchieue, and further your renowne, yet now ſeing ſo great a reward ſet out & propounded, I wil eudeuour & bend my ſelfe therunto Honor is a ſpirite to noble mindes. farre more diligently.
            Do ſo (quoth he) and make thy ſure accoūt of this, yt it is not thou, which art

mortal: but it is this Bodye of thyne: neyther art thou yt, which thy outwarde Forme & ſhape declareth: but the Mind A man is his Mynd. and Soule of euery Man is he: and not that figure & ſhape which may be pointed & ſhewed with the finger. Therfore knowe this, that thou art a God, if (forſoth) a God be that, which lyueth, which The mind ruleth and directeth the bodye feeleth, which remembreth, which foreſeeth, which doth ſo wel rule, gouerne & moue that Bodye ouer whom it is appointed Ruler, as that moſt high prince God, doth this Worlde.
            And as God beinge himſelfe eternal, doth moue this World, beinge in ſome parte mortall: ſo likewiſe the Mynde being ſempiternall, doth moue ye Bodie being frayle and tranſitorie: for yt which is euer moued, is eternall. But that which bringeth motion to another, and which ſelfe ſame, is mooued from elſewhere, when it hath an end of mouinge, nedes muſt it haue an end of liuing alſo.
            Therfore that only which moueth itſelfe, becauſe it is neuer forſaken nor left of itſelfe, neuer (trulye) ceaſeth it not to

be moued. Moreouer, this is the fountain and beginninge of mouinge to all other things that are mooued. And the beginning hath no originall: For all thinges proceede and ſpring from a Beginning, but itſelfe can be made of nothinge.
            For that which ſhould haue generacion elſwhere, could not be a beginning.
            So therfore if it neuer ſpring and begynne, neyther doth it euer dye. For the Beginning being extinct, neyther ſhall itſelfe euer grow again out of an other, neither ſhal it create any other of itſelfe. For al thinges muſt nedes ſpring from a Beginning. And ſo it cōmeth to paſſe. yt the beginning of mouing is, becauſe it is mooued of itſelfe, and it can neither breede nor dye: or els the whole Heauen would fal down, and al Nature would of neceſſitie ſtand at a ſtaye, and not obteyne anye force and power wherebye to bee mooued with his firſt impulſe and motion. Sithens therfore it playnly appeareth, that what ſoeuer is moued of itſelfe, is eternall: who is he that dareth to denye this Nature to bee geeuen to

Myndes for that is without lyfe, which is moued wyth externall force and motion: but that which is a Soule, is moued with internall & proper mouing: for this is the nature and power that is peculier to a Soule. Which if it bee one & the alone thing of al, which moueth itſelfe, certes it was neyther borne, & is alſo eternall. This ſee yt thou exerciſe in the beſt thinges.
            And the beſt cares that a man can take, are ſuch as tend to the auayle & profite Beſt cares that aman can nexte after God employe his minde vnto. of our Country. In which cares the mynde being enured and practiſed, ſhall haue ſpedier acceſſe & arriuall into this Habitation, as into his proper Manſion place: and the ſoner ſhal it do ſo, if then, when it is encloſed in the Bodye, it ſurmounte abroade, and beholdinge thoſe thinges, that are outwardly, doe greatlye withdraw itſelfe, as much as is poſſible from the Bodie.
            For the Minds of them that haue enthralled & geuen themſelues to bodylye Pleaſures, and haue made theymſelues (as it were) the Bondſlaues & miniſters

thereof: and by the egginge and procuremente of ſenſuall Luſte and Appetite obaying Voluptuous liuers. Pleaſures, haue prophaned and violated the Lawes both of God & man: thoſe men whē they be diſmiſſed and deliuered out of their bodies, are tumbled and toſſed about the Earth, and doe not retourne into this Place, tyll they haue bene purſued & turmoyled manye hundreth yeres. He departed: and I immediatelye awaked oute of my Sleape.
            
               Thomas Newtonus,
Ceſtreſhyrius.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Table
            
               A
               
                  ACcuſation. 29.
               Acquaintaunce, nevv and olde. 30.
               Adoleſcencie. 47. 55. 59. 61. 62. 63. 69. 75. 77, 80, 81. 82. 83. 84.
               Adulterye. 65. 101.
               Affection 102. muſt be brydeled. 104. 113. 116.
               Agamemnon 60.
               Age. 61
               Agreement. 42.
               Al thinges returne to that, vvhereof they had their firſt beginning. 87.
               Ambition, a greate plague to perfect Frendshyppe. 26. 113.
               Anger. 109.
               Antipodes. 129.
               Antonius. 109. 114.
               Apollo. 3. 85.
               Apparell. 119.
               Appius Claudius beinge old and blinde, had a noble courage. 53. A perfect paterne of a noble Gentleman, and vvorthye householder. 63.
               Archytas Tarentinus. 37. 64.
               Argantonius liued 120 yeares. 81.
               Aſtronomie. 70.
               Athenians. 68.
               Atticus, vvhy ſo named. 45.
               Auncientnes in familiaritie. 30.
               Augur. 78.
               Aucthority, the chiefeſt ornament of Oldage. 77. 79. 119.
            
            
               
               B
               BAnishement. 99. dreadefull and terrible, to vvhom. 100.
               Banished man, vvho. 108.
               Banquetting moderately vſed, cōmendable. 67
               Baibilles. 112.
               Baudrie. 103.
               Benefites, confirme loue and Frendshippe. 14
               Beſt dvvelling for Oldage. 78.
               Bias one of the vij vviſe Sages. 26. 96.
               Bloſius his deſperate aunſvvere. 17.
               Bodye, the priſon or gaole of the Soule. 85. 124 the vvardhouſe of the ſoule. 125.
               Bona Dea, her temple. 108.
               Bondſlaue to Vices. 109.
               Bondſlaue, vvho, 110, 111. 112.
               Bondage vvhat it is properlye ibid.
               Boundes of Frendship 17. 25.
               Briberye. 73, 117.
               Brutus 87. 96.
               Budde. 72.
               Buildinges ſumptuous. 95. 111.
            
            
               C
               Coecilius. 62.
               Care of ech noble and vvorthye man. 20. after a ſort, incident to Vertue. 21. 22.
               Care, rather to lyue vvel, then long. 81.
               Carinae, a ſtreate, or Rovve of houſes in Rome. 120.
               Carthage conquered by Scipio. 54. 122.
               Catadupa. 128.
               Cattall. 96.
               Cato Called vvyſe, vvhy. 34. 47. his vviſe ſayinge

38. learned the Greeke tongue in his old age. 46. 57. 63. his ſundrye Offices and ſeruice in the common vvealth. 54. 64. a perfect Stoicke. 91. 97.
               Caucaſus. 129.
               Cethegus. 113.
               Chaffe. 101.
               Children in frendship, nevv fangled & fickle. 16.
               Choyſe of frendes. 26. 27. 28. 36.
               Chydinge. 34. 38. vvhen and hovv to be vſed, ibid. & 39. 42.
               Circles of the coeleſtiall motions. 125.
               Citye. 105. 106. 107. 124.
               Citizen. 105. 107.
               Clavvbackes and diſſēbling frendes, vvorſe thē playne enemies. 38. hovv they may be knovven and diſcerned. 39.
               Cleanthes. 56.
               Cleopatra. 110.
               Clovvnish life vvithout frendes, yrkeſome and vnpleaſaunt. 25.
               Coffers ſtuffed vvith mony, maketh not the rich man, but a contented Mynde. 116.
               Comforting & cheering of diſtreſſed frendes. 26
               Cōmon vvealthes vpholden by graue oldmen, vveakened by yong & youthful officers. 55. 80.
               Cōmunitie of al things among frendes. 27.
               Compariſon. 79. 82.
               Conſcience. 100.
               Conſcience of vertuous Lyfe, comfortable. 49.
               Conſenting to the requeſt of frends, againſt the vveale of our country, vnlavvful. 20.
               Conſpiracy againſt the cōmon vvealth vvith al extremitie to be punished. 20. vvhence it procedeth. 64.
               Conſtancie. 4. 28. 29. 42. 85. 99. 102. 106.
               
                  Contented life rych. 115. 120.
               Contention. 16.
               Continuance of frendship: ibid.
               Coriolanus, moued vvith the vnkindenes of his
               Countrye, vvarred againſt it, and laſt of al killed himſelfe. 17. 20.
               Cornelius Gallus an Auncient & excellente Aſtronomer. 70.
               Corynthian vvorkes. 97. 111. 112.
               Coruncanus. 8. 18. 53. 58. 66.
               Courage. 98.
               Couetouſneſſe a plague to Frendship. 16. in old men. 79. euer needy and neuer ſatiſfied 96. 120. in the old time abhorred. 96. 110.
               Counſaylours, graue & vvyſe, the ſtayes of common vvealthes. 53.
               Craſſus, 114. vvhom he accoumpted rich. 116. his shiftes to get monye. 117.
               Currours. 74.
               Curteous maners. 29.
               Cuſtome. 30.
               Cuſtome of ſuch ſtrict and vertuous lyfe, as vvas in the old time, novv cleane gone. 19.
               Cuſtome of the Pythagoreans, to debate & call into remembraunce euery Eueninge, al thinges ſayd, done, or heard, the day before. 63.
               Cybele, Lady great Mother of the Gods. 67.
               Cyneas. 66.
               Cyrus. 75. a prince vertuous and fortunate. 76. 86 87.
            
            
               D
               DAnaus. 116.
               Death. 7. not to bee feared. 80. 83. not to bee bevvayled ibid. ſpareth no age. ibid. houre and time thereof vncertayne. 80. 83. the Hauen of reſt 82. 99. Feare thereof cauſeth a

troubled and vnquiet mynde. 83. deſpiſed euen of common perſons. 84. deſired of the Godly, and feared of the vvicked 88. terrible, to vvhom. 100. muſt not bee haſtened before the appointed time. 125.
               Death of frendes greuous. 4.
               Decius, 66. 84. 97.
               Delightes in huſbandry. 71. 73.
               Delightes peculier to euery ſeueral age. 84.
               Democritus. 56.
               Departure of frendes one from another. 32. 33.
               Deſire of honour. 113.
               Deſtenie. 123.
               Dictator, vvhat officer he vvas. 74.
               Diet of the Bodye and mynde reſembled to a Lampe. 62.
               Difference betvveene the povvers of the bodye and of the mynde. ibid.
               Digginge. 72.
               Dignitie of the mynde and Soule. 65.
               Diligence prepoſterous. 27. 38.
               Diogenes Stoicus. 56.
               Diſcorde. 11.
               Dishoneſty. 109.
               Dishoneſt point, to fal out vvith him, that hath beene an old familier frend. 33.
               Diſſimulation. 29. 39.
               Dotage. 63.
               Dreames. 122.
               Drudge. 113.
               Drudgerye. ibid.
               Dunginge of Land. 72.
            
            
               E
               EArth round lyke a Ball. 125. 126. lovveſte, lū
                  pish, and vnmoueable. 127. hovv it is habitable. 129.
               
                  Earthly matters, contrary to heauenly. 85.
               Echion a cunning Paynter. 112.
               Eloquence. 92.
               Empedocles opinion, that the vvorld & al thinges, conſiſted of Frendship. 11.
               End of lyuing beſt. 82.
               Enemie. 108.
               Ennius. 10. 44. 50. 52 83. 122.
               Epicures opinion of Frendshippe. 20. repoſe all felicitie in pleaſure. 66.
               Epitaphe. 55. 77.
               Equalitye in frendshippe. 30. 31.
               Equalite of faultes. 103.
               Euery man meddle vvith no more then hee can vvel compaſſe. 61.
               Euery age hath his proper ſeaſon. ibid.
               Excuſe for doinge ill, to pleaſure our frende not allovvable. 18.
               Exerciſes for youngmen. 75.
               Exerciſes for old men, ibid.
               Exerciſes of vvytte, 63.
               Exile. 108.
               Expenſes moderate, a greate reuenue. 119.
            
            
               F
               FAbius prayſed. 50. 51. 53.
               Fabritius. 8. 13. 53. 66. 97. 118.
               Face vvrinckled not the cauſe of aucthoritie & credite. 77.
               Faythfulneſſe. 28. 99.
               Fame of vvorthy men, neuer dyeth. 43. 107.
               Familiaritie. 30.
               Faultes in oldage hovv to be redreſſed. 62.
               Faultes in maners. 79.
               Feare is Bondage. 113. 114.
               
                  Feare of death vvhat it cauſeth. 83.
               Feaſtinge. 67.
               Fee. 120.
               Felovvshippes. 35.
               Fishpond. 112.
               Firmament. 127.
               Flattry & diſſembling, vvorſe then open enmity 29. getteth frendes novv adayes. 38. to be eſchevved. ibid. the greateſt plague to truefrēd shippe. 39. vvhich kinde of it is moſte hurtfull. ibid. vvho are moſte hurt thereby, & vvho lyſten moſt thereto. 41. of a litle maketh a great deale ibid. Slyly done, moſt carefully to bee taken heede of ibid.
               Fond delightes. 111.
               Forgery. 116.
               Fortune. 24. 99. 110.
               Four cauſes vvhy Oldeage ſeemeth miſerable. 52.
               Forum vvhat it vvas. 106. 107. 108.
               Free vvho. 109. 110.
               Freeman 109. deſcribed. 110. 113. 114.
               Frend is as a man his ovvn ſelfe. 11. 34. beſt knovven in time of Aduerſitie. 23.
               Frendes perfect, very fevv 7. vvherefore they are are too be ſought. 12. muſt not flatter one an other. 20. the beſt treaſure of all other. 24. 4
                     •
                  . vvhen, hovv and for vvhat cauſes, they may lavvfullye bee forſaken, and geeuen ouer. 33. muſt be admonished and frendly chidden. 38. effectes thereof. 43. vvhether nevv or old frē
                  des bee better. 29. departure one from another. 3
                     •
                  . 33. muſte bee Good men. 35. reioyce vvhen they meete together. 122.
               Frēdship vvhat it is. 7. 9. to be preferred before al vvorldly thinges. 8. agreable to nature, and

fitte both for Proſperitie and Aduerſitie. ibid. cannot be but among Good men. ibid. excelleth kindred. 9. the beſt Gyft, next vnto vviſdome ibid. can not bee but vvhere vertue is ibid. & 18. commodities therof. 10. 11. as neceſſary as the Elements. ibid. hovv farre it is perdonable 27. generallye profitable 36. property therof 3. 9. boūdes. therof. 17. 25. vvithout all cogginge and diſſimulation. 13. natural, ibid. 15. 34. not to be ſought for profite ſake, but for vertue. 14. 21. 34. cōtinuance therof. 16. nevv fangled in children & not durable. ibid. plagues belonginge to it. ibid. hard to be found among great men. 28. beſt iudgemente of it, at ful grovven Age. 32. compared to the Sun shininge in the vvorld. 21. reioyſeth at theire frends vvelfare, and ſorovveth at their mishap 22. geeuen by nature for an ayde to vertue. 35 generally prayſed. 36. moſte plainlye appeareth in men of equal and like age. 42.
               Frendship of vulgar or common ſorte 33. onely for gayne, and money novv adayes. 34.
               Fruict of Oldage. 81.
               Fruict of Witte and Vertue. 31.
               Furniture. 119. 122.
            
            
               G
               GAyne. 119.
               Ganges. 129.
               Gapers for other mens Death. 113.
               Gardeyne. 74.
               
                  Garriſon of this lyfe muſt be kept, til God, oure Capitayne diſcharge vs thence. 83.
               Geometrye. 70.
               Giftes of the mynde, the trueſt Rycheſſe. 3.
               Gyftes of Fortune. 25.
               Glorye, 35. 88.
               Gnato. 39. 41.
               God. 125. 126.
               Godly perſons deſire Death. 88.
               Goddeſſe of Eloquent ſpeache. 70.
               Gold. 73. 97. 101. 102. 119.
               Good for euerye man in his conuenient tyme & Age to dye. 90.
               Good man. 29. 96.
               Goodvvil and hartie frendlyneſſe among good men, 23. more to be regarded then profite. ibid to be deſired. 27. 42.
               Gorgias Leontinus his vvorthy Oldage. 51. 56.
               Graffinge. 72.
               Grape. 72. 73.
               Grauitie, 50. 77. 99.
               Graunting an vnlavvful ſute, as great an offence as to requeſt it. 18.
               Grave hayres bring not ſtraightvvayes Auctoritie and eſtimation. 77.
               Griefe of minde incident to vviſemen. 21.
               Groſſe errour to thincke the ſoule to dye together vvith the bodye. 6.
            
            
               H
               HAnnibal. 13. 84.
               Happye lyfe. 35.
               Harmony, in the motion of the Coeleſtiall Bodies. 127.
               Havvkinge. 74.
               
                  Heauenlye thinges onlye to be deſired. 129.
               Heauye thinges ſvvaye dovvnvvarde. 127
               Heſiodus. 56. 73.
               Homere. 56. 122.
               Honeſt men obey lavves, not for feare, but for loue of vertue. 110.
               Honour, vvealth, and ryches, chaunge maners. 24. hovv truly to be gotten. 130.
               Horatius Cocles, a valiaunt Gentleman. 97.
               Houshold ſtuffe. 96.
               Housholder. 63.
               Huntinge. 74.
               Huſbandrye. 71. 73. in old time the delighte and life of Noble men. ibid. a bleſſed kinde of life. 74. both neceſſary & profitable. 74. 76.
            
            
               I
               IL rulinge another, vvho cannot rule himſelfe 109.
               Image of Minerua. 92.
               Immortalitie of the Soule. 6. 85.
               Inferiours muſt not repine at their ſuperiours. 31
               Inſtructing of youth, an excellent and vvorthie function. 59.
               Ioye of frendes at their meetinge. 122.
               Iſocrates his luſtye old age. 52.
               Iupiter one of the vij. planets, in vvhat time he fully runneth his courſe. 126.
               Iudge. 113.
               Iuſtice the lincke or Bond of all cities. 106.
            
            
               K
               KIlling himſelfe, a thinge vvicked and horrible. 83.
               
                  Kinffolke. 124.
               Knightes vvhich dyed for for the honor & ſauegarde of their countrie. 84.
               Knovvledge. 59. 86.
            
            
               L
               LAcedaemonians 54. moſt of al others, honored Oldage. 78.
               Lacke of health. 62. 69.
               Lacke of vvealth. 116. 117.
               Laelius, & Scipio, ij faythful & perfect Frendes. 2. 7. 14. 43. A very vviſeman. 3. 46.
               Lamentation for the Death of Frendes. 5. 6.
               Lampraye. 112
               Lavv called Gabinia & Caſſia, vvhat it vvas. 19.
               Lavv called Cincia vvhat it vvas. 50.
               Lavve called Voconia, vvhat it vvas. 42.
               Learning and liberall Artes. 59. 92. comforteth and armeth a man againſte all extremities and aſſayes. 100.
               Learned men, fitteſt to decide controuerſies. 103
               Legacie. 52. 115.
               Legion. 116.
               Libertie, vvhat it is. 109.
               Life, vvhich is only & truly vvorthye to be ſo called 85. in this vvorld, ful of miſery & trouble. 88. not vvorthye to bee called lyfe, 124. compared to a Lodginge or Inne for a ſmall vvhile. 89.
               Lyfe contented, the rycheſt lyfe. 115. 120.
               Likeneſſe of maners and delightes, cauſeth frēdship. 22.
               Like delighteth, and dravveth to like. 43. 48.
               Loue. 13. confirmed by benefites and mutuall curteſies. 14. vvhat it is. 42.
               Loue to our Parentes. 
                     •
                  1. 125.
               Loue to our Countrey. 125.
               
                  Loue tovvard our frends, beeinge againſt theyr profite, is fond and foolish. 32. being taken avvaye, all pleaſauntnes of this lyfe is taken avvaye. 34.
               Liuius Andronicus. 70.
               Liuelode. 119.
               Lucre. 115.
               Lumbardie, ſometime called Gallia Ciſalpina. 51.
               Luſt, 66. 101. 102. 109. 111. 116.
               Lycopum. 120.
               Lyſander. 75. 78.
            
            
               M
               MAgiſtrate. 103. 106. 124.
               Magnanimitie. 98.
               Man vertuous and vvorthy, not borne in vayne. 89.
               Man is his Minde. 130.
               Man moſt happy, vvho. 99. created vvhy. 125.
               Man voyde of all Affections, cōpared to a Log, or ſtone. 22.
               Maners of men often chaunge. 16.
               Manilius. 120. 121.
               Marcellus. 84.
               M. Curiꝰ. 8. 13. 18. 46. 53. 66. 73. 74. 97. 112. 118. 120
               Many rather deſire to ſeme, then to be vertuous 41.
               Mainteynors of their countrye 524.
               Marius, a paterne of noble conſtancie, and patience. 99.
               Mariner. 101.
               Mars, one of the vij. Planets, in hovv many yeres he finisheth his course and reuolution. 126.
               Maſiniſſa a vvorthy and paynful prince. 61. 121.
               Memorye. 55.
               Mercury, one of the vij. Planets. 126. the time of his courſe. ibid. & 127.
               
                  Merchaundiſe. 117.
               Metellus, ſtrong and luſtye in his oldage. 59.
               Milo Crotoniata, his effeminate ſpeach reprehē
                  ded. 58. caried a lyuing Oxe vpon his shoulders the ſpace of a furlong. 61.
               Mynde vvhy inſpired into man. 85. is onelye it vvhich maketh a man Rich. 115. 116. his dignitie and excellencie. 65. 98. immortall 86. inuiſible. ibid. chiefely liueth after it is rid out of the bodye. 88. 99. 111. 114. 125. 130. 132.
               Mynde vvauering and mutable. 39.
               Minde of a vviſeman, vnconquerable. 105.
               Minerua. 92.
               Milke vvaye, or Milkie Circle, in heauen vvhat it is. 125.
               Modeſt bashfulneſſe. 35.
               Money, 28. 95. 115. 116. 117. 118. 119. 120.
               Moone the leaſte & lovveſt of the planetes. 126. hath no light but of the Sunne. ibi. in vvhat time and ſpace she runneth her courſe 127, be neath & vnder it, all is corruptible, mortall & tranſitorye, except Soules. ibid. aboue it, al eternall & incorruptible. 127: her heauen. ibid.
               Moſt Frendship novve a dayes, for moſt money 34.
               Motion of the Planets, & coeleſtiall bodies. 125.
               Mummius vvanne Corinth. 112.
               Mutius Scaeuola. his valiaunt enterpriſe. 97.
            
            
               N
               Naeuius. 70.
               Nature the beſt Guide to directe our liues by. 8. cannot be altered. 15. loueth her like 22. loueth no ſolitarineſſe. 37. hath her limitation, of lyuinge. 90.
               
                  Neceſſitie, tryeth a Frende. 24.
               Negligence. 36. 101.
               Neſtor lyued. 300. yeeres. 60.
               Nilus. 128.
               Noble men, Huſbandmen. 74.
               Noble Natures deſire to vvynne honor, and to leaue a fame and memoriall behynde theim. 87.
               No man ſo Olde, but hopeth to lyue one yeere longer. 56.
               Nothing euil vvhich commeth by neceſſitie of Nature. 47.
               Nothing long or of continuance in this vvorld 81.
               Nothinge better then good. 102.
               No vnlavvful requeſt, ought to be graunted. 18 19.
               Nurſe. 32.
               Numa Pompilius. 96.
               Numantia. 123.
            
            
               O
               Ocean. 129.
               Offence. 101. 104. 105.
               Oldage 5. no hinderer from dealing in publique offices and functions. 53. Surmiſed to be vvretched, becauſe it is vveake and vvearish. 58. lacking ſtrength. 61. diſpenced vvithal, and priuiledged from dealinges of mayne ſtrength and labour. ibid. Sickelye ibid. Surmiſed to lacke pleaſures. 64. Qualifieth all ill motions. 66. 67. allovved moderatelye to banquet. 67. hath pleaſures ynoughe and competent, 69. vvhat kinde of Oldage is pleaſaunteſt. ibid. & 73. moſt commendable. 77. Talkatiue and full of

vvordes. 73. vvhat is the chiefeſt honour and ornament thereof. 77. teſtie and captious. 79. Miſlyked becauſe it is neere death. 80. Fruicts thereof. 81. hath no certayne number of yeres appointed hovv long to laſt. 82. ſtout and couragious. ibid. bragging and prayſing themſelues and their former dedes. 87. Luſty. 59. muſt be reſiſted. 62. vvherein honorable. 63. prerogatiue thereof. 78. laſt parte or finall ende of this lyfe. 90.
               Old betimes, vvho vvold be old long. 60.
               Old young age commendable. 63.
               Oldmen delight in the louingnes of youngmen 42. 57. vvrongfully charged to be obliuious, 55. forget not vvhere they lay their purſes, or hyde their treaſure. ibid. vvayvvard. 79. vvho, are called by Caecilius, foolish. 62. ſtudious. 70 their exerciſes 75. vvhere the beſt dvvellinge for them vvas, and vvhere they vvere moſt reuerenced. 78. ſeuere. 79. couetous ibid. endued vvith profoundnes of reaſon. good counſaile and graue aduiſe. 80. dye vvith leſſe payne thē Youngmen, and more agreably to Nature. 82.
               One good and vertuous man, more to be regarded, thē many rich Cobbes, being vvicked. 97.
               Oppreſſion. 105.
               Oracle of Apollo. 3.
               Oration of Scipio, pythye. 40.
               Orbes of the planets & Coeleſtiall Bodies. 125. nyne. 126.
               Order. 105.
               Originalles, a Booke ſo entituled and penned by olde Cato. 63. 84.
            
            
               P
               Payſaunt. 111.
               
                  Papyrius. 40.
               Paradoxa. vvhat it ſignifieth. 93. Socraticall and true. 94.
               Parſimonye. 119.
               Partaking vvith Frendes in trouble. 28.
               Pelfe and vvorldlye vvealth. 96.
               Penſion great, not to be couetous. 120.
               Phidias a notable Image maker. 94.
               Picaenum, in Italy, hovv novv called. 51
               Picture, 97. 111. 112. 119.
               Piſiſtratus the tyraunt. 82.
               Planets. 125.
               Plantinge. 73.
               Plate. 97. 111.
               Plato hovv hee lyued in his Oldage, and hovv hee dyed. 51. 56. 66. 67. his reaſons, prouinge the immortalitie of the Soule. 86.
               Plautus. 70.
               Playfelovves in youth. 32.
               Pleaſure. 15. beaſtly and pernicious. 64. 65. 132. Welſpring of al Vices. 65. muſt be abandoned. 
                     •
                  09. contrarye to vertue. 66. Bayte of miſchief 67. hard to reſiſt the allurements thereof. ibid in ſome reſpectes tolerable. 68. Ytch thereof. ibid. moſt in Youngmen. 69.
               Pleaſure of learninge and knovvledge, excelleth al other pleaſures. 70.
               Plentie. 118.
               Prayſe due to Vertue. 98.
               Prauitie of the mynde. 102.
               Principalitie. 113.
               Profite by Frendshippe. 23.
               Promotion. 36.
               Propertie of a vvell ſtayed mynde. 21.
               Protectours of their countrie. 124.
               Prouerbe. 30.
               
                  Priſon of the Soule. 85. 87.
               Poet: 105.
               Poles of heauenl. ij. 129.
               Polycletus, a cunning Imagerer. 112.
               Porſenna. 97.
               Poſſeſſions. 119. 120.
               Pouertie and Oldage ij. heauye burdens to beare. 52.
               Pylades and Oreſtes 11.
               Pylote of a shippe. 53. 101.
               Pyrrhus. 13. 53. 66. 73. 118.
               Pythagoras. 56. 61. 83. 85.
               Pythagoreans cuſtome. 63. 85.
               Punishment. 104. 108.
               Purſeuauntes. 74.
            
            
               Q
               QValification of vices. 109. of affections. ibid.
               Qualities of the mynde. 62. 112.
               Queſtions briefe & compendious. 92.
               Quicke motion of the Coeleſtial Spheres. 125.
               Quietnes. 21.
               Quincuncie, vvhat it is. 76.
            
            
               R
               Rashnes, incident to youngmen. 55.
               Realme, nobly protected by vvorthy Gentlemen. 1
                     •
                  5.
               Reaſon. 102. 105 Regulus Attilius. 84. 98.
               Remorſe of conſcience. 113.
               Requeſt of one frend to another. 18. 20. 32. 35.
               Requital of curteſies. 22.
               Reſiſtaunce againſt Nature. 48.
               Reſpect in preferment of Frendes. 32.
               
                  Reuenue. 119. 120.
               Reuerence to elders and betters. 30.
               Reuerence to Parentes. 104.
               Reuerent avve in Frendshippe. 35.
               Reuolutions of the celeſtial Bodies. 125.
               Right in a peny, aſvvel as in a pounde. 102.
               Ryches. 24. 36. 95. fruict thereof. 117. conſiſteth only in vertue. 119 vvhereby to be meaſured, 120. propertie thereof. ibid. poſſeſſed manye times by euill and naughty men. 96.
               Rich man beeing foolish, very tedious and vveariſome in companye. ibid.
               Rich vvho. 115. 119. vvho not rich. 118.
               Riot. 16.
               Rome 105.
               Romulus. 96. 130.
            
            
               S
               SAcietie of lyfe. 84. 90.
               Saguntines. 103.
               Saying moſt repugnaunt to Frendship, 26.
               Samnites. 118.
               Saturne the higheſt Planet. 126. in vvhat time. hee fully finisheth his courſe. ibid.
               Scipio a vvorthy Gentleman. 5. 6. 23. a perfect & ſtedfaſt frende to Laelius. 2. 7. 14. 43. Subdued Carthage and Numantia. 5. 54. 70. 84. 97. 122. 133.
               Sea Atlanticke. 129.
               Senate and Senators vvhy ſo named. 54. delited in thold time in huſbandrye, 74. 106.
               Senſualitie. 15. 65. 98. 109. 132.
               Septenarye number, myſticall. 127.
               Seſtertium, vvhat it is in value. 119.
               Seueritie in meaſure, allovvable. 79.
               Shame. 109.
               Shiftes vnhoneſt to get vvealth. 115.
               
                  Shypvvracke. 120.
               Short thinges ſufferable. 43.
               Shrylneſſe of voyce. 59.
               Simonides. 56.
               Synne 101. vnlavvfull. 102. 103.
               Sincke of al miſchiefe. 89.
               Slaue. 112.
               Slauerye moſt vyle. 112. 113. vvhat it is. 114.
               Sleepe, an Image of death. 87.
               Socrates, the only vviſeman of the vvorld. 3. 56. 85. learned to playe vpon muſical Inſtrumentes in his Old dayes. 58. his manner of diſputinge. 103.
               Sommer. 85.
               Solitarineſſe. 37.
               Solon vvaxed euery daye older by learninge daylye more and more. 57. 70. his ſtout aunſvvere to a Tyraunt, 82. 83.
               Sophocles. 55. accuſed by his ovvne Sonnes of Dotage. 56. his aunſvvere touching carnal cō
                  cupiſcence. 69.
               Soothing and holding vp vvith yea and nay. 38
               Soules. 85. Immortal. 88. 89. 90. 127.
               Spartacus, a notable Ruffian and Rebel. 107.
               Speach myeld & curteous, commendable in old men. 59.
               Spending prodigallye. 119. meaſurablye & ratably to our gettinges. ibid.
               Springe. 72. 81.
               Stabilitie of Frendshippe. 34. 42.
               Stage player. 104.
               Starres. 125. bigger then the Earth. 126.
               Starry Firmament. 127.
               Statius. 36.
               Stepping aſide a little frō honeſty, to ſaue thereby the credite or lyfe of our frend. 27.
               Steſichorus. 56.
               
                  Studies appropriate to ech ſeueral age. 84.
               Suada, Goddeſse of Eloquence. 70.
               Sufficiencie is vvealth ynough. 116.
               Sullennes. 29.
               Sunne the chiefeſt, greateſt and moſt ſoueraigne light. 126. In vvhat tyme he perfourmeth his Reuolution. ibid.
               Superiours, muſt helpe and relieue Inferiours. 30
               Suſpicion. 29.
               Syllable in lyfe. 105.
            
            
               T
               TAbles. 97. 111. 112.
               Talebearers and tale creditours. 29.
               Talke. ibid.
               Tarquinius. 13. hovv and vvhen he tryed his frē
                  des. 24. 96.
               Taunt rebounded. 50.
               Terence. 79.
               Terentius Varro, ſlayne. 84.
               Themiſtocles. 20. 49. his excellent memorye. 55.
               Thermopylae, a mountayne in Greece. 60.
               Thetica. 93.
               Things fayre and beautiful, hovv to be eſtemed 112.
               Thinges excellent, rare, and hard. 34.
               Thraſo. 41.
               Three ſuppoſed ſpecial opinions of frēdship. 25.
               Tiberius Gracchus. 17. 19. 123.
               Tyllage. 74. 75.
               Timon, an hater of al companye. 37.
               Torment of a vvicked and guiltie cōſcience. 100.
               Trāquillity of mynde. 35.
               Tryal of Frendes. 27. 28.
               Truth. 38. 40.
               Treaſure not comparable to Vertue. 119.
               Treaſon. 64.
               
                  Treacherye ibid.
               Tuſculane Queſtions. 93.
               Tutours to children. 32.
               Tyme paſſeth avvay. 81.
               Tyme rype and conuenient to dye. 84.
               Tyraunt 23. 107.
               Tyrannye. 105.
            
            
               V
               VAlerius Coruinus 76.
               Vaunt of levvd lyfe, moſt beaſtlye and deteſtable. 98.
               Venerous copulation. 69.
               Venus one of the vij. planets. 126. her courſe & reuolution, ibid & 127.
               Vertue amiable and dravveth men to loue her. 13. vvel liked and loued, euen in our enemies, and them vvhom vve neuer ſavv, 14. 15. dyſdaynful of no man. 23. not to bee diſpiſed, 27. deſpiſed, 16. 41. getteth and keepeth Freendeship, 42. 44. cannot be vvhere pleaſure ruleth 65. to bee deſired euen for herſelfe. 67. more vvorth then all vvorldly treaſure. 97. 99. agreable to reaſon and conſtancie. 102.
               Vertues equal. 102. prayſe vvorthye. 112. cauſes vvhy moſt chiefely to be eſteemed. 120.
               Vertuous man, cannot be miſerable. 100. lyueth after he is dead. 124.
               Vnlavvful requeſtes of Frendes. 16. 17. 18.
               Vnlike maners, vnfit for frendshippe. 32.
               Vpbrayding of pleaſures and benefites. 31.
               Vrinalles. 112.
               Vſury. 117. 119.
               Vice to be punished vvithoute reſpecte of perſons, 66.
               Vices equall. 192.
               
                  Vyne. 71. 72.
            
            
               W
               VVAightye matters, hovv atchieued. 53.
               Wardhouſe of this lyfe. 83. 125.
               Waryneſſe. 33.
               Wayvvardneſſe. 49. 79.
               Wealth and vvorldly Ryches vvithout a Frend, vnpleaſaunt. 23. 37. 115. 119. altereth maners. 24. are not rightly to be tearmed any of ours. 106.
               Weapons fit for Oldage. 49. 54.
               Whoredome 65. 103.
               Whole Worlde as one cytty. 100.
               Wycked lyuers afraid to dye. 88.
               Wiſdome paſſeth ſtrength. 60.
               Wiſeman. 110.
               Wiſe and ſententious counſayle. 36.
               Wit vvauering. 29.
            
            
               X
               XEnophon. 68. 75. 86.
            
            
               Y
               YEre, called the turning yere, vvhat it is. 130.
               Younge head, rash and vnſkilfull. 55.
               Yoūge men ſubiect aſmuch or more to ſickneſſe then Old men. 62. 80. their exerciſes. 75. dye vvith greater payne then Oldmen. 82.
               Youth inordinately led, maketh a feeble and impotent Oldage. 59. delighteth in vayne Pleaſures.

69.
               Youthfull Oldage, moſt commendabl
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  .
            
            
               Z
               ZEno. 56.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            Imprinted at London in Fleetſtrete by Thomas Marſh. 1577.
            
               Cum Priuilegio.
            
            
         
      
   