
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE Approoued order of Martiall diſcipline, with euery particuler Offycer his offyce and dutie: with many other ſtratagemes adioyning to the ſame. (*)
                  Whereunto is adioyned a ſecond booke, for the true ordering and imbattelling of any number ſo euer, with the proportions of euery Battell, which beſt ſerueth in theſe our dayes of ſeruice. (⸪)
                  Newlie written by Gyles Clayton.
                  
                  Printed at London, by I. C. for Abraham Kitſonne, dwelling in Paules Church yarde, at the ſigne of the Sunne. Anno 1591.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ƲIrtutis Cuſtos, verae pietatis alumna,
                     Inſignita viges Relligione, fide.
                     Quae pacem patriae, meditaris, vt omnia recte,
                     Hoſtibus externis, praelia dura parans.
                     Vnde parens patriae vocitabere virgo, ſed hoſti,
                     perpetuus terror, dum timet ipſe ſibi.
                     Alma licet regno ſit pax optanda quiesque,
                     Non tamen armorum reiiciendus amor.
                     Bella parant nobis pacem, placidamque quietem,
                     Et pax alma vigens praelia iuſta iuuat.
                     Viue, vale, patriae Cuſtos, & amica bonorum,
                     Et ſemper florens ſis decus ipſa tuis.
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCESSE, ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE of God: Queene of England, Fraunce, and Irelande: Defendreſſe of the Fayth. &c.
                  
                     HAVING HAD OPORtunitie, (moſt gracious and mightie Princeſſe) ſince my laſt ſeruice in the Lowe Countries, I thought it good to betake me to my penne, in ſetting forth this approoued order of Martiall Diſcipline. And for that your princelie loue and good will, hath alwaies beene great and fauourable, to all true and faithfull Souldiours and Seruitors: it hath the more imboldened me, to preſent to your moſt gracious view, this little labour, beſt befitting to come from a Martiall mind. The circumſtaunces verie neceſſarie to be conſidered of by thoſe which are in authoritie. And although commonlie, euerie man (moſt worthie and renowmed Soueraigne) ſeeketh ſpeciallie to commende and extoll the thing, whereunto hee feeleth himſelfe naturally bent and enclined. Yet all ſuch partialitie and priuate affection layde aſide: it is to be thought, that for the defence, maintenaunce, & aduauncement of a Kingdome, or Common-weale: or for the good & due obſeruation of peace, and adminiſtration of iuſtice in the ſame, no one thing to be more profitable, neceſſarie, or more honourable,

then the knowledge of ſeruice in warre or deedes of Armes. Conſidering the ambition of the world is ſuch, that it is impoſsible for any Realme, Kingdome, or Dominion, long to continue free in quietnes and ſauegard, where the defence of the ſword is not alwaies in a readineſſe. For as Valerius Maximus ſaith, the ſafe keeping of this bleſſed peace, conſiſteth in the knowledge of warre, and deedes of Armes.
                  
                     Plato prayſing the arte, commaundeth that children ſhoulde learne it ſo ſoone as they were able. Cyrus ſaid it was as neceſſary as Husbandry. Auguſtine and Bernard, both graue Catholique Doctors of the Church, doth approoue the ſame. Manie more, and infinite examples might be alledged, and all againſt thoſe which diſaloweth of this moſt famous and honourable exerciſe of Martiall diſcipline, and renowmed orders of the Lawe of Armes, which hath alwaies heeretofore beene the purchaſer of Empires: Kingdomes hath beene enlarged: Princes preſerued: iuſtice maintained: good Lawes protected: and the Common-wealth defended. So in laying aſide the exerciſe of warlike weapons and Martiall diſcipline, how many Kingdoms hath beene ouerthrowne, how many Countries ruinated, & how many floriſhing Citties ſacked and beaten downe flat to the ground.
                  But as your Highneſſe, hauing moſt ſufficiently furniſhed euerie part of your Realme, with all manner of warlike prouiſion, in ſuch ſort, as neuer any of your Prediceſſors hath heeretofore come neere: euen ſo could I wiſh in hart, that Englande were as well furniſhed with Seruitours of experience and knowledge, in this moſt honourable exerciſe of Martiall diſcipline. But the ſtarres run their courſe contrarie to the world, and the learned iudge otherwiſe then the Idiote. The Cranes, when they flie out of Cicilia ouer the Mountains, carrie in their mouthes a peble ſtone, leaſt by their chattering, they ſhould be ſeazed vpon by the Eagles: which byrds, (moſt gracious and renowmed Princeſſe) teacheth mee ſilence, leaſt my ignoraunce be perceiued by your moſt excellent and learned minde. The conſideration of the which, droue me firſt into doubtfulnes, whether it were beſt to write, and ſo ſhew my good will, or to ſuſpend my penne, and ſo to hide the ſame.
                  
                     But then I conſidered, that the ſtone Perites burneth not the fingers, except it be broken: nor the loue and hartie affection of the minde, is not knowne, except by words that be opened. Iupiter hath not made mans bodie like a Latteſſe, that the hart might be ſeene through the holes: but hath ſhutte vp the ſame cloſe, that the tongue and penne might be the organes and inſtruments of the thought. I hauing ſerued your Maieſtie in Irelande and in the Lowe Countries theſe ſixteene yeeres, yet not worthie the fauour of ſo mightie and gracious a Princeſſe.
                  Thus moſt humbly crauing pardon for this my preſumptuous enterpriſe, moſt humbly beſeeching your Highneſſe, ſo to accept my labour heerein, as the firſt fruites of a poore Seruitours ſtudie, who to the vttermoſt of his ſmall power, in the ſeruice of your Maieſtie, and his Countrie, will at all times, according to his bounden duetie and allegeance, reſolutely and willingly yeeld himſelfe to any laboure, trauaile, or danger what ſoeuer ſhall happen. Praying in the meane ſeaſon the Almightie God, to giue your highnes a long and proſperous raigne ouer vs: and as hee hath heeretofore wonderfully preſerued you, in moſt magnificent & princely regalitie, in the deſpite of all your enuious foes: ſo he to haue a mercifull and louing eye continually vpon you, to the great comfort of all your louing Subiects: and againſt all your enemies, moſt happy and ioyfull victorie.
                  
                     Your Maieſties Seruitour, moſt humble and dutifull to be commaunded. Gyles Clayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the freendly Readers in generall, and ſpecially to all young Gentlemen of Englande, which moſt honourably attempteth to get renowne and honour, in thys moſt famous and renowned exerciſe: Gyles Clayton ſendeth greeting, health to your perſons, and happineſſe to all your honourable attempts.
                  
                     ALthough (freendlie Readers,) you thinke my labours might haue beene verie well ſpared, in wryting any matters appertayning vnto warres, for that euery man is deſirous to liue in ſecuritie of peace: but freendly Readers, you are to vnderſtand, that this bleſſed peace cannot be maintayned and kept ſecure, without the vſe and practiſe of warlike weapons, and Martiall diſcipline. For we are to conſider, the ambition of the world is ſuch, that it is vnpoſſible for a Realme or Dominion, long to continue in quietnes & ſafegard, where the defence of the ſworde and Mtiarall feates of warre is not exerciſed and practiſed with diſcipline. For as the Greckes thinking themſelues to be in peace and ſecure, applyed themſelues in tryfling matters, taking pleaſure in Comaedies, and ſuch like toyes, altogether laying aſide Martiall diſcipline and the exerciſe of warlike weapons: which gaue occaſion to Phillip King of Macaedonia, father to Alexander the great, to oppreſſe and to bring them in ſeruitude vnder his ſubiection. I could alledge many more which hath beene ſuppreſſed, onelie for lacke of the vſe of warlike weapons, and thinking thēſelues to be in moſt ſecuritie and peace, as the Aſsirians, Perſians, Athenians, & ſuch like. And the Cittie of Rome, which might haue beene perpetuall, but thought themſelues in peace, and fell to inordinate ryot and paſtimes, not doubting nor fearing any thing which was hurtfull vnto them or their Commonweale: which thing was to theyr great ruine and ouerthrowe. Euen ſo where ouermuch libertie is giuen, men may be troden down vnder foote, and brought to moſt horrible miſerie & calamitie:

if they giue thēſelues only to paſtimes & pleaſures, and forſake the vſe and exerciſe of warlike weapons, which are the defence both of Prince, Country, Religion, iuſtice, lawes, and ſubiects: the which are altogether maintained, and protected by Armes onely. And therefore the moſt famous Conquerers and mightie Captaines did deuiſe, with moſt dilligence, all maner of waies, to bring their men to be perfect in the knowledge of all manner of things appertayning to the warres. As manifeſtly appeareth, by the warlike Games which the Princes of Grecia ordained vpon the Mount Olimpus. And alſo by the orders and exerciſe that the auncient Romans vſed in ſundry places, and ſpecially in Campo Martio, and in theyr ſumptuous Theaters, which chiefely they builded for that purpoſe: whereby they made their Souldiours of ſuch experience, that they obtained with ſmall company in fight, againſt a great multitude of enemies, ſuch wonderfull and meruailous victories, as in many credible Hiſtories are mencioned. And alſo by the ſame meanes, their ſtragling people which followed the Campes, gotte ſuch vnderſtanding in thoſe actions of Armes, that they in the day of battaile, beeing leſt deſtitute of ſuccour, were able without any other helpe, to ſette themſelues in good order of battaile, for theyr owne defence againſt the enemie, and in ſuch times of ſeruice, they haue doone theyr Countrey great ſeruice. So that the antiquitie eſteemed nothing more happy, then to haue the Country full of men of vnderſtanding and knowledge, in warlike actions, and Martiall diſcipline. Which thing is leaſt regarded in this Realme, & moſt neede of it: for that we haue ſo many euill & peſtiferous enemies roūd about vs: which are ready continually, if oportunity ſerue thē, to worke our ruine and decay. Wherfore ſtirre vp your ſelues euery man with courage, and boldnes of minde, to the exerciſe of your warlike weapons, which is honourable, and moſt worthy to be preferred before all exerciſes. For the vſe heere of being laid aſide, breedeth more ſedicions and warres, then if they were daily had in vſe, & ſo perfectly practiſed: for experience in ſeruice, doth much more preuaile, then many multitudes of

people, beeing without vnderſtanding and knowledge in this moſt honourable ſeruice. Wherefore, ſith the neceſſity of this ſeruice of warre, and Martiall exerciſe is ſo great, and alſo the neceſſary vſe of them ſo manifeſt, that euen peace herſelfe, in manner, doth challenge her cheefe defence & protection, ſuch is the worthines of Martiall exerciſes: for as by proofe wee ſee, that the glory thereof cannot eaſily finde roote, but in the harts of ſuch moſt worthy men, which continually exerciſeth themſelues in theſe warlike weapons, for the glory of their Prince & Country, and alſo for their own honour and magnanimitie. Wherfore theſe exerciſes being of ſuch force, which bringeth all thoſe that exerciſe the ſame to ſuch honour and fame, both of Prince and Countrey, that I would in hart, that all Engliſh men, might ſhewe their good will in the exerciſe thereof. But hauing ſo fewe men of experience in theſe dayes, we ſee that euery one hauing ſerued but a yeere or two, it is a great matter. Nay, if he but croſſe the Seas, and make hys abode but one month, he is accounted a Souldiour. But for my part, I haue ſerued theſe ſixteene yeeres in Ireland, and in the Low Countries, and haue ſeene many peeces of ſeruice in both places, and yet I dare not account my ſelfe a Souldiour. For the name of a Souldiour is moſt honourable, and thoſe that beare the name or title thereof, ſhoulde be men of vnderſtanding and knowledge, and well experienced in warre, & Martiall diſcipline.
                  Doe we not find in many places of the holy Scripture, both in the bookes of Moſes, in the booke Numbers, in the booke of Ioſua, and in diuers other places of the Scripture, where they vſed no little regard, not onely in chuſing of theyr Captaines and leaders, but as well in preſcribing of Lawes and Martiall diſcipline of warres, the which in times paſt were appointed by the Almighty God himſelfe: moreouer promiſed gyfts to thoſe which could perſwade the children of Iſraell. As by example, in the booke of Numbers, as I remember, in the foureteene chapter, howe God promiſed with his owne mouth to rewarde Caleb, for his conſtancie, & couragious perſwaſion

to the children of Iſraell. And Dauid beeing a man of ſmall account among the great Warriours, yet for his worthines and famous behauiour, in killing and ouerthrowing Goliah: what great riches and rewards receiued hee, with the Daughter of King Saul? But in Englande, we neuer conſider, neyther of hys actions, nor of his knowledge and experience: but moſt commonly, our Captaines are choſen, more for fauour then for knowledge: more for freendſhip, then for experience: for if they haue a good opinion in him, they neuer conſider his deſert, whether he be a man able to diſcharge his place or no. But I haue no doubt, that euery manſhalbe hereafter better looked vnto, both for theyr knowledge, as alſo for their experience & deſert. And 
                        Ʋarro ſayth, there be three things not to be ſuffered, a wiſe man vnder the gouernaunce of a foole: a liberall man in ſubiection to a caytife: and a foole ſette in authoritie. Wherfore it is moſt commonly ſeene, where good order & gouernaunce faileth, obedience decayeth, boldnes increaſeth, deceit eſcapeth, iniuries preuaileth, auarice corrupteth, and the eſtate of a Weale publique ſoone after decayeth. But leaſt I ſhould offend, I will conclude with a fewe other examples, as in Spayne, in Fraunce, in the Low Countries, and many other places, what great intentions are among theyr Princes & Gouernours, the which is a great perrill, and an endangering to their Princes and their Common wealth & Countrey, in an euil and dangerous eſtate. Wherefore let vs be thankfull to God, for giuing vs ſo louing and gracious a Princeſſe, who foreſeeth ſuch euill intentions, leaſt they ſhould breede to ſuch inconuenient ſores which may not be cured. For her Maieſtie conſidereth, that the ſtrength of her Realme, is the freendſhip and loue of her people. And Marcus Aurelius ſayth, that Princes liue more ſafely, in gathering to them men of good vnderſtanding and knowledge, then with theyr treaſures of money: for the loue of a Princes Subiects to theyr Prince, is the whole ſtrength of the Lande. And as Hermes ſayth, vnhappy is that Prince, that eſteemeth himſelfe happy, to haue his Cofers full of treaſure, and his counſaile full of men of euill and corrupt

liuing. Alſo let vs remember the woorthy ſaying of Socrates, who ſayth, that if a Prince be mercifull, liberall, and louing, his eſtate ſhall proſper, and his wiſedome ſhall helpe him in hys neede. If he be iuſt, his ſubiects ſhall reioyce in him, his Realme ſhall proſper, & his eſtate continue: for glorious is that Country and Common wealth, and fortunate is that Prince, that is Lord of young men to trauaile, and olde ſage perſons at home, to giue graue and wiſe counſaile.
                  Thus hauing ſpoken ſufficient, I will conclude, moſt humbly beſeeching God, ſo to bleſſe her Maieſtie, with long life to raigne ouer vs, that wee may by her gracious proceedings be long gouerned. God confound her foes, and bring to lyght all traiterous Conſpiratours againſt her moſt excellent Maieſtie. God ſo bleſſe her honourable Counſaile with increaſe of wiſedome, that all theyr conſultations, may redownd to the ſafe keeping and honour of this moſt famous England. Amen.
                  
                  
                     Gyles Clayton.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE ORDER OF MARTIALL DISCIPLINE: AND FIRST, OF THE ELECTION OF A Lorde Lieuetennaunt, or a Generall for the Prince.
                  
                     
                        AS the entrance into warres and martiall diſcipline, is of great charge and importaunce, as wherevnto requireth no ſmall regard and conſideration to be admitted, for in this bleſſed peace we haue continued a great time, for the which wee thinke our ſelues in a moſt happie and bleſſed eſtate, which is true: but let vs not flatter our ſelues too much in this ſecurity of life, and ſo lay away the vſe of warlike weapons, the which is the only preſeruer & maintayner of that bleſſed peace, for as Valerius Maximus ſayth: without the vſe and knowledge of wars and the exerciſe thereof, this bleſſed peace cannot be maintayned and preſerued. And Auguſtin and Barnard, both Catholike Doctors of the Church) affyrmeth, that this ſweete and quyet peace cannot be maintayned and kept, without the vſe of war and Martiall exerciſe, with ſuch policies as is poſſible to be vſed, for the defence of his Countrey and Common-weale, and eſpecially, for the maintenaunce of true Religion: wherefore it ſhall firſt and principally be conſidered, that Officers be choſen therin of all degrées to ſerue in the ſame, and thoſe alſo that

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
be men of godlie conuerſation, great wiſdome, expert and politique in Martiall affaires, faythful and loyall to theyr Prince and Countrey, and of ſuch magnanimitie and courage, as rather couet to climbe to honour by deſert, then to liue a cowardiſh life with ſhame. Theſe Officers ought alſo, to be of ripeneſſe of witte, at a ſuddaine to perſwade and diſwade as the cauſe ſhall require: of great lenitie in their ſpéech and actions, whereby to winne the loue and liking both of enemyes and friendes.
                  A Campe, Leagar, or Gariſon, furniſhed with ſuch Officers, cannot but floriſh as the Laurell in all behauiours: in ſo much, as the Officers being themſelues faythfull, expert, and godly, the common Souldiours muſt needes be the better, both by inſtruction, and example of lyfe, and knowe how to liue in all duetie and obedience: ſo that vertue thus bearing ſway on euery ſide, vnitie thence immediatly ſpringeth, wherin they all in one lincke: beeing knitte together, there is no doubt but they muſt néedes preuaile againſt their enemies, for loue and concorde in Campe or Leagar, is a diſcouragement to the enemies, and an encouragement to themſelues. Who by ſuch meanes are ledde, doe ſuppoſe and thinke no toyle paynefull, to winne honour, ſo forceable is loue, vertue, and obedience, in all kindes of gouernement. But on the contrarie part, where corrupt, gréedy, and churliſhe Officers are, who ſéeking nothing more, then their own priuate gaine and commoditie, not regarding at al, the poore ſouldiour, whoſe life for his wages and honour of his Countrey, is ſolie aduentured: but what enſueth of ſuch Officers, but mutinies and diſcords, and in fine, by ſuch onely occaſions, commeth the vtter raine and confuſion of an whole Army.
                  But the Officers be diuers, for ſo it is néedefull: for, the gouernment of a Campe or Leagar, is as the gouernment of a Realm or Countrey, and requireth lyke Officers, to miniſter iuſtice and to ſuppres wrongs and iniuries: and as that Common-wealth (though the Lawe be neuer ſo pure) cannot long continue in ſecuritie, where the Magiſtrates bee ignorant of

the ſame: ſo that Campe or Leagar, not hauing good, ſkilfull, and politike Officers, to rule, place, gouerne, and defende their Souldiours, to order their Campe, to make their battailes of diuers ſortes, for the beſt aduantage againſt theyr enemies, and for the greateſt ſtrength to place Ambuſhes. To endomage the enemy by aduauntage, and alſo by politike foreſight to fore-ſée the traps, ſnares, and Engines of the enemie, and thereby to preuent the ſame cannot long endure.
                  But to conclude, a Generall muſt haue an eſpeciall care to bee well prouided, for the true payment of his Armie: for the want of pay doth not onely inféeble and abate the courage of Souldiours, when they ſhall bee pincht both with hunger and colde: but it bréedeth mutinies, it cauſeth diſcordes, it neglecteth ſeruice, and lets ſlippe opportunities. To ſette downe in particulars what great daungers hath happened for want of pay, woulde aſke a longer diſcourſe then were requiſite: wherefore, maintaine diſcipline, and ſée your Souldiours be well payd and well puniſhed.
                  
                     The Office and duetie of a Colonell generall.
                     WHen this Colonell is choſen of his Lord Generall, and receiues his aucthory from him, he ſhall chooſe his Captaines, Lieuetennants, and Sargeants, Harbengers, Enſignes, Drums, and Phifes, and that his ſpeciall care be in chuſing of good Captaines, Lieuetennants, and Sargeantes, and that they been men of gouernment, expert and ſkilfull in ſeruice, of ſuch ripenes of witte, which may vpon the ſuddaine perſwade and diſwade as the cauſe ſhall require. He ſhall alſo examine his Captaines, what choiſe they haue made of their Officers, whether they be men of ſufficient knowledge or no, if hee findes them to be good, then hee is to aſſigne euery Captaine what weapon his Souldiours ſhall vſe.
                     He is to haue an eſpeciall and great care, in chuſing of hys Lieuetennant, for that he ought to be a man of great experience and knowledge in ſeruice: for it appertaineth to him only, if occaſion ſerueth, to inrancke men in time of ſeruice, to alter

and chaunge them, as beſte ſerueth for their aduantage. And laſtly, hee ſhall giue great attendaunce on his Generall, that he may be ready at his commandement to know his pleaſure, for that paynes is honorable and of great credite, a place beſt fitting a man of countenaunce and credite, whoſe experience ought to be great, and to excéede the knowledge and experience of all other Lieuetennants.
                  
                  
                     The high Treaſurers Office.
                     YOU ought alſo to chooſe vnto you an high Treaſurer, which is an Offyce of great reputation, and therefore hee ought to be a man of wiſdom, and expert in Martiall affaires: for, hee is to ſpeake his opinion in all Offices, as well concerning other offyces as his owne, otherwiſe committed to his charge: for the payment of all high Officers appertayneth vnto him, as to the Colonelles and Captaines.
                     Likewiſe he ſhall receiue from the Generall, the true note of horſemen and footemen within the Army, and to make a perfect booke cuery moneth, that he may knowe what is due to euery Officer and Souldiour. Hee is alſo to conferre with the Maſter of the Ordenance for the prouiſion of Municion of all ſortes, and likewiſe with the prouante Maſter, or Maſter of the victualles, to fore-ſée that they be well prouided of victuals for the Campe, that the Souldiours may haue no want thereof. There be many other thinges which might be ſpokē of, as concerning his Office, but I will referre them vnto the good opinions of thoſe which be wiſemen, and ſufficiently inſtructed in this Martiall exerciſe.
                  
                  
                     The Office of the Lord high Marſhall of the fielde.
                     WHen the high Marſhall is appointed, and for euery battaile, one prouoſt Marſhall with his vnder Marſhall, which ought to be men of good vnderſtanding and iudgement, both wiſe & graue, for yt matters of great weight, bependeth onelie vpon them. Likewiſe they ſhall haue all thinges neceſſary, for the puniſhment of all diſordered perſonnes according

to iuſtice: that is to ſay a Hal with yrons, for the ſafe kéeping of their priſoners, and carriages for the ſame, a ſufficient nū
                        ber of Tipſtaues vnder them, which are inferiour Officers for the reprehenſion of Offenders, and for the ſafe-keeping of thē. A Clarke of the Market, and an Execucioner: alſo, at the remooue of your Campe or Leagar, the high Marſhall is to giue an order to euery Officer in the Campe, to haue ſpeciall care for the conueying of their carriages.
                     Likewiſe hee is to haue ſpeciall care for the placing of the Scoutes, at that time of remooue, and at all other times. Finally, he ought to be a man of ſounde iudgement, and experienced in the knowledge of Martiall diſcipline, for that his office eſpeciallie dependeth thereon.
                     Alſo he is to fore-ſée, that euery inferiour Officer not dooing his duetie, to bee corrected and reformed, that diſcipline may be vſed, as well to inferiour Officers, as to the common Souldiour: thus ordering his Leagar or Campe without parciallity, ſhall not onely winne loue and fouour of the Campe or Leagar, but alſo reape to him ſelfe honour and renemue.
                  
                  
                     The Office and duety of a Sargeant Maior.
                     LIkewiſe you are to elect and chooſe a Sargeant Maior, whoſe offyce is great, therefore you ought to haue an eſpeciall care in chooſing of him: for he ought to be a man of great courage, for that his offyce is alwaies to bee in the face of the enemie. In time of battiale hee ought to be a man of ſinguler inuention, at a ſuddaine to perceiue and preuent the ſituation, terror and pretence of the enemy.
                     Likewiſe, he is to appointe what ſortes of weapons ſhalbe vſed in euerie battaile, and to ſee there be no want thereof in time of néede. He is to haue a ſpeciall care, to for-ſée that the Armie be perfectly inſtructed, that they may knowe and vnderſtand, the true order and meaning of your battailes, aſwel in time of peace as otherwiſe: alſo, he is to appointe the battaile, & of ſuch ſort, as he thinkes beſt befitting the ground. He is to appoint euery Captaine his place, & to giue them theyr

ſeuerall charge, which they ought to performe. Hee is to appoint them, what kinde of weapons ſhall bee vſed in the time of battaile: finally, his Officers ought vnder him, to be very good and ſufficient Seruitors, ſound in vnderſtanding & knowledge in Martiall exerciſe: for they ought to take paines in ſetting of battailes, if occaſion ſerue, for that theyr Sargeant Maior cannot be alwaies in one place of the battaile.
                  
                  
                     The Maſter of the Ordenance.
                     THE Maſter of the Ordenance, ought to be a man expert and ſkillfull in all pointes of Cannonry, alſo in thoſe artes which to that office belongeth, able to inſtructe and reforme his Lieuetennants, Controulers, Clarkes, Conductors, Cannoners, & all other Artificers, teaching them the beſt he can. To conuay theyr charges to ye place of ſeruice, be it in time of marching, in time of Camping, battering, imbattailling, or retyring: regarding as well, that euery peece of Ordenance be well & ſtrongly ſtocked, and mounted vpon ſtronge Axeltrées, & their wheeles well ſhooed, and ſtrongly bound with yron, in all pointes as to the ſame belongeth, placing and giuing to euery Cannoner his charge, as to his place appertaineth: and alſo, it belongeth vnto him to haue in regard and in readines, all thinges fitte for the making of fyre workes: that is to ſay, Saltpeter or quickeſiluer, Roſen, Linſéede oyle, and common Lampe oyle, Pitch, wexe, Aquauite, Camphere, Tutia, Arſenicke, Calx viue, and great ſtore of Sulphure, of al theſe frame balles to burne in the water.
                     He ſhal haue ſpecial regard for ye placing of his Ordenance for the beſt aduantage againſt the enemies, & to haue a regard to ſee that euery Officer doe their duetie in time of battaile: and to conclude, he is in great reputation in the field, for vpon him dependeth the performing of great exploytes, and that all other Officers vnder him be men of vnderſtanding, and experienced in Cannonry, and that they taking wages vnder him to be occupied in and about ſuch thinges, as to theyr dueties belongeth.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Lieuetennat of the Ordenance, his duetie and charge.
                     THis Lieuetennant of the Ordenance, ought to be a man well practiſed in ſeruice, and ſkilfull in Cannonry, and to be in all pointes as ſkilfull as the Maſter of the Ordenance: ſo that he may at all times in his abſence, be able to inſtructe, reforme, and correct, able to giue a charge vnto all men vnder their leading, as to the ſame appertaineth, examining and tr
                           •
                        
                        ing theyr Cannoners, Municioners, and Artificers in theyr ſeuerall ſciences: and finding them neceſſary and able, ſhall inſtracte the Maſter of the Artillarie, who may allowe and place them at his pleaſure.
                     But if in the viewing the Artillarie and Municion, and finding them vnready and not ſeruiceable, ſhall cauſe it to bée amended foorthwith, or elſe to complaine to the Maſter of the Ordenance, who ſhall ſee preſent redreſſe for the amendment thereof.
                  
                  
                     The Maſter Gunners charge.
                     THe Maſter Gunner muſt be a man of great experience in that ſcience in all pointes, placing and appointing ſuch men vnder him to bee Cannoners, as haue like experience, which ſhall ſee that euery Cannoner, appointed to any Péece of Ordenance, be able to gouerne the ſame, as to that ſeruice appertayneth.
                     Likwiſe he ſhal ſée all inferionr Gunners do theyr dueties, & that they be ſkilful incharging and diſcharging, and to haue in a readineſſe all thinges belonging to his offyce, and to foreſée that their Peeces be kept cleane, to haue in ſtore all kinde of ſhotte and fire workes: theſe and ſuch like matters appertaineth to the Maſter Gunners charge and duetie, the which he ought to haue a ſpeciall care vnto, for his owne aduancement and credite, during the time of his charge: and that hee be ſkilfull in the height and weight of his ſhotte and powder, alſo in the height of the month of his Péece, and that he ſee his

ſhotte ready in the bere of his Péece, and pouder in bagges, touch pouder in his horne, Lint and Lintſtocke ready. That he bee ſkilfull in the receipt of his pouder, and knowe the authority of the ſame: and when ſoeuer hee reciueth charge of hys Péece, he ought to be dilligent in trying and ſearching of the ſame, that ſhe bee cleane within, for honny Combes right bored, and to the ſame a cloſe couer, with Ladies and Spunges fitte for the ſame.
                     Thus furniſhed and ſtrongely mounted vpon ſtronge wheeles well ſhooed, ſtronge Axeltrées well clowted, often greaſed, with Linſ-pins of yron, a ſtronge backe well bounds with yron plates well nayled, and reueted boultes, Linſ-pins to the ſame ſtockes, two Boxes, one of powder in bags, the other for ſhotte, and ſome hayle ſhotte according to his Péece, with mouldes for the ſame, with many other neceſſaries vnrehearſed.
                  
                  
                     The Office and duety of a quarter Maſter.
                     THeir ought to be appoynted one quarter Maſter, whoſe experience ought to be great, for that he is to place and lodge an whole Armie, either in fielde or Garriſon, as it ſéemes beſt to the high Marſhal: for that he ought to appoint the ground for Leagar, or place for Garriſon. This quarter Maſter ought to appoint conuenient wayes or ſtréetes for men to paſſe thorowe, eyther in Leagar or Garriſon: and that he haue a ſpeciall regarde to fore-ſée, that the wayes bee fayre and eaſie for men to paſſe to the place of Artillarie, where men moſt commonly doe aſſemble together in time of Alarum, or in time of battaile.
                     This quarter Maſter ought to haue foure quarter maſters vnder him, which ought to be auncient Seruitors, and men of good behauiour and vnderſtanding in thys ſeruice: and that they may at all times giue dilligent attendance on him, to knowe his pleaſure, and what beſt is to bee doone in that ſeruice.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Office and duetie of the Scoute Maſters.
                     ALſo there ought to bee certaine Scoute Maſters, elected and choſen of the high Marſhall and prouoſt Marſhall: they muſt ſee that euery Officer doe their dueties in time of theyr watch, and to be carefull for the preuenting of any miſchiefe that may happen by their negligence: Wherefore, he ought dilligently to veiw and walke the roundes euerynight, be it in Leagar or Garriſon. If he finde any place of ſuſpicion, where the enemy may take any aduantage: then ſhall hee in that place, plante certaine Scoutes for the defence thereof.
                     Theſe Scoute maſters ſhall attend vppon the high Marſhall, and ought to be both diligent and painefull, for that the preſeruation and deſtruction of the whole Armie conſiſteth in them onely: wherefore the high Marſhall ought of his owne perſon, to haue a ſpeciall care and regard thereof, and diligently to trye and examine the truſtie and carefull ordering of the Scoutes, if any fault be in them, and to ſée that preſent reformation bee made thereof, for they be all of the offyce of the Marſhall, and counted all as Marſhalls in that time of ſeruice. As for Forrage maſters, carriage maſters, and ſuch like Officers, which are very neceſſary, are hereafter to be ſpoken of, as you ſhall finde them in theyr ſeuerall places of ſeruice.
                  
                  
                     The Office and duetie of the Muſter Maſter.
                     THis Muſter maſter ought to be a man of great credite and truſt, for that he is to giue true information vnto the Lord Generall or high Treaſurer, what ſtrenght they are of able men, both of horſemen and footemen: alſo, he ſhall in taking Muſter haue a ſpeciall eye & regarde, vnto thoſe Officers appointed for the leading of men: that they bee men of ſeruice, and not choſen without regarde, but be men of experience and knowledge, and to ſée that the Souldiours bee well furniſhed with Armor and weapons, and eyther to paſſe or defaute thē as he ſhall finde reaſonable cauſe, and to make preſent certificat to the high Treaſurer, that he may ſtoppe ſuch defaultes

of theyr pay. Alſo, they are truely to kéepe all ſuch Lawes and Ordinances, as by the ſayde Generall or his ſaide Counſaile ſhalbe ſette down, and appointed by his or their authorities.
                  
                  
                     The Office and duetie of the Corporalles of the fielde.
                     IT is moſt neceſſary and needefull, that there be choſen 4. Corporals of the fielde, though not in auncient ſeruice they haue beene vſed, but as our ſeruice ſtandeth in theſe daies, they are moſt needefull and profitable, for that they are as eyes and a right hande to the Generall, Marſhall, and other head Officers in the fielde.
                     Theſe men ought to be of good vnderſtanding and knowledge, well experienced in the orders of Martiall diſcipline, and the ordering of companies, in marching by degrees in the fielde, that of a ſuddaine they may be brought into a battaile, or battailes, as occaſion beſt ſerueth. It were good that theſe Officers might not be choſen, neither for fauour nor affection, but by deſert: either to be Captaines of experience, which are diſcharged of their companies, or to prefer ſuch Liuetennants as be of good gouernment and knowledge, well experienced in theſe exerciſes of Martiallity, for yt they are to diſcharge the heade Gouernours of the field, of many trauailes and paynes. When they are cōmanded, then one or two ought dilligently to giue good attendance of the Generall & Marſhall, to know theyr pleaſures: the place is painfull, yet honourable, and therefore duelie to be conſidered of.
                     Alſo they ought to haue a ſpeciall regarde to euery Colonelles and Captaines companies, that they march in good order, as beſt befitteth the way they march in: and as it may ſéeme beſt to the Generall, Marſhall, or other head Officers, to alter and chaunge as time and place ſerueth in that iourney.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Office of a Forrage Maſter.
                     A Forrage Maſter is to haue and receiue from the Leiuetennant of the horſe, an able companie of horſemen for the guarde of their Forrages, and ſuch as ſhall fetch in neceſſaries, the which muſt giue dilligent attendance on the ſound of the Trumpet: for that they are to goe all together, and not ſuffering them to ſtraggle out of his companie, further then he is able to reſkue them. And if they bee farre from the Campe or Leagar, not to ſuffer any to depart homeward, vntill they are all prouided: and as they came foorth, ſo to returne all together.
                  
                  
                     The carriage Maſter.
                     THis Carriage Maſter ought to be of good credite and truſtie, for that hee is to take great charge of carriages vpon him: for the ſafe conduct thereof, hee is to haue a Cornette of horſe, from the Lieuetennant of horſe for hys guide, and alſo loſe ſhorte from the Generall, or elſe to march with all hys carriages, betwéene the troupes of footemen, for his better ſecuritye in his iourney.
                  
                  
                     The election of a Captayne, hys Offyce and duetie
                     THE place of a Captayne is not lightlie to bee conſidered of, for that vppon his ſkill and knoweledge dependeth the ſafety or loſſe of many mens liues: wherefore he ought to be well experienced, and of great wiſedome and policie, to be choſen for his owne worthines of ſeruice and not for fauour. But I wonder how ſo many inſufficient men, dare oppoſe themſelues to vndertake a matter of ſo great importaunce: whoſe inexperience, beſides many circumſtances, concerneth the loſſe of a Countrey, or at the leaſte, the hazard of many mens liues.
                     
                        But a good Captaine will haue a great regarde to fore-ſée, that his Souldiours be well trayned, and make them men of warre, méete for ſeruice, within a ſhorte time, thoughy the neuer ſawe warres before, in taking a little paynes with them. A Captaine ought to ſée his Souldiours ſeruing vnder him, to be well furniſhed with all things needfull for the ſeruice, and to ſée them truely payde their wages. Euery Captaine ought to haue vnder him one Lieuetennant, one Enſigne bearer, two Sargeants, fiue Corporals: one of the ſayde Corporals for his pikes, to ſée their Armour and pikes be well kept and ſeruiceable, the other foure Corporalles, to haue the ſhotte deuided betweene them as his companie is.
                     He is to haue one Surgeon, one Drum and Phife: it were not amiſſe that a Preacher and a Phiſition, were prouided for euery two thouſand of men, to miniſter remedy, the one to the Soule, and the other to the bodie. But no Captaine that hath but foure ſhillinges a day, ſhall be able to furniſh himſelfe to his calling, and the healping of his Souldiours, except he rob his Prince and poule his Souldiours of their pay: wherefore it were very good, that euery Captaine ſhoulde haue in his charge and leading, ij. hundred men to his Enſigne: for without doubt, the charge for the carrieng of ſuch neceſſaries as he ought to haue comes to foure ſhillings a day, wherfore he can haue no leſſe then eight ſhillinges a day. Thus hauing two hundred men to his Enſigne, the Prince thereby ſhall neuer the more be charged: then ſhe was before: ſo may they be able to furniſh their bande with many thinges needefull, as meat, drincke, Armour, weapons, carriages for ſicke and hurt Souldiours, his Surgeons cheſte, and other tooles very neceſſary: alſo, hee may releeue the Souldiours of his owne table. Yet ſhall the Prince bee at no more charge then ſhee was before, when they had but foure ſhillings a day, which was then more like to hinder himſelfe and his Souldiours, then to giue them any thinge beſides theyr pay, which thing is very needefull, at all times to giue to ſuch as be weake and ſickely.
                     It were not amiſſe to haue a prieſt vnder him, which might

ſupply the place of a Clarke, and to haue the calling of his bill vnder his Enſigne: alſo, he ſhall haue the choyſe of his Lieuetennants, and all other Officers vnder him, and to for-ſée that they bee ſufficient Seruitors, and expert in Martiall exerciſes, alwayes ready and painfull to diſcharge their dueties, for the honour of theyr Captaine, and that it may redownd to their owne credites and diſcharge of their duetyes.
                     Likewiſe it appertaineth to him, to be preſent with the Generall at all times, to knowe his pleaſure and determined minde, for the exployting of any péece of ſeruice commited to his charge: and the ſame ſhall he faythfully proſecute, to the vttermoſt of his power, for his own credite and aduancement. Wherfore he ought to be ſkilfull in making of Trenches and Ramparts, as wel for his own defence as for any aſſault: alſo hee is to appoint his Sargeants to receiue the watch worde euery night, and the ſame to keepe verie carefully, and to vſe all the deuices hee can poſſibly make or frame for the annoyance of the enemies, and the ſame continually to followe and practiſe with all dilligence: not to be timerous, but alwayes bearing a valiant heart, and neuer ceaſe to encourage his ſouldiours, which may winne him credite for euer, both of his Prince and Countrie.
                  
                  
                     The Office and duetie of a Leiuetennant.
                     THe Lieuetennant of a Band, ought to be a man of knowledge and experience in this ſeruice, for that he is diuers times to diſcharge his Captaine of many and ſundry trauails and paines, which to him belongeth. Yet notwithſtanding, he is not to take any more authority then to him belongeth: but faythfully and willingly to aduertiſe his Captaine, what time ſoeuer he ſhall be demaunded any queſtion of him, and ſhall ſhewe and inſtructe to the vttermoſt of his power.
                     He is to ſée the Sargeants and Corporalles doe their dueties, in time of ſetting the watch, and to ſée that other inferiour Officers bee obedient and carefull in their charge: for the furniſhing and prouiding of Armour and weapons of all

ſortes: and in his Captaines abſence to apply his authority, and that with great dilligence, and eſpeciall care during the time of his abſence.
                     Finally, he ſhall inſtructe the Souldiours, and giue them to vnderſtand, what they haue to doe at any time of exployt, with the beſt and ſureſt way hee canne for theyr aduantage: and therein not to fayle, but franckly and freely to performe the ſame with all dilligence poſſible, for his own aduancement and credite.
                  
                  
                     The Enſignes charge and duetie.
                     FOR that the Enſigne in the fielde is to be honoured of all men, ſo ye Bearer thereof ought to be a man of good courage knowledge, ſufficient to diſcharge his duetie. He ought to bee ſworne to be faythfull and loyall to his Prince and Captaine, profeſſing rather to die, then to be diſhonoured with the loſſe of his Coulours: but with courage to aduance them▪ in the ſight of his enemies.
                     He muſt be of able perſonage, ſecret, ſilent, zealous, wiſe to perſwade and animate the Souldiours: whoſe reſolute minde ought to be ſhewed in time of any diſtres, to the encouragement of all the Souldiours about him.
                  
                  
                     The Sargeants of the Bandes charge.
                     THeſe Sargeants of Bands, ſhould be men of great experience, well knowne to bee ſufficiently inſtructed in theſe Martiall exerciſes: both ſecret and ſilent, for that they are to put their men into goodorder of aray at euery ſuddain, to teach them the vſe of their weapons whatſoeuer, in the beſt and ſeruiceableſt manner, practiſing the ſame in Garriſon or in time of Muſters, or trayning, marching, and retyring, vntill they be perfect, that euery man in time of battaile may bee able to diſcharge his duety.
                     Alſo to ſée them furniſhed with Armours and weapons, to them moſt fitte and agréeable, ready by the Enſigne at euery calling, be it by ſound of drum or ſecret calling, either by night

or day: who ſo refuſeth their authority in ſuch behalfe, ſhall be puniſhed as diſobedient perſons: for the aſſurance of the whole company conſiſteth in the ſame.
                     Hee ſhall aſſigne euery Souldiour to his place moſt fitteſt for him, ſuffering them not to ſtriue the one with the other, for any place: but euery one to be placed according to his ſeruice and ſkill. Alſo, he is to ſée there be no want of victualles, powder, ſhotte, or match: if any ſuch thinges be wanting, he is to aſſigne it to his Captaine or Leiuetenant, who ſhal ſée it prouided for them, in a readines at all times. He is to accompany the watch to place of ſtand, either to market place, or to watch Hyll, and at the breaking vp to take the watch worde of the Sargeant Maior or high Marſhall: wherefore he ought carefully to giue attendaunce on the Sargeant Maior and hys Captaine, to be ready at his commaundement. For good Sargeants in a diſordered company, ſhall finde toyle more then enough, vntill ſuch time as they haue well trayned them: and therefore, his Captaine is to haue great regarde and conſideration of him.
                  
                  
                     Corporalles and Launceſpazadoes charge.
                     IT is neceſſarie for the readines of ſeruice, that fiue Corporals be choſen, which ought to men of honeſt behauiour and experience, euery Corporall hauing his ſquadron appointed to him: who is not onely to exerciſe them in the vſe of theyr weapons, to ſee them that they be well furniſhed with all neceſſaries, as ſhot, powder, match, bullets, and ſuch like: but to haue a ſpeciall care in kéeping their furniture cleane and ſeruiceable.
                     If any defaults be founde, they are to complayne, if amendment be not found preſently, to the Sargeant or Leiuetennaunt, who ſhall ſee it preſently reformed, bee it in Garriſon or Campe. Thus, iuſtice and aucthortie ſhall be mayntayned, and faultes amended.
                     Alſo, the Launceſpazadoes ſhall ſupply the charge of the Corporals in theyr abſence, if occaſion at any time call them.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Clarke of a Bandes charge.
                     CLarkes of Bandes ought to be men of ſober and wiſe behauiour, perfect in accounts: for that hee is to take the names of euery Souldiour, ſeruing vnder his Captaines colours. He is to be carefull in kéeping of his accounts, betwéen his Captaine and the Souldiours, and to ſée that euery Souldiour haue his pay well and truely payd, and to prouide them all thinges neceſſary, and eſpecially in time of ſicknes: the which will be a great credite, both to himſelfe and his Captaine, and the onely way to winne the heartes of hys Souldiours.
                     Alſo, he muſt be preſent at euery turne, as watch, Muſters, and other méetings and aſſemblings, with his bill of names, to call his Captaines Souldiours, and of euery one being abſent, to make certificat thereof. Many other things might be ſpoken of touching his Office, which for breuity I ommitte.
                  
                  
                     A Chirurgions Office and duetie.
                     THoſe Chirurgions ſhoulde bée men of honeſt and good conſcience, and ſuch as ſhoulde worke according to arte, not practiſing new experiments vpon poore ſouldiours, by meanes whereof many haue béene vtterly maimed: wherefore, the Captaines are to haue a ſpecial care in chooſing their Chirurgions, that they be ſkilfull in their ſcience or arte, and to ſee them haue all thinges neceſſary: as Oyles, Balmes, ſalues, and Inſtruments ſufficient for his turne, allowing & ſparing carriages for the ſame.
                     Alſo, that euery Souldiour ſhall giue to the foreſaide Chirurgion, euery moneth two pence, as in times paſt hath beene accuſtomed, to the augmentation of his wages: in conſideration wherof, he ought readily to imploy his induſtry vpon the ſore and wounded Souldiours, not intermodling with any other cures to them noyſome, regarding alwayes that hee bee truely payde his wages, and all dueties to him belonging, that he may be able to prouide al ſuch ſtuffe as to him belongeth.

It ſerueth his turne at néedefull times in the night, to go through the watch without the worde, when vpon ſtraight occaſions he is to goe to his cures.
                  
                  
                     Drums and Phifes duetie.
                     IT is neceſſarie that euery Captaine haue two Drums, the one to be reſident with the colours, the other to march with the Troupes, as vpon occaſion they ſhall be drawn forth: alſo, it were not amiſſe to haue one Phiſe, for that it is a good lightſomnes to the Souldiours.
                     Thoſe Drumers ought to be men of perſonage, faithful, ſecret and truſty: they ought to haue ſundry languages, and to know the ſound and cal of all marches, charges, retreites, alarums, and ſuch like pointes of warre: for many times they are ſent to parlie with the enemy, to ſummon their Fortes or Townes, to redéeme and conducte priſoners, and diuers other meſſages. If ſuch Drums or Phifes fortune to fall into the handes of the enemie, no gyfte, no faire ſpéeches, neither force nor terror, ſhall cauſe them to bewray any ſecrets knowne to them. They muſt often times practiſe their Inſtruments and teach the company the ſoūd of march, charge, retreit, alarums, and ſuch like, that is neceſſarie to be knowne: They muſt bée obedient to their Captaines, Lieuetennants, and other Officers, when ſoeuer they command them either to goe or ſtand, or to ſound any point of warre, what they thinke beſt: many other things belongeth to their offyce and duetie, as in diuers places in this booke you ſhall finde.
                  
                  
                     Furniſhing of Souldiours to the Fielde.
                     FIrſt, that all Corporalles and Launceſpazadoes, leading of ſhotte, ſhall in his owne perſon, ſée them to be well furniſhed in all pointes, as followeth: that they haue their full number of Souldiours, and euery Souldiour to haue a ſufficient Caliuer, Flaſke, and Touch boxe, pouder, bullets, mould, priming yron, match, rammer, worme, burgenet, and one ſword and dagger, to teach them to march, to charge and diſcharge

with a fayre retreit, not touching one an other, kéeping their faces vpon the enemies: and in raine or moiſt weather, to hould their Péece vnder their arme, with the touch-hole of their Péece, cloſe vnder their armehole, their match being fyred betwéene their fingers in the palme of their hande, ſo ſhal they be ready at euery ſuddaine. Prouided alwaies, they kéepe their match and pouder dry, their Péece cleane ſcoured within and without: if any fault be found therein, immediatly to be amended.
                  
                  
                     The Corporall of the pikemen, his Office and duety.
                     A Captaine ſhould chooſe a ſufficient man, ſtronge and expert in the handling of his Pike, to be Corporall of his companie of Pikes: for that it is a moſt ſtronge and warlike weapon. This Corporall ſhall teach the Souldiour often times to vſe his Pike, in puſhing and trayling the ſame in good order, both for the beauty of the battaile, and for the neceſſity thereof: and to ſée them haue ſufficient and good Corſlets, for they bee the greateſt ſtrength of your battaile, and a terror to the enemies, and in any wiſe ſée them fitte and eaſie for their bodies, that they may be able to vſe their weapons in time of fight, which is a great defence in a Campe, and choſen chéefely for the battaile.
                     They muſt haue Morions Swordes and Daggers, their Pikes of vſuall length, ſharpe pointed, and well nayled: and cauſe them in time of marching, to lay their Pikes on theyr ſhoulders, and their thums vnder the ſame, the but ende on the outſide of his leades mannes Legge. After this ſorte to march to Muſter, to retyre, and Imbattaile as aforeſayd: hauing a great care and regarde, that no Souldiour of ſpite or negligence doe cut the ſame, or any way impayre it, for the greateſt ſtrength of the battaile conſiſteth therein.
                  
                  
                     Of Holberders to garde the Enſigne.
                     THeſe Holberders ſhould bee men of good ſtature and courage, for that they are to beautifie the company and guarde

the Enſigne, wearing Curites on theyr bodies, with ſwordes and daggers, vſually called Executioners of the battail: which ought to be alwaies ready at the ſound of Drum or ſecret call, to attende vppon the Collours, and neuer to depart from the ſame till it be brought into place of good ſecuritie.
                  
                  
                     Prouiſion to be fore-ſeene by the Lorde Lieuetenaunt.
                     WHen all néedefull Officers be thus choſen, it then behooueth that a conuenient place be appointed, where all Captaines may gather their men together in ſeueral companies, where the Lieuetenant generall, & other warlike counſayle ought to be preſent, to take the muſters of them, and ſubſtantially to foreſée, that euery man be well prouided of hys furniture, according to his place of ſeruice, alſo to foreſée there be no lacke of Munition of all ſorts, both ſmall and great, alſo powder and bullets, both ſmall and great, Caliuers, Muſkets, Holberds, Pykes, Armour, Scaling ladders, ſhort laders to fill Maundes, for the ſafegard of the Ordenaunce and Gunners at time of batterie or battaile, ſmall handbaſkettes, ropes, and all other earthware: to haue ſufficient tooles méete for the Labourers and Myners to worke withal, if occaſion ſerue, Carts, Cart-wheeles, and Axeltrées, both for the Ordenaunce and other carriages, and that there be ſtore of them in time of néede. Alſo prouiſion for bridges if neede bee, as boordes, boates, and Anckers, other plancks and pillers faſtened together with ropes and Cables: alſo to be prouided of all manner Artificers, with theyr neceſſaries meete for the warres, as Smithes, Maſons, Carpenters, and Armorers, with other ſuch like.
                     And aboue all things to foreſée there be ſufficient ſtore of victuals, for all things may be beter endured then hunger, for hunger ouercōmeth without ſtroke of enemies, and one other like prouiſion, which is, money ſufficient, that your Souldiours may be wel paid: for oftentimes money giueth courage, and reuiueth the ſpyrits of your Souldiours, for a Souldior

without meate, and eſpecially without money, is as a man without a ſoule: but if your Souldiours haue money, and bée well paid, then ſhall your Campe floriſh like a Cittie, with all manner of victuals, and other neceſſaries moſt meete for your Souldiours.
                  
                  
                     The chuſing of Guides.
                     AND when all your prouiſions neceſſary be made, and ſette in good order, and that you be ready to inuade your enemies Countrey, then ere you begin your iourney, you muſt be ſure that you be well prouided of a ſufficient number of men of the ſame Countrey, that knoweth all manner of waies of that Countrey, to ye intent they may be your guides, whereby you may the eaſier conuey your Armie and Carriages, the which Guides muſt be carefully looked vnto by the High Marſhall, and the ſaide Guides muſt be vnder the ſafe keeping of the foreſaid High Marſhall, béeing alwaies gently intreated, to the intent they may haue no occaſion to ſteale away.
                     Theſe Guides, in theyr examination muſt be promiſed large rewards, if they doo well & truely: alſo they muſt haue great threatnings of cruell puniſhment, if they deale not trulie. And when examination is made, you ſhall examine them ſeuerally, euery one by himſelfe, to feele whether they agree all in one tale or no: thus ſhall you vnderſtand whether they be perfect in the waies of the Countrey or no. And although you be determined to goe one way, yet muſt you examine thē of diuers other wayes, which you intend not to goe, to the intent they ſhall not know, but be vncertaine of your determination, vntill ſuch time as you ſette foorth your iourney, leaſt that your determination might be diſcouered to your enemies by your ſaid Guides.
                  
                  
                     The Captaines care for prouiſion for their Souldiours.
                     ALthough theſe neceſſary prouiſions be made by ye Prince, or Lord Lieuetenant generall, yet notwithſtanding, it

ſhall be needefull for euery good Captaine, to make as much prouiſion for victuals as hee can for hys Companie vpon hys owne charges, for oftentimes victuals decayeth before a man be aware, likewiſe euery good Captaine muſt be prouided of all manner of tooles méete to make Lodgings and Cabines for his Souldiours, and for the ſetting vp of Pauillions or Tents, and in generall to prouide all other needful and neceſſary thinges, for the ſuccour and reléefe of his Souldiours.
                  
                  
                     Heere followeth many ſtratagemes and obſeruatitions very neceſſary to be vſed for diuers good cauſes which may not be forgotten.
                     AND when all things is thus prouided and furniſhed as I haue ſpoken of before, and then appointed to ſerue in Campe or Gariſon, you ſhall chooſe out ſome cōuenient place to muſter in, and béeing their aſſembled, it ſhall be neceſſary to publiſh vnto the Souldiours theſe obſeruations, ſtratagemes and ſtatuts, ſette foorth by the Marſhall: and whoſoeuer offendeth or breaketh any of them, is not woorthie the name of a Souldiour: for in ſilence, obedience and truth, conſiſteth the whole ſumme and effect of Martiall diſcipline in the warres.
                     
                        Silence.
                        THey ſhall vſe ſilence, to the intent that they may heare and well vnderſtande any precept, commaundement or poynt, of diſcipline giuen vnto them by the Officers in anie authoritie from the Prince, and in time of ſeruice by night or by day, that they may heare their enemies, but not be hearde of them: Manie other vertues belongeth vnto ſilence, which for breuitie I omit.
                     
                     
                        Obedience
                        THis Obedience is of great force, and worketh in the harts of all true Subiects, for it procéedeth from God, that the

Princes thēſelues, or any other, ſpeaking in theyr names and authoritie, muſt be obedient, although the precepts be contrarie to the mindes of ſome Souldiours, who be not worthie to knowe the ſecretes of the Officers in theyr authoritie: yet muſt they in all poynts obey them, both by the Lawes of God and theyr Prince, though the thinges be both painefull and perrilous vnto them.
                     
                     
                        Truth.
                        IN thys truth is contained ſo many vertues, that they cannot be written in a whole booke: for as faithfulnes proceedeth, and hath his rewarde of God, ſo hath the vnfaithful and vniuſt, theyr reward of the deuill: ſo Souldiours ſhal be ſomtimes tempted by the enemies to be corrupted with money, and great promiſes of liuing, to be falſe to theyr Prince and Countrey, which things doone before God, is condemned to perdition, and before man hath loſt his good name and fame for euer, and all other things wherein they ſhoulde reioyce: wherefore all good Souldiours eſtéeme more of theyr trueth and loyaltie, thē of theyr liues: for they be full aſſured of double reward both of God and man, whether they liue or die.
                     
                     
                        Captaines bils called by the Clarke.
                        IT is conuenient and néedefull, that at euery muſter or aſſembly, the Captaines bill ſhall be called by the Clarke, euery man aunſwering to his owne name: ſo marching foorth as he is called, that no man vnto two names make aunſwer. If any Souldiour be ſicke or hurt, béeing not ſeruiceable, pay him his wages, and ſende him home with a paſport into hys owne Countrey, then immediatly furniſh hys roome with an able Souldiour. If any Souldior hauing his health & limbes, abſent himſelfe at ſuch times, let him be puniſhed, as in the ſtatutes héere following is mentioned, to the example of the reſt.
                     
                     
                        
                        The buriall of the dead.
                        WHen as any Souldiour is ſlaine, or otherwiſe dead, the Company ſhall bring the dead body to the ground, with the ſound of the Drum, and ſuch ſolemnitie as his ſcruice meriteth and deſerueth, if conueniently you may.
                     
                     
                        The Souldiours duetie in keeping cleane his furniture.
                        EUerie Souldiour muſt keepe cleane his Armour and furniture, alwaies placing the ſame in hys Tent, Cabben, or Lodging, in ſuch a readines, as hee may preſently, and on a ſuddaine finde the ſame, eyther by night or by day, readie to attend on the Enſigne if occaſion ſerueth of a ſuddaine, & that no other take any part thereof.
                     
                     
                        The aduauncement of a Souldiour.
                        ALſo euery Souldiour ſhall helpe to Arme the one the other, ſo that they may with dilligence reſort to theyr Enſigne, and whoſoeuer comes firſt, and ſheweth himſelfe in beſt readines, with honeſt and good behauiour in the vſe of his weapon and aray, ſhall not onelie merite thanks & reward of his Captaine, but ſhall be aduaunced by degrée of office, as it falleth in the Companie.
                     
                     
                        Puniſhments for not keeping cleane theyr furnitures.
                        IF any Souldiour be negligent in the kéeping cleane of hys Armour or other Furniture, or neglect hys dutie as aforeſaid, after once warning thereof, he ſhal be puniſhed as for that offence is moſt méete, which is a great dyſgrace and diſcredite, and not worthy the name of a Souldior, but to be baniſhed as an idle perſon, & neuer to come in place of ſeruice any more.
                     
                     
                        
                        Trayning your Souldiours in time of Muſters.
                        YOU ſhall firſt make deuiſion of your weapons, and lette euery kind by himſelfe in like Companies, which in the opinion of diuers notable Warriours wil be a great ſtrength to your bande: for if you haue too many of one ſort, and too fewe of another: when you ſhall come to the ſetting of a battaile, you ſhall finde a great weakeneſſe by reaſon thereof, but the remedy is eaſie. For let euery Enſigne be like prouided, and appointed, ſo many Shotte, ſo many Pykes, and ſo many Bils or Holberds: then ſhall your company of Footemen be in good order. Likewiſe for your Gydorne of Horſemen, cauſe euery Gydorne to haue ſo many Launces, and as many Light horſe, all well furniſhed, as they doo vſe in theſe dayes of ſeruice, then ſhall you haue good order of battaile throughout your whole Armie.
                        You are further to conſider how many ſorts of weapons will ſerue, viz. What, ſhotte, what Pykes, and what Holberds will ſerue: and to appoint neceſſary ſhotte, is one of the hardeſt things that belongeth to the warres, becauſe it is ſo vncertaine, for euer as your number increaſeth, ſo your ſhotte diminiſheth, according to the number, for in a ſmall number, you ſhall haue neede of the third part of ſhotte, and in the bigger number, the fourth part of ſhotte ſerue, and in the greater number, the fift part of ſhotte will ſerue, and ſo vpwards.
                     
                     
                        Marching your men by degrees.
                        ALL theſe things finiſhed accordingly, then march foorth your Souldiours with theyr ſeuerall weapons, firſt your Muſ-kets, then your Caliuers, your Pykes, and in the midſt of your Pykes, put your Holberds or Eyls, with your Enſigne in the midſt thereof, ſo marche them about awhile, tyll you may view your whole companie, to ſee whether they be of like ſtrength, and in good order in euery place, both your Uoward and Rereward, keeping good order in theyr aray.
                        
                           The Almaines truſted much in the puſh of the Pykes, therefore they will in no wiſe haue more ſhotte then Pykes, for ouermuch weakning of the body of the Battell: the more ſhotte you appoint for the body of the Battell, the weaker is the Battell when it ſhall come to the puſh of the Pykes, or fight, and yet not in any wiſe to lack ſhotte ſufficient, for many times it hath béen ſeene, that battailes hath béene gotten by ſhotte onely, without puſh of Pyke, or ſtroke of weapons.
                     
                     
                        Augmenting your ranckes in time of battaile.
                        WHen you are ready and determined what battaile to make, if it be a Quadrent battaile, then you may augment your rancks, from thrée to fiue, and ſo to ſeauen, then to nine and eleuen, and ſo on till you haue brought them to a Squadrant. Proportion alwaies your Holberds & Enſigne in the midſt of your Pykes, then ſhall yée know the ſtrength and force of your battaile, place your ſhotte on the flancks of your battaile by themſelues, a good ſpace of, and there let thē ſhoote, ſkyrmage, and retire, with theyr faces alwaies vpon the Enemies, till they be perfect, and ſo learned to retyre to ſome place of ſafetie, which place is héereafter more plainelie declared.
                     
                     
                        Captaines, Lieuetenants, and Sergiants charge, in deuiding their weapons.
                        EUery Lieuetenant or Sargiant of a Bande, ſhall vſuallie ſute the Companie euery weapon by himſelfe, and when they ſhall march with ye Enſigne, whether it be to muſter, or place of aſſembly to be imbattailed, or in any other time of ſeruice, they ſhall furniſh them as they be accuſtomed in theſe dayes in the Low Countries, that is to ſay, with Targetors, Muſkets, Caliuers, Pykes, and then your Holberds and Bylles in the mids of your Pykes, with your Enſigne, Drum and Phife, then the reſt of your ſhotte and ſuch like, that you may be of like ſtrength, both Foreward and Rerewarde, ſo

march your men, and ſometimes caſt them in a King, which is verie neceſſarie for young Souldiours, to knowe the order thereof, for it is a moſt needefull thing, as heereafter ſhall be more plainely ſhewed vnto you.
                     
                     
                        Furniſhing Launſes, Light-horſe, or Carbines to the field.
                        IN like manner, troupes of Horſemen being furniſhed, with Carbines, Launces, and Light Horſe, ſhal in like ſtrength march or imbattaile, ſo that their Gydron may be garded in the Uowards and Rerewards of like ſtrength, ſo that they neede no more but turne theyr faces towardes their Enemies, to ſkyrmage at euery ſuddaine.
                     
                  
                  
                     Rules to be obſerued and ſhewed vnto young Souldiours in time of Muſters or other times conuenient.
                     SOmetimes béeing imbattailed, they ſhall wade from the one end of the battaile to the other, to ſtrengthen the ſame with ſo manie rancks of Souldiours as they ſhal command, leauing one ranck of men, which is called the man of aduauntage, ſtanding ſtill on the out ſide: thus vſing them, you ſhall find your battaile in like ſtrength euery where.
                     
                        Receiuing a word to goe through the battaile.
                        AT times they ſhall receiue a word to goe through the battaile, from the one ende to the other, which ſhall paſſe frō man to man, till it come to the end of the ſame, which worde muſt be ſpoken with ſoft ſpéech, as it ſhall not be hearde but amongſt themſelues béeing in battaile, in like manner they may performe the ſame by a ſigne giuen them of the Marſhal, Captaines, or other like Officer.
                     
                     
                        
                        To march ſtooping.
                        SOmetimes the whole Companie ſhall march ſtooping, as vnder a hedge or hyll, or ſuch like, and ſuddainly ſhall fall flatte on the grounde as in Ambuſh, which ſhall ſuddainlie ryſe againe, and ſette vpon theyr Enemies in good order of aray, the which may aſtoniſh the Enemie, your aſſaulting thē ſo ſuddainlie.
                     
                     
                        Keeping of array in the darke.
                        AT ſuch times, euery Souldiour ſhall carry the end of hys leadeſmans weapon for making any noyſe, and by that meanes they ſhall keepe theyr aray in darke nights, or marching through ſtraights or woodes, or ſuch like.
                     
                     
                        Marching and retyring.
                        SOmetimes marching towardes the Enemies and retyring againe, they ſhall alwaies keepe theyr faces vpon theyr Enemies, and theyr Pykes couched, readie to encounter with their Enemies.
                     
                     
                        Trayling your Pykes.
                        SOmetimes trayling your Pykes on the grounde, the Uoward bearing theyr heads of Pykes in theyr handes, and the Rereward trayling the heads on the ground, ready to receiue the Enemie.
                     
                     
                        A ſhew as if men were ſlayne.
                        SOmetimes marching in order of battaile, certaine of the Companie ſhall fall, heere ſome, and there ſome, as if they were ſlaine with ſhotte, the next man following ſhall ſtep in the place of his leadeſman, ſo that there be no place left for the Enemie to enter in: if anie ranck be not full, let it be in the body of your battaile.
                     
                     
                        
                        A ſuddaine Allarum.
                        MAnie times it hath beene vſed among Souldiours of experience, to giue Allarums to theyr friendes, as among themſelues, to foreſée whom they might prayſe or diſcommend, according to theyr readines found in them, & although they vſed thys as a neceſſary meane, to the intent their Souldiours ſhould be the more carefull, yet ſtill to deceiue them, is a meane to make ſecure and not careful, if they be oftentimes mocked: wherefore to vſe it is good at times conuenient, but not too often. But moſt commonly, when the enemie maketh any Allarum, it is to accompliſh ſome exployt, eyther to lye in Ambuſh, to caſt a bridge, to plant Ordenaunce, to entrench, or to breake vp ſome paſſage, or viewing your numbers and ſtrength, or ſuch like, but when any Allarom is giuen in the night, change the worde.
                     
                     
                        Pointes of a good Captaine.
                        AT times conuenient trayne your Souldiours, and pitch them in ſquare battailes, round or breade battailes, and other ſtrengthes, which good Captaines and Officers will vſe at times conuenient: which will be a great eaſe to the Souldiours, at what time ſoeuer they be called to imbattaile, and a profit to the whole Campe in time of neede.
                     
                     
                        No brunt to bee made in time of Muſter or Campe.
                        NO man ſhall make any brunt or noyſe, vpon the ſight of any Hare, Deare, or Fore, neither breake his array to ſtay the ſame, if it be in Muſter or March, leſſe in Camping, or in time of ſeruice.
                     
                     
                        Spoiles or booties to be deuided.
                        YOU ſhall giue the company to vnderſtande and knowe, that if any exployte or enterpriſe be executed and doone, the victory ouercome, the enemies taken or ſlayne: all ſuch

ſpoyles or booties as is gotten, ſhall be brought to the colours and there ſhewed, and a noate taken of the ſame, and at conuenient time to be ſould by the ſounde, as a generall bootie, and ſo deuided in equall portions to euery man his parte, as well them that keepe the fielde in order of battaile, as to them that entred the fight and brought the ſayd bootie away.
                     
                     
                        Care in carrying bagages.
                        YOU ſhall haue a great regarde, that no Souldiour take any bootie or pillage to hinder himſelfe, or annoy his company, but as he may be diſcharged of the ſame at euery ſuddaine, ready to his weapon or place: for the practiſe of the enemie, is to ſette ſuddainly vppon ſuch men ſo laden with baggages, a great hinderance to the Souldiour, and an incouragement to the enemie.
                     
                     
                        Hurte Souldiours to be conſidered.
                        IF any Souldiour be hurt in this time of fight, of body or Limmes, ſpent his weapon, broken his Armour, or ſuch lyke loſſe, he ſhall be conſidered of, out of the ſayd bootie, and the reſt to be equally deuided.
                     
                     
                        Souldiours charge for intreating Meſſengers.
                        IF any man or woman, what Nation ſoeuer they be, friend or foe, come to ſpeake with any of the high Officers of the Campe or Garriſon: it ſhalbe conuenient, for any ſuch Souldiour, to bring them into ſuch a place as they ſhall ſée but little, and ſend worde to the ſayde Officers, kéeping them ſafe vntill the ſayde Officers pleaſure bee to ſend for them, or to knowe in that behalfe, and in the meane ſpace to intreate them gently with good wordes, what Nation ſoeuer they be: For ſuch perſons are not knowne to moſt Souldiours.
                     
                     
                        Souldiours charge in trauailing.
                        THat no Souldiour in time of trauelling, within ye Realm of England, or other dominions vnder our Prince, ſhall

allure any woman, mayde or widdowe, to follow the Campe vnhoneſtly, neyther ſhall haue any, without the licence of the Marſhall: they ſhall not ſpoyle nor deſtroy any cattell, Pulline, or ſuch like victualles, he ſhall not ſtray out of his way, to filch or ſteale any manner of thinge whatſoeuer, neither commit any other outrage: but ſhall kéepe the high wayes appointed for them to iourney in, accompaning their Enſigne, and honeſily regarding the ſaftie of the ſame.
                     
                     
                        The couſaile of olde Souldiours.
                        CAptaines hauing any olde Souldiours ſeruing vnder them, ſhall giue eare vnto them ſpeaking of experience or ſeruice, with diſcréete policie, and ſhall rewarde them and aduance thē to the vttermoſt of his power, & according to the value of their good counſaile: for ſuch men ſometimes, be vnto a Captaine and his company, much auaileable. So muſt he puniſh buſie bodies, therevnto preſuming without experience or diſcretion.
                     
                     
                        Captaines, Lieuetennants, and Officers, with Souldiours charge.
                        IT is conuenient and a moſt neceſſary pointe of the Captaine, Lieuetennant, or Sargeant, to frequent oftentimes with the Souldiours in their Lodgings, Tents, or Cabins, to veiw how they be prouided and furniſhed of all manner of thinges to them néedefull, and that they liue an honeſt, ciuill, and Chriſtian life, as Chriſtian men ought to doe, not preſuming by meanes of warres, to vſe ſuch libertie, as if Gods Lawes and our Princes were forgotten, as ſome Souldiors of diuers Nations in times paſt haue doone: in vſing the vices of great oathes, in ſwearing to the blaſpheaming of the almighty God: alſo in the exceſſe of drunkennes, bringing thē
                           ſelues into the likenes of brute beaſts, to their great diſpraiſe before God and man: alſo, in vicious lyuing, contrary to the Law of God, which may not be vnpuniſhed: alſo in fighting and quarelling, lyuing in malice with his fellows, which

is vile, or in any other vice vſed, amongſt the company. Such perſons muſt be ſharply puniſhed, for God is wel pleaſed therewich, and ſendeth the company good ſucceſſes, that ſerueth him and liueth in his Lawes.
                     
                     
                        Theſe bee the Articles which ſhall appertaine to the oath of euery Souldiour, as followeth.
                        EUery priuate Captaine ſhal ſweare his Souldiours one by one, and the Souldiour ſhall lay his hande vppon the Enſigne, and make his oath to God, that by the faith he beareth vnto God and his Soueraigne, hee wyll obſerue and kéepe all theſe Marſhall Lawes, ſtatutes, and Ordinances, during the ſayd iourney, or elſe to be accounted not onely a forſworne perſon, but to bee puniſhed at the diſcretions of the Lorde Lieuetennant or Marſhal.
                     
                     
                        The charge of all Souldiours and Officers generally.
                        ALſo the whole companie of euery Captaine, ſhall bringe theyr Enſigne with euery Officer and Souldiour, to the place of aſſembly, be it in Campe or in Garriſon, by night or by day, and there ſhall dilligentlie become in order of battaile by the Sargeants ſo placed: they ſhall there tarry and abide attending their Colours, till commaundement bee giuen to breake vp, by the Lord Lieuetennant of the fielde, and then the whole companie ſhal returne with their Enſigne to their Lodging, with the ſounde of Drums and Phiffe. If any fayle in this behalfe, they ſhall bee puniſhed as to the offence belongeth.
                        Alſo, it behoueth all good Captaines, to gratifie the good induſtry and dilligence of Souldiours in that behalfe: yea, a very good policie to aſſemble by night, without cauſe of enemies, to teach the Souldiours the order of battaile, and to reprooue their negligence in ſuch behalfe offending.
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Certaine rules of Armes pertaining to Marshall Diſcipline: ſette foorth and proclaimed by the Lorde Marſhall, who ſhall ſee the offenders thereof puniſhed.
                        FIrſt, that all men whomſoeuer, as well head Officers as inferiour Officers and Souldiours, ſhall be true & faithfull Subiects, vnto our moſt gracious Soueraigne Lady Quéene Elizabeth, her crowne and dignitie, and truelie to ſerue her, vnder her Lieuetenant generall appointed in that iourney.
                        Alſo they ſhal obey all heade Officers, which be appointed to ſerue vnder the ſaid L. Lieuetenant, as his Captaines, and all ſuch Officers as are appointed vnder the ſaid Captaines, to ſerue and gouerne them, as his Lieuetenant, his Enſigne, his Sargiants, and the Corporals and Launce ſpazadoes, following, defending, ſupporting and maintaining theyr owne Enſigne, and neuer to leaue the ſame till it be alwaies in ſafetie, be it in times of aſſault, allarum, battaile, ſkyrmage, connoy, watch, ward, or time of ſeruice. And to theſe poynts all Souldiours ſhall be ſworne, as I haue before mentioned and ſette downe.
                        All men ſhall gently and honeſtly intreate, and ſuffer in generall, all Victualers, be they friendes or foes, bringing victuales to the place appointed for the ſame by the Marſhall or Coronell: ſuffering them to paſſe and returne with theyr money, or any other things, which they are ſuffered to buy, or exchange for theyr victuals by the Clarke of the Market, or other Officers appointed for that purpoſe.
                        It were very good at ſuch times, hauing forraine Victualers comming into your Campe, Leaguor, or Towne of gariſon, at their returne homewards, to ſende ſome Souldiour of diſcretion with them, to bring them on the way ſo farre as they may, without danger to themſelues, giuing them good

words, with fayre and gentle language, and wiſe queſtions, moſt neceſſarie, for that time to be knowne, which ſomtimes may preuaile to learne the intent of the Enemies.
                        Alſo if any offend the ſaid Victualers, they ſhall be puniſhed as to the Law appertaineth: no man ſhal take any thing from them by force, or without any money, nor vnder the price ſette by the Clarke of the Market, or any other bringing any other neceſſaries, as wollin cloth, Linin cloth, ſhooes, hoſe, or weapons, with ſuch like, béeing permitted by the ſaid Officers.
                        You ſhall relieue poore Souldiours, which by ſickneſſe or impriſonment amongſt the Enemies, is fallen in decay, and lacketh meate, drinck, weapons, or Armour, and beeing a ſeruiceable Souldiour, ſhall by his Captaine be reſtored, and ſhall deduct the ſame in his wages or booties taken of the Enemie, which ſometime ought to be deuided, for Captaines in times paſt, hath not regarded the poore Souldiours, ſo that ſome hath perriſhed for want of reléefe and ſuccour.
                        All Captaines who hath any man enrowled in his booke, whatſoeuer he be, Souldiour, Corporall, Victualor, Pioner, Carior, or any other, and be taken priſoner of the Enemy, the ſaid pryſoner ſhall not be ſuffered in theyr hands, which may be ranſomed eyther by exchange of pryſoners, or otherwiſe, but with diligence ſhall they be redéemed and brought home to theyr Colours.
                        In lik manner, if any Souldiour be taken pryſoner, and ſent home vpon his fayth and credite, the Captaine ſhall ſee that they eyther pay ſuch raunſomes as they are agréed of, or els to ſend them backe againe to their takers by the day appointed, till ſome other remedie be found, which thing redowneth to the onely credite and faith of a true Souldiour.
                        So ſhall they correct and reprooue diligently all outrages, riotous perſons, quarrellors, fighters, whoremungers, murtherers, and robbers, according to their offences committed.
                     
                     
                        
                        Other penall ſtatutes, to be executed by the Marſhall.
                        FIrſt, that no man make any fray within the Campe, Leguor, or Gariſon, nor appoint any place without the ſame for that purpoſe, to take any parts, or carrie any tale, to attempt the ſame vpon paine.
                        That no man killing any Cattaile within the ſaid Campe or Leaguor, doo leaue the garbidge aboue the ground, or if any man or beaſt die within the ſaid Leaguor, it ſhall be conuaied out of the ſame, a certaine ſpace of, & there to be buried, except the Leaguor remooue ye ſame day, vpon paine.
                        That no man ſhall water their horſes, or caſt any filth into any part of the water which adioyneth to the ſaid Leaguor, but in the loweſt parts appointed for that purpoſe, vppon paine.
                        That no woman follow the Campe or Leaguor but ſuch as be by the Marſhall appointed, victualers or Laundreſſes, which ſhall be licenced by the Marſhals byll, and in his booke ſo recorded vpon paine.
                        That no Captaine receiue any Souldiour into wages, which is put away for any notable or criminall cauſe, vpon paine.
                        That no Captaine entice any Souldiour vnto him, from any other Captaines Bande, nor no Souldiour ſhall depart without the good will of his Captaine hauing a paſport, vpon paine.
                        That no Souldiour take any weapons or Armours, Garments, or any other thing whatſoeuer, which to another man appertaineth, nor come within any other mans lodging, except the owner or Kéeper thereof be within, vpon paine.
                        That all men ſhall be lodged by the quarter Maiſter, and béeing ſo lodged, ſhall be contented with the ſame, be it in Towne, Leaguor or Campe, vpon paine.
                        That no man make any brunt or noyſe after the watch be ſette, and the warning péece ſhotte off, ſo that all allarums

may be heard and brought in by the Skowtes, or otherwiſe, vpon paine.
                        That no Captaine ſend foorth any Company about anie enterpriſe or exploite, without the licence of the Lord Lieuetenant, vpon paine.
                        That no man goe a forraging, further then they be appointed by the forrage Maſter, which is garded by the Marſhals appointment, vpon paine.
                        That all priuate Captaines being no head Officers of the Leaguor or Campe, which muſt be continually buſied, doe watch and ward with their Colours themſelues, vpon paine.
                        That all Souldiours, Horſemen and Footemen, learne the ſounde of both Trumpets and Drums, which ſerueth to call as the mouth of Man, and that they be ready at all ſuch calles, eyther on Horſe or Foote, vpon paine.
                        That no man doo his naturall eaſement within the Leaguor, nor within certaine ſpace of the ſame, for anoying the Skowtes or ſtanding watch, except the ſame be buried three foote within the ground immediatly, vpon paine.
                        That no man goe out of his aray, eyther in day of battel, or in marching, vpon paine.
                        That no man carry any woman to the Leaguor, or kéepe her in the Towne, except ſhe be his lawfull wife, vpon paine to be puniſhed as a vile perſon, or a vagabond, and neuer to be accounted a Souldiour in any ſeruice.
                        Alſo if any Souldiour béeing a common ſwearer, and leaueth it not after once warning of hys Captaine or Lieuetenant, ſhall be puniſhed as a ſlaue or villaine, to the example of others.
                        Alſo that no man take any thing of the Princes ſubiects, without he pay truely for it, or it be giuen him, vpon paine.
                        Alſo that no man be lodged in Gariſon or Leaguor, but onely by the Quarter Maiſter appointed for the ſame, vpon paine.
                        Alſo that all Souldiours intreate theyr Hoſtis and theyr familie well, béeing the Princes Subiects, to the intent they

may be welcome if they come againe, or others in theyr places, for els we ſhoulde not onely make warre with our Enemies, but alſo vpon Princes friendes, vpon paine.
                        Alſo that no Souldiour be a common dicer or drunkarde, which is the onely way to waſt his wages, which ſhould bee his maintenaunce otherwiſe, to goe like a ſlaue, vpon paine.
                        Alſo that no priuate Captaine nor others, come from hys watch or warde, beeing appointed to the ſame in Leaguor or Gariſon, till they be releaſed by other Companies, or els dyſcharged: for what a ſhame is it to a Captaine, when his companie dooth not theyr duetie for want of hys preſence, and be diſtreſſed by the meanes therof: what account is ſuch a Captaine able to make to his Prince or Lord Lieuetenant, that will come away, leauing his Enſigne and Companie behind him: in like manner to any other man. Wherefore no man ſhall depart from his Company vpon paine.
                        Alſo in times of lodging the Leaguor, all Horſemen ſhall keepe on horſebacke, vntill ſuch time as all footemen be entered into the Leaguor or Campe, and euery man appointed the quarter or place of aſſembly, vpon paine.
                        Alſo thoſe Horſemen ſhall ſee the Skowtes ſette foorth, to ſkowte vppon the high groundes on all ſides of the Leaguor, and to ſée all Cariages, Ordenaunce, and Municions, cleerly entred into the Leaguor or Campe, before they enter or dyſmount, they ſhall remaine in theyr Armours till the place of encamping be made, vpon paine.
                        Alſo if any allarum be made, the Sargiant Maior ſhall reſort to the place of aſſembly, dilligently there to place euery Souldiour in good order of battaile, and in the ſtrongeſt manner to be deuiſed, vpon paine.
                     
                     
                        
                        The cauſe of allarums or shewe of Enemies to the Leaguor, eyther by night or by day.
                        SOmetimes to viewe your order of array, and to diſcouer your numbers.
                        Sometimes to viewe your Horſemen, howe they be appointed with great horſe for the battaile, and light horſe, and ſuch like.
                        Sometimes to view your Ordenaunces, what ſtore of Cannons you haue for battery, fielde Peeces for the battell, and ſuch like.
                        Sometimes to viewe the ſituation of your Leaguor, how they may beſt bring the allarum in the night, by Canuiſado, or otherwiſe.
                        Sometimes to viewe the placing of your victuals or powder, and howe they may beſt take or deſtroy the ſame.
                        Sometimes to traine men out of the Leaguor, to bring them into the place or lappes of theyr ambuſh.
                        Sometimes to kéepe men waking, and ſo to weary them with allarums, whereby they ſhall not be able to appeare in theyr places at time of neede.
                        Sometimes to kéepe in Skowtes or Forragers, vntill they doo ſome exployt, eyther in victualing ſome holde, or els making ſome breach or ſuch like.
                        Sometimes they will mount as many Footemen as they can, vppon baggage horſe, to make a great ſhewe of Horſemen.
                     
                     
                        Heere followeth the poynters of the Leaguor or Campe, which ſhall take view of the place appointed.
                        THE High Marſhall, the Quarter Maiſter, the Maiſter of the Ordenaunce, the Captaines of the Pyoners, or

french Maiſters, & diuers other Officers, with certain Lieuetenants of euery warde, to view the place appointed, which Officers ſhall be well and ſtrongly guarded, with one or two thouſand horſe at the leaſt, for great honour conſiſteth in the ſafe keeping of your Marſhall and other heade Officers, alſo they be a good aſiuraunce for the reſt of the Armie which followeth.
                        It behooueth them to haue circumſpect Skowtes, which ſhall march before them ſtrongly guarded, with a company of Pykes and ſhotte, or troupes of Light Horſemen, leaſt your enemies lie in ambuſh, or deuiſe ſome other engin when you thinke leaſt of them, how to overthrow your Marſhal, which were a great diſcomfort in a field to your Souldiours, and a greater encouragement to the Enemies. Wherefore make your Marſhall ſtrong that goeth before, and hee ſhall bee a good ſtrength to them that follow, and when the Marſhall is arriued at the place appointed for the Armie where they ſhall lodge, and that hee and the reſt of his companie haue viewed round about the ſame, then it ſhall be meete for the Captaine of the Pyoners, and the Carriage Maiſters, to returne to the Armie, to ſée theyr Companie and carriages conueyed to the place before appointed: and to leade them as in times paſt haue béene vſed, which is, to march but fiue or ſixe myles in foure howres, ſo your Arinie ſhall come at time conuenient to theyr lodging, to prouide forrage and ſuch neceſſaries, and not to be ouertoyled and made wearie, for a wearie man béeing aſſailed in time of his wearines, is halfe ouercome by the reaſon of hys wearines.
                     
                     
                        In lodging the Armie aforeſayde.
                        YOU ſhall lodge the Armie where they may be Lordes of theyr commodities, which may not be ſpared, as Wood, water, and paſtures, which muſt be good and ſwéete, alwaies kept cleane: being thus furniſhed, the Marſhall and quarter Maſter, ſhall appoint to place the Arinie on the higher ground, where they may haue the moſt aduantage againſt the

enemies, if they ſhould approache them.
                        The Maſter of the Ordenance, ſhall place his charge to the moſt aduantage of the hyll, where they may beſt diſcouer and ſhoote to thoſe partes, where the enemies might beſt approche. Alſo if your enemies aſſault, they ſhall climbe vppe to you, whereby their ſtrength is deminiſhed and their breath ſhortned. Alſo, if you will meete with your enemies, deſcending from your Leagar, which is on an hill, your force and ſtrength is the more, (for a man going downward is of more force then he that goeth vpward.
                        And when hee hath found out ſuch a commodious ground as beſt befitteth him, and lookes for the comming of his enemies, then it is good to lodge your Army both horſe and foote, all in one Leagar or Campe, vnleſſe it be before a Towne or Caſtle, that you minde to beſiege and incloſe on euerie ſide: but for a remoouing Leagar, or a Leagar lying ſtyl, and is not at the ſtege of neither Towne nor Caſtle, and lookes for the comming of theyr enemies: then I thinke in my opinion, that men bee of more force, lying together in one Leagar or Campe, then to lodge in ſeuerall companies.
                     
                     
                        The proportion of your Leagar or Campe.
                        YOU ſhall make your Leagar or Campe large, according to the number of your Armie, neither bigger nor leſſe then your company ſerueth therto: Pitch your Leagar foure ſquare, deuiding the ſame into foure partes, by two great ſtréets reaching croſſe through your Leagar or Campe, from the one ſide to the other, two partes for horſemen, and two partes for footemen. Poynt the place of aſſembly on the higheſt part thereof, and make the ſame ſo large, as to imbattaile your number of footemen, and in ſuch order as men may paſſe with eaſe to the ſame, by the ſtréetes appoynted.
                        You ſhall point your Market place, in the middeſt of your foure ſtreetes, whereas your horſemen ſhall aſſemble in time of allarams by night, where they ſhall both arme themſelues and kéepe on horſebacke, ready to iſſue forth

if néede be. Lodge your Generall néere the place of aſſemblie, vpon ſome commodious grounde.
                        Your ſtréetes are to be made as moſt commonly is vſed, iij. ſcore and tenpaces broad, without any annoyance of tentcordes or ſtakes, ſo may men march in good order with theyr Enſigne, to the place of aſſembly: but in any wiſe, looke that your Leagar be neither too large nor too little for your companies, for by either of them you are the weaker: and point the Artillarie places in ſuch ſorte and places, as may bee moſt daungerous to your enemies, whenſoeuer they aſſayle you, and neere vnto the Artillarie, leaue ſome voyde place to aſſemble your men together in battailes, at time of alarum. And if your ſtrength bee great, ſo that you make more battailes then one, then you muſt haue more places of aſſemblie then one, for euery battaile would haue a place of aſſebly, and ſo to make a ſtand til occaſion ſerueth, with the Artillarie before them in time of allarum, beſides the horſemen: ſo ſhal you bee ſure, if your men be well placed, that your Leagar or Campe ſhalbe well warded and defended, for a man know eth not on which ſide the enemies will come, wherefore it is good to place your men euery way for your beſt aduantage.
                        Alſo, I woulde wiſh (as I haue ſayde before) that euery horſeman ſhould be ready at the ſound of ſuch allarums, and to reſorte with ſpéede, to the ſayde aſſembly there to doe any ſeruice if néede ſhall require at any ſuch times.
                     
                     
                        Intrenching your Campe or Leagar.
                        ALſo if you intend to ſtay in your enemies Lande, ſpecially knowing your enemies to be at hand, then it ſhalbe néedfull, by the opinion of diuers olde Seruitors, to entrench your Campe or Leagar with a Trench of twelue foote déepe, and fiftéene foote broade, and as wee vſe nowe in theſe dayes, which ſhall haue ſmall Ordenance in them, and ſmall ſhotte to flancke your Trenches, and one baſtian to be leuell within compaſſe of your ſhotte: and if you looke not for manie enemies to aſſayle you, then it ſhall bee ſufficient to make the

                           
                           
                              The plat for Incamping. Place this battell 268 folio, at this mark ******
                           
                           
                           Trenches of your Leagar, but eyght or nine foote deepe, and ſeauen foote broade, and at ſuch times all men ſhall helpe the beſt they can.
                        But if you haue not many enemies at hande, and intende to remooue daylie, tyll oportunitie ſerueth: then it ſhall bee ſufficient to make your King or Pale with your carriages, placing your Ordenances amongſt the ſame to your beſt aduantage, with your ſtand watch in the midſt, & your Scout watch without the ſame, both on horſebacke and on foote, for your better ſecurity.
                     
                     
                        Intrenching your powder and Treaſure.
                        ALſo it behoueth you to haue a ſpeciall care, in bringing your carriages loden with Powder and Treaſure, to the Maſter of Artillarie his lodging, where you ſhall ſafely entrench and watch the ſame, with good and ſtronge watches, and none to come néere the ſame, but his Officers and the watch who hath the ſame in charge.
                     
                     
                        Commaundement to bee giuen to the troupes of horſemen at your firſt arriuall at the Campe or Leagar.
                        AT your arriuall at any Campe or Leagar, you are to giue commaundement to euery horſeman, that no man ſhall diſmount from his horſe backe, vntill ſuch time as euery footeman be quietly lodged, and that at ſuch times, good and ſure Scoutes bee ſette foorth towardes the enemies, ſo farrre as you can learne: for vppon thoſe Scoutes, at ſuch times, dependeth the wealth and euerthrow of your Armie, for when footemen be buſie in making theyr Lodging and Cabines, then they be out of array and ſtrength, and if then they ſhoulde be ſuppriſed of the enemies, it were enough to caſt away the whole Armie.
                        
                           But a good Scoute will repayre euer to the higheſt places of grounde, where they may ſee on euery ſide of the Leagar, and eſpecially towardes the enemies, ſo may they bee ſure to diſcouer on euery ſide, both on high groundes and valies: and if they liſt to diſcouer farther, let parte of the ſame companie remayne ſtill on the high grounde where they bee, which ſhall not ſtirre vntill they make theyr returne backe againe: So ſhall your Leagar or Campe be ſure to haue aduertiſement, though the former Scoutes were ouerthrowne and taken, wherfore be ſure to haue alwaies good and ſufficient Scoutes, for your better ſecuritie.
                     
                     
                        Scoute watch on foote.
                        YOU are alſo to place your Scoute watch on foote, rounde about the Leagar or Campe, ſixe ſcore with out the Ring of the ſame, by fiue men in a companie, beeing ſo néere together, as one may ſée another in a light night: in a dark night, the one to ſende to the other euery halfe quarter of an houre, to know what brunts or noyſe they heare. And if the Scouts on horſe were ſo vſed, fiue in a companie, and to ſend the one to the other as I haue ſayde before, I am in that opinion, it would be of more force, then the body of a watch ſtanding ſtil, me thinkes this were great ſafty to the Leagar: Likewiſe euery fift man to haue the watch worde, and no more.
                        Thoſe which watch ſhall vſe great ſilence, without great occaſion giuen by the enemies comming, then to make allarum with the vſuall worde, arme, arme, then euery man ſhal make haſte the one helping the other, and bée in a readineſſe with his weapons for their beſt defence, tyll they be retyred to the ſtande watch of the Leagar, wherby they may fight, and be reſkued of all the Souldiors of the Leagar or Campe: wherefore, they ſhall haue great regarde, that they make no allarums, but vpon iuſt occaſiion.
                        Euery fift man ſhall haue the watch word for that night, ſo watching, for at that time they are as Scoute Maſters: alſo, the chéefe Scoute Maſters, are appointed to ſette the

watch, and at certayne times to bring them reliefe, and to ſearch and examine the ſame, both on horſebacke and foote: alſo, the ſtande watch ſhoulde haue great care in hurting the Scoutes, when as at any time they make their retyre.
                     
                     
                        Speciall care to be fore-ſeene both in watching and warding.
                        ALſo the Lorde Liuetennant, the high Marſhall, with the reſt of the Counſell, muſt appoint a ſufficient number of men, both on horſebacke and foote, to watch and warde the Leagar or Campe: in the which appointment, they ought to vſe great diſcretion, to fore-ſée that there be no want of men for the furniſhing thereof. Alſo, that no man be ouertoyled or wearyed either in watching or warding, for according to the number of your ſtrength, ſo you are to deuide your companies, that no man ſhall watch but euery fourth night, which will be very well, both for the Souldiours & for the ſtrength of your Armie: for by the ouerwatching of your men, may be a great heauineſſe and dulnes vnto them, and a great weakning vnto your whole Armie.
                        And for the appointment of the bodie of the watch, at the Artillarie you muſt in any wiſe appoint that very ſtronge, as your number will ſerue, for the ſafe kéeping of your Artillarie and the wealth of your Leagar. Alſo, it appertayneth to the prouoſt Marſhall at ſuch times, to ſet the ſtand watch and Scoutes, both on horſebacke and on foote: but the watching of the place of Artillarie, belongeth vnto the Officers thereof, which are appointed by the high Marſhall and the Maſter of the Ordenance, as I haue before ſette downe.
                     
                     
                        How the Sargeant Maior, Captaine, and ſimple Sargeant are to gouerne themſelues, when theyr battaile ſhall chaunce to be aſſaulted, on foote and on horſebacke.
                        IN ſundry and diuers manners, and moreouer in diuers places of groundes, battailes are fought, according to the

occaſions and accidents, that in Millitarie occurrents doe chaunce at vnawares, in time of warfare, abroade in the plaines, in Townes and in Fortreſſes: for which cauſes it is neceſſary, that the witte of thoſe which haue the managing thereof, be prompt and ready, as well in this, as moreouer in finding out a good partie for himſelfe, all for the honour and ſafety of the Prince whom he ſerues, ioyning to his couragious heart, witte, experience, policie, and each aduantage that is poſſible to bee vſed againſt his enemie, therefore in two fortes doe ariſe the meanes to fight: one is, when he dooth ſéeke to fight with his enemy, and the other when he is ſought of the enemy, in ſuch ſort that it is needefull to defende himſelfe. And therefore I ſay, when the firſt occaſion doth ryſe, and that he ſéekes the enemie, ſpeaking héere of ſtriking battaile in the playnes, it is requiſite firſt he conſider, how the enemies Armie is furniſhed with horſemen and footemen, and if he looke to fight with horſemen that are to come to breake his battaile, in this caſe he is to be aduertiſed, that hee ſuffer himſelfe not to be founde (if it be poſſible) in the open fieldes, or in the playnes, but rather muſt accomodate his battaile in ſome place of a hill or a mountaine, or vppon ſome ſeate of ground, which hath vppon one ſide, either Riuer or ditch, or ſome other impediment againſt ye enemies horſemen, which on ſome ſide may be a defence, as in ſome places bee Trées, Vines, and diuers other ſuch like, as nature brings foorth in diuers places, which are of great impediment vnto the enemies horſemen, and vnto foote battailes are very profitable, and although the number of Souldiours are very ſmall, yet oftentimes by much aduantage remaine victorious. But aduertiſment is to be had, that in ſuch caſes it is requiſite, that there be accomodated many Hargabuziers in the battaile, and many Pikes, for they be good againſt the enemies horſemen: Hauing to fight with footemen, the open fieldes is the beſt, with a ſquare battayle and many Pikes, placing Hargabuziers according to his diſcretion.
                        
                           Since I haue ſpoken of the firſt manner of fight, I will ſpeake of the ſecond, which is, when the enemie deoth aſſault at vnawares, it is neceſſary then couragiouſly not to looſe any point of courage, to place his people in ſquare battaile, for that it is the moſt ready and moſt ſure way that is, making himſelfe good ſlanckes wth the Hargabuziers of the band, afterwardes expecting the aſſault, cauſe his battaile to ſhutte and cloſe it ſelfe well, cauſing them to couch and abaſe, 4. or 5. or ſomtimes 6. ranckes of Pikes in that caſe, round about all the ſides of the battaile, and the others to ſtand vpright vntill time of néede: and the Hargabuziers are to holde their Péeces vpon their thighes, with their matches in their cocks, a morce in their pan, and all vigilant in a readineſſe. And the Captaine before the battaile, valiantly giuing courage to his Souldiours, to performe the duety of a leader: aduertiſing, that when the aſſault is giuen by horſemen, that the Pikemen couching and abaſing themſelues, doe holde the great ende of their pikes faſtned harde in ſtronge earth, to the ende the Pike may haue the greater force.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE SECOND PART.
                  With a Kalender, contayning the ſquare of any number, from one hundred, to ten 1000. ſeruing for the ordering of iuſt ſquares, baſtard ſquares, and broade Squares: and moſt ſufficient for the imbattailing of any number. (*)
                  With certaine rules of marching by degrees, the which of a ſuddaine you may with eaſe bring them into a Square battell, or a broad Square, of what number ſoeuer.
                  
                  By Gyles Clayton, ſeruitour & late Lieuetenant to the Right honorable the Lord North, Lorde Lieuetenant Generall of Cambridgeſhyre.
                  AT LONDON
                  
                     ❧ Printed, Anno. Domini.
                  M. D. XCI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Right honorable and his very good Lorde, the Lord of Hunſdon, Lord Chamberlaine of her Maieſties houshold, and Gouernour of her Towne of Barwicke: G. C. wiſheth increaſe of all honourable vertues.
                  
                     RIght honourable and my very good Lord, hauing receiued ſo many bountifull rewards, with an infinite number of good words, for other of his writings, the which it hath pleaſed your good Lordſhip ſo fauourably to accept, is not thereby onely encouraged nowe once againe, to betake himſelfe to his penne, but alſo he is emboldened, to preſent to your L. view this his ſmall labour, which containeth the approoued order of Martiall Diſcipline. And as it is the common opinion of all worthy men, (right honourable & my very good Lord) that among all things that is to be preferred, warre is the one: and that becauſe whoſoeuer behaueth himſelfe honourably in the exerciſe thereof, repreſenteth the true Image of the moſt great and omnipotent God, becauſe among the high titles attributed according to his will and diuine Maieſtie in the olde and holy Law, hee hath alwaies beene content to be reuerenced and called by the name of the GOD of hoſtes: ſo if this worthy exerciſe of Martiall Diſcipline be vſed, and had in practiſe for the glory of God, and the defence of Chriſt hys Goſpell, or for the defence of a Kingdom or Common-weale,

no doubt there is, but that the great GOD of Hoſtes is our chiefe Generall, and moſt worthy Captaine.
                  And as your honour, being not inferiour to any in the exerciſe heereof, not onely for your owne honour and magnanimitie, but for the better vpholding of Chriſtes Goſpell, for the defence of our gracious Soueraigne, her Lawes and louing Subiects, for the exerciſing of warlike weapons, and the often vſing of them breedeth peace, but if warlike weapons ſhould be layd aſide, and Martiall diſcipline forgotten, then would it be with vs, as it was with the Romans. For as Scipio ſaith, after the Romans layd aſide the vſe of theyr warlike weapons, and Martiall exerciſes, they fell into great idlenes, outrages, ryot, and wantonnes; for more hurtfull was this time of peace to Rome, then during the whole courſe and ſeaſon of the warres, for that whilſt they had enemies in Affrick, they knewe not what vices and inordinate ryot ment in Rome.
                  Wherefore, may it pleaſe your good Lordſhip, in this time of peace, there muſt be had ſpeciall regard, to ſee theſe warlike weapons vſed and practiſed, and not that euery common fellow be ſette in authoritie, but thoſe which be men of experience & knowledge, for what profiteth theſe Companies heere in England with all theyr muſter and traynings? May I ſpeak it without offence, there is not in conſcience two Companies among twentie, which hath men of experience to inſtruct them in the exerciſe of theyr weapons. For it is not ſufficient to haue ſtore of Armes, weapons, Munitions, and furniture, but alſo to haue men of experience to vſe them, and good Gouernours in the knowledge of Martiall diſcipline to lead thē.
                  The Realme thus gouerned with men of experience and knowledge, there is no doubt but it will continue and floriſh. For as Varro ſayth, exerciſe of warlike weapons, and rumors of warres, breedeth peace. And for that your Lordſhip, beeing a moſt loyall and faithfull friende to her Maieſtie, and a moſt worthy and famous Generall, beſt befitting your honourable eſtate, for the better ſafe keeping of thys little England, I haue thought it good, for to diſcouer this briefe diſcourſe of Martiall

diſcipline vnto your good Lordſhip, hauing not any better thing to beſtow of you whereby to witneſſe my good will, for if I had, I would with all willingnes impart the ſame. And for that your Lordſhip knoweth, the earth which yeldeth ſalte beareth no other thing, and the ground that hideth golde, will beare no kinde of grayne, ſo from a ſlender wit, exerciſed in Martiall diſcipline, your Lordſhip will looke for no gyfts, but fruites of a moſt willing minde. And albeit they are many, who allured by your manifolde vertues regarde you, and mooued through your true nobleneſſe of minde to honour you, yet as one not inferior in affection to any, but in good wil ſurmounting many, thus I boldly preſume, leauing it to your honourable humanitie: as a perſonage moſt meete, and bulwarke moſt ſufficient, againſt the barking impes of the enuious, and blunt haſtie bolts of the fooliſh, whoſe eyes beeing ſore, cannot beholde the Sunne, and theyr wits ſo weake, are not able to penetrate the ſubtiltie of Martiall experiences: and therefore as ſlothfull neglect them, or as malicious, wholy contemne them. But proceeding too farre in theſe ſpeeches, peraduenture I may be miſliked, and therefore leaſt I ſhould ſeeme entred ſo farre, that I cannot find the way out, I will conclude.
                  Thus beſeeching your good Lordſhippe to pardon me in diſcharging my duetie, and to receiue with cheerefulneſſe, defend with willingnes, and to reade with friendlines thys rude worke which I offer to your good L. as an outwarde ſigne of my inward good will. Thus beſeeching God, moſt earneſtlie to bleſſe and proſper, both you and yours heere on thys earth, with health, and increaſe of honour, and magnanimitie, and ſend you in heauen moſt aſſured happines.
                  
                     Your Lordships moſt humble in all dutifull ſeruice to be commaunded. Gyles Clayton.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     ❧ THE SECONDE PART.
                  
                     
                        ❧ Formes of Battels very neceſſary to be vſed in place of ſeruice, euery Battell beſt befitting the place of ground.
                     
                        FOR as much as I haue vndertaken to ſette down the ordering of certaine Battels, with the ordering of your men to march by degrées, ſo that on a ſuddaine you may bring them into a Square battell, of what number ſoeuer they be: and to the intent that ſuch as reade thys Booke, may without difficultie vnderſtand the ordering of euery Battell & place of ſeruice, according as they in the diſcription are appointed, I thought it good to ſhewe you the figure of euery one in his place. Wherefore I wyll firſt declare vnto you, by what figure and Letters you ſhall finde the Footemen, the Horſemen, and euer other Officer in his place of ſeruice.
                     
                        The Letters and Characters.
                        
                           
                              
                                 T
                                 for
                                 Targetters.
                              
                              
                                 O
                                 for
                                 Musketters.
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 for
                                 Caliuers.
                              
                              
                                 P
                                 for
                                 Pykes.
                              
                              
                                 H
                                 for
                                 Holberders.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 G
                                 for
                                 Generall.
                              
                              
                                 M
                                 for
                                 Marſhall.
                              
                              
                                 T
                                 for
                                 Treaſurer.
                              
                              
                                 C
                                 for
                                 Captaines.
                              
                              
                                 L
                                 for
                                 Lieueten.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 B
                                 for
                                 Bylles.
                              
                              
                                 n
                                 for
                                 Carbines.
                              
                              
                                 m
                                 for
                                 Light horſe.
                              
                              
                                 M
                                 for
                                 Launſeares.
                              
                              
                                 c
                                 for
                                 Cariages.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 S
                                 for
                                 Sargiants.
                              
                              
                                 E
                                 for
                                 Enſignes.
                              
                              
                                 D
                                 for
                                 Drumes.
                              
                              
                                 F
                                 for
                                 Fifes.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſumme and contents of the Figures following.
                     
                        1. In the figure following, is deſcribed the marching of your men into a ring, the meaning whereof is more plainly ſette downe as followeth.
                        2. In the ſecond figure is ſhewed how to order a Battell, or bonde of men, and to bring their men into a Square battell, with theyr Pykes on the fronte of the ſaid battell.
                        3. In the thirde figure is deſcribed the manner of marching by degrees, of what number ſoeuer, and at the firſt ſight of your enemies, to bring thē into a iuſt Square battell, ſo that your Enſignes may be in the midſt.
                        4. In the fourth figure is ſhewed, the ordering of three ſquare battels of Pykes, and to what vſe they ſerue.
                        5. In the fift figure is ſignified, the ordering of the foure Squadrons of Pykes, and to what vſe they ſerue.
                        6. In the ſixt figure is declared the ordering of a Croſſe battell.
                        7. In the ſeauenth figure is ſhewed, the ordering of a baſe Croſſe battell, and wherefore it beſt ſerueth.
                        8. In the eyght figure is ſhewed, the ordering of a baſe Square battell, and to what vſe it beſt ſerueth.
                        9. In the ninth figure is declared, a perfect Square battell of foure hundred Pykes.
                        10. In the tenth figure is ſhewed, the forme of a battell on foote, without Horſemen, imployed wyth Shotte, readie the fight.
                        11. In the eleuenth figure is plainly ſhewed, the order and forme of a Square battell, readie the fight in Fielde, impayled both with Carbines, Light-horſe, and Launces, as in theſe dayes we vſe.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        ❧ The order of Imbattayling.
                     
                        Although theſe thinges being firſt ſette down, as marching by degrees, and caſting of a Ring, extendeth not to olde Captaines, and Seruitors of experience, yet it is not hurtefull to ſuch as be younge Seruitors, which would be glad to learne experience and knowledge in theſe Martiall exerciſes, which is a moſt honourable lyfe ſo vſed.
                     
                     
                        FIrſt you ſhall vnderſtand, that if two or three Captaines, hauing vnder theyr leading two or thrée hundred men to each Captaine, & bee ſent into the enemies Countrey to doe ſome notable exployte, or to conduct any Conuoy through the ſame: then, they ſhall march thrée or fiue in a rancke, as is moſt cōmonly vſed, when they be few in nūber, for the ſpéedines of their way & paſſing through ſtreights, for in ſuch waies a man may not march aboue 385. at the moſte, for few men being not ſtrengthned with horſe, cannot long endure in the enemies Countrie.
                     But ſay it happeneth, that their enemies come ſuddainly vppon them, ſo that they rannot ſet their men in order of battaile as they woulde: then it ſhall be good for thoſe Captaines to caſt their men in a Ring, as they marched before, fiue or thrée in a rancke, with the greateſt part of their ſhotte in the midſt of their Pikes, your Holbards or Billes next the Enſigne, being placed in the middeſt of all, and thoſe ſhotte which bee in the Rereward of your company, if occaſion ſerueth, ſhalbe deliuered to certaine of your Corporalles, which ſhal lead them in winges to ſkirmiſh with the enemie: but of all thinges haue a care to take all aduantages that may be, both of wind, ground, and Sunne, and be ſure that your Corporals be men of knowledge, and able to diſcharge their dueties and charge committed vnto them. If they be not ſo skilfull as you would
                     
                        
                        
                           The plat for Incamping.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           The Battell called a Croſſe, verie excellent both for night and day.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           A two-fold Battell of 2000 men Theſe Charecters are to be vſed in the place of the other, where this letter H was placed for B as heere you may ſee.
                              
                                 
                                    Theſe Characters.
                                    S
                                    Signifie
                                    Shot.
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    ♂ or this P
                                    Signifie
                                    Pikes.
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    
                                       ✚ or this B
                                    Signifie
                                    Halberds.
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    E
                                    Signifie
                                    Enſignes.
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    
                                       
                                          〈☐〉
                                       
                                    
                                    Signifie
                                    Launces.
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Δ
                                    Signifie
                                    Light horſemen.
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    *
                                    Signifie
                                    Argoletteares.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     wiſh them to be, then ſende out with them one or two Sargeants, if you canne ſpare them from the battaile, for they ought to be ſkilfull Souldiours, and to knowe howe to bring theyr companies to the face of their enemies, and howe to charge and retyre with the beſt aduantage.
                     And if your place of meeting be large, it were good to appoint many of your Corporals, with ſeuerall companies of ſhotte to méete your enemies in the face: and when they haue deliuered theyr powder and ſhotte, they ſhall make their retreite to the battaile, and then certaine other ſhotte which are within the battaile, ſhall iſſue foorth and reſkue them, and to ſupply their place of ſeruice, tyll ſuch tymes as they haue furniſhed themſelues, and beeing thus furniſhed and refreſhed, are ready to make a new ſupply, if needed ſhall require. Thus may they continue a long time, and maintaine your battaile.
                     But if you meet your enemies vpon the plaines, then muſt you appoint certaine of your Pikes with Halbards or bils to defende your ſhotte from the charge of horſemen: thus dooing, you ſhall be able to defend your ſelues in all places, and to encounter with the enemies, though they aſſaulte you on euery ſide, & were more in number by thrée partes. Theſe premiſes conſidered, & ſo performed as before mencioned, may redownd to the great credit & magnanimity of ſuch Captaynes, as performeth ſuch an exployt, and alſo honour and renowme to their Souldiours, which were ſo reſolute in their ſeruice: for a Souldiour or Seruitor had rather chooſe to dye with honor in the fielde, then to be any way or meanes diſhonoured in ſeruice. This (Gentlemen) is my opinion, and the good opinion of diuers olde Souldiours and Seruitors, if you bee aſſaulted on a ſuddaine, which ſometimes happeneth.
                     
                        This is the King which I haue declared vnto you, which King is very neceſſary to be vſed as I haue declared be fore, ſo that you caſt and deuide your men with their ſeuerall weapons as aforeſayde, and ſhalbe more plainely ſeene in the next Figure following.
                     
                        
                           A Corporall with ſhot.
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           A Corporall with ſhot.
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                        
                     
                     For the ſtraites.
                     
                        
                           Corporall.
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        In this order for the playnes.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                           
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                              o
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                     
                     
                     A perfect rule to bringe your men into a ſquare battaile on a ſuddaine, with theyr Pikes in the Front, the which at times were very good, if by chaunce you méete with your enemies in any broade way: thus march your men by degrées fiue in a rancke, euery Captaine by himſelfe, with their pikes on the front of theyr array, ſo, euery Captaine marching with theyr ſeuerall companies, may on a ſuddaine bring their men into a ſquare battaile, with their pikes on the Front of the ſayde battaile, the which is very good, if by broade wayes or woods they happen to meete with their enemies, for the defence of their horſemen: and for your better vnderſtanding thereof, I haue héere in Fygure more playnely ſette it down, to ſhewe you the meaning thereof.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                     
                     Thus is the foreſaid marching by degrees fiue in a ranck, brought into a Square battell, with theyr Dykes on the front, ſo alſo you may order your Companies, and bring them into thys proportion, of what number ſo euer they be if neede requireth.
                     
                        
                        Heere you ſhall further vnderſtande, howe many men may march in a ranck, and on a ſuddaine to bring them into a iuſt Square battaile, of what number ſoeuer they be, ſo that your Enſignes may be in the midſt thereof.
                        IF you happen to eſpy your enemies, and are driuen to make a ſquare battell with ſpéede, then deuide the roote of your Company of what number ſoeuer they be, into thrée equall parts, and the thyrd part of your men ought to march by the way, as by thys figure more plainly appeareth. Say there be but 2. hundred fortie fiue men to march through the Enemies Countrey, the roote of thoſe two hundred fortie fiue muſt be taken, which is fifteene, which number may bée equally deuided into three parts, béeing fiue in fronte, fifteene in flanck, ſo marching fiue in a ranck, there ſhall be fortie fiue rancks, fiue to a rancke, as by the figure next folowing more plainly appeareth.
                        
                           
                           
                        
                        Thus marching with your men by degrées fiue in a rancke or more, what number ſoeuer, if the companie may equally be deuided into three parts, thē they may be brought into a Square battell, ſo that you deuide thē by C. and L. as this figure ſignifieth, ſo that euery part heereof is fifteene rancks, fiue to a rancke, and when you will haue them brought into a iuſt Square battell, make a ſtande, and cauſe the front of your Company to ſtande, that doone procéede forwarde with the ſecond, and ſo with the thirde, vntill they become vp to the front, the which three parts ſo placed, will make a iuſt ſquare battel, 15. both in fronte and flancke, as the example following more plainly ſheweth vnto you.
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           Theſe are the thrée parts which I ſpake of before, & nowe bringing them vp in order, as you ſée, they ſhall make a iuſt Square battell, with all their Enſignes in the midſt thereof, which ſhall be more plainly ſéene vnto you, by figure of theſe thrée parts brought into a ſquare battel.
                        
                        Alſo there are a great number of good battailes, which haue beene vſed among olde Seruitors, & men of experience, which are very good to be vſed againſt the Enemies, and as they are good, ſo they are dangerous, for they will be ſoone

diſordered where Souldiours are not throughly experienced and trained vp in ſeruices: but the fight in theſe dayes, are cleane contrary to the fight in times paſt, for wee vſe altogether Shot, Pykes and Horſe, with a few Holberds and Targets, for the which weapons, there is no better order of imbattelling, then the ſquare battell: alſo if there be 20000. or 30000. in the fielde, then to deuide them into thrée or foure ſquadrons, which is a moſt ſtrong way, if occaſion ſerue, as thys figure more plainly ſheweth.
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              The fore Front of the foure Squadrons.
                           
                        
                        THeſe ſquare platformes, beeing well and ſtrongly impayled with ſhotte, (as moſt commonly wee vſe in the fielde) is the moſt ſtrong way and beſt to be vſed, if that you haue any great number, as ten, twenty, or thirty thouſand in fielde, for then you may deuide your pikes, as you finde your ſelfe beſt aduantaged againſt your enemies, eyther in 2. 3. or 4. ſquadrons, as beſt ſerueth for the grounde where you make your ſtande: but if your commpany be ſmall, as 2. or 3. thouſand pikes in the fielde, then it were not good to deuide them, but vpon ſome great aduantage of grounde, or ſtopping of a

ſtreight way or ſome gap, which occaſions ought moſt chiefly to be fore-ſéene: for it hath euer beene obſerued for a principle, amongſt auncient Souldiours and Seruitors of experience, that the ſtronger your Pikes are together, the more of force is your battaile accounted, and the more companies your ſhotte bee deuieed into, the better they may maintayne the ſkirmiſh with their enemies, and the apter for ſeruice.
                        Theſe premiſes conſidered as before mencioned, you will of your ſelues confeſſe, that the ſquare battailes are beſt to be vſed in theſe dayes, for that wee vſe not the weapons which hath béene vſed in olde time, as Croſ-bowes, long bows, black Billes, with ſuch other like weapons: but if you happen to méete with your enemies, in any Countrey full of hilles or Mountaines, then your Croſſe battaile is very good, or a baſe croſſe bataile, as by Figure I haue ſette down in moſt plaine manner and forme following.
                        
                           
                           
                              The forme of a Croſſe Battaile.
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                              
                              
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 h
                                 h
                                 h
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                              
                              
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 D
                                 E
                                 F
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                              
                              
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 h
                                 h
                                 h
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                              
                              
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 h
                                 h
                                 h
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                              
                              
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                              
                              
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                              
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 p
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                                 o
                              
                           
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           The forme of a baſe Croſſe battaile. Place this battaile at folio 68. after the Croſſe battaile.
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           〈1 page duplicate〉
                        
                        
                           Theſe are the formes afore ſpoken of, both of the Croſſe battell, as alſo of the baſe Croſſe battell, which are very good to be vſed, as aforeſaid, for the defending of your ſhotte from the Horſemens deſcending downe eyther hyll or Mountaine.
                     
                     
                        How to make a battell called the broade Square.
                        THis broade ſquare battell is very good to be vſed if you be but of ſmall ſtrength, for that it maketh a fayre ſhewe in the ſight of your Enemies, and in time of fight vſeth manie hands more then the iuſt ſquares: for if his enemies be before him, he is like to doo great ſlaughter, for it will inuiron his enemies rounde about. But there be ſome of a contrary opinion, the which I yeeld vnto, for in mine owne opinion the iuſt ſquare is beſt, becauſe it ſerueth moſt commonly in moſt places of grounds, but this broade ſquare ſerueth as the grounds will ſerue, for we be not ſure alwaies of a place fitte for the ſquare battel: and alſo theyr ſtrength may be ſuch, by woods, waters, or falſe grounds, or ſuch like, that the broade battell is much the better, if helped by theſe aduantages. But howſoeuer you make your battaile, you muſt haue a great regard to the ſituation of your ground, and the ſtrengthes about the ſame.
                        
                           The order and forme of a broad ſquare battaile, which is very good to be vſed, if ſo aduantaged with ſtrengthes, as I haue before ſpoken of, as woods, waters and falſe groundes. with ſuch other lyke.
                        
                           The fore Front.
                        
                        
                        A perfect rule to bring your men into a ſquare battaile, of what number ſoeuer they be, ſo that their Enſigne may be in the middeſt thereof, as by example, with a ſmall company, ſo you haue but foure hundred Pikes in the fielde: the 4. ſquare roote whereof is 20. then putting 20. men into a ranck, there will be 20. ranckes, 20. men to a rancke, the which 20. ranckes beeing orderly placed the one behinde the other, wil make a iuſt ſquare battaile, if ſo placed as by thys Figure more plainely is ſhewed vnto you.
                        
                        
                           
                           
                              The order of a ſquare battaile, impayled with winges and troupes of ſhotte, as in the fielde is vſed in theſe dayes.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧ Certaine Rules of Armes, very needefull and neceſſary to be foreſeene, both of Generall and Captaines. (*)
                     
                        ALthough it be not néedefull, yet I will put you in minde of the great incombraunces, which may happen in the fight of a battell, wherefore be ſure that your Horſemen in charging the Enemie, be as much diſtante from the maine battell as may be: or els it may be an occaſion in retyring from the Enemie, to breake the rancks of your men, and ſo diſorder the whole maine battell, for ſometimes it is pollicie to make a retreite, as occaſion ſhall ſerue. Alſo you are to lodge your Horſemen in time of Leaguor or Campe, within the palle or quarters of your footemen, becauſe they are not ſo ſoone Armed and mounted, ready to defende as the footemen.
                     Alſo you ought to know, how that the Townes and Fortreſſes be ſtrengthened, eyther by nature or by induſtry: by nature thoſe are ſtrong, which are compaſſed round about with Riuers or with Fennes, by induſtry thoſe which ſtand vppon hyls or Rocks: thoſe likewiſe may be ſtrong, which ſtande on the plaines, eyther by Caſtell, Turrets, turnings, or crookednes thereof, with many other ſuch like, which may endanger the Enemy on euery ſide both on front and flanck.
                     
                        Alſo when you are minded to beſiedge any ſtrong Towne or Holde, you ſhall firſt ſuffer them to ſowe theyr ſéede and fieldes, and ſo ſtay a time till it be gréene aboue the ground, to the intent they ſhould lacke the ſame graine which they haue ſowne, and that you may the better hope to reape the ſame for your commoditie.
                     Alſo you are to exerciſe & practiſe your Souldiours in actiuitie and déedes of Armes, when as you are not in any great danger of the Enemie, for the perfectnes thereof, and in time of ſeruice for renowne and honour.
                     Alſo if any Generall, Colonels or Captaines, béeing in Leaguor or Campe, and hath any want of victuals, let hym then fayne himſelfe to make a compoſition or agréement with his Enemies: and during ſome proces of time in this practiſe, you may be eyther prouided of theyr victuals, or others at the leaſt. And when you haue by thys policie and meanes gotten away theyr victuals & graine, then you may with eaſe kéepe them ſhort and famiſh them.
                     Alſo if you be minded to win any Cittie or ſtrong Hold, then you ſhall firſt foreſée which way is beſt to ouercome all the ſmall Townes rounde about the ſame, and ſo ouercomming them with violence, ſhall driue them into the Cittie or ſtrong Holde, for ſuccour at their fréendes and Countrimens hands, the which multitude of people béeing driuen into the Cittie, you may with more eaſe famiſh and ouercome them.
                     Alſo if you be minded to make an aſſault, firſt & chéefelie you ought to haue a care in giuing the firſt onſette, wherein you ſhall be valiant and couragious, and very hotely to aſſault them on euery ſide, the which hath oftentimes gotten many victories.
                     Alſo he that will be counted a man at Armes and ſeruice,

muſt be valiant and couragious, moſt vigilant to obſerue the deuiſes of the Enemie, and in taking ſome paines to exerciſe his Companie, ſuch Seruitors ſhall incur leaſt perils: and may hope moſt of victory.
                     Alſo there is no purpoſe better then that which is hid from the Enemie, vntill ſuch time as you haue executed the ſame.
                     Alſo to know in the warres how to vnderſtande occaſions, and in the taking thereof, helpeth more at ſuch times, then any other thing.
                     Alſo nature bréedeth many luſtie & ſtrong men, but practiſe and exerciſe maketh many.
                     Alſo you are to vnderſtand that where diſcipline is vſed with lenitie and curteſie, more preuaileth then furie & raſhnes, without diſcretion or wiſedom.
                     Alſo you ſhall vnderſtande, that the valiantneſſe of your Souldiours, more preuaileth then the multitude, and ſometime the ſituation helpeth more then the valiantnes.
                     Alſo you may vnderſtand, that new and ſuddain things, maketh many Armies amazed and feared, and accuſtomed things daily vſed, are little regarded. Wherefore make your Armie to practiſe, and to know with ſmall fights a new Enemie before you enter the fight with him.
                     Alſo he that with diſorder foloweth the Enemie, after that he is broken, he wil doo no other but become of a Conquerour in the fielde the looſer thereof.
                     Alſo hee that prepareth not ſufficient and neceſſary victuals to liue vpon, both for himſelfe and for his Company, may ſoone be ouercomewith ſtroke of weapons.
                     
                        Alſo hee that truſteth more in Horſemen then in Footemen, or more in Footemen, then in Horſemen. Muſt firſt accommodate himſelfe with the ground and ſituation.
                     Alſo when you perceiue in the day, that there be any cō
                        ming to eſpy your Leaguor, then cauſe euery man to goe into hys Tent or Cabbin, and change your purpoſe if you perceiue he hath fooreſeene your Leaguor or Campe.
                     Alſo you may conſult with many, thinges which you ought to doo, but the ſame thing which you doo, conferre with fewe.
                     Alſo you ſhall vſe ſuch meanes, that the Enemies may not by any meanes know how you will order your battels in fight: and in what manner ſoeuer you order them, make that the firſt may be receiued of the ſecond, and ſo of the third.
                     Alſo if you will make a ſette battaile, neuer change to any other purpoſe, but to the ſame for which you haue appointed it, for if you doo, it will breede diſcention and diſcord.
                     Alſo you ſhall accuſtome your Souldiours to deſpiſe and hate delicate lodging, great fare, and cut apparrell, for that it is dangerous vnto them in time of ſeruice.
                     Alſo I will put you in mind of a ſaying, which hath béene vſed in times paſt, and moſt néedfull to be obſerued in theſe daies. Whereas they ſaid that men, yron, money and bread was the ſtrength of the warres, they ſayde true, but of thoſe foure, the firſt two be beſt, and moſt neceſſary, becauſe men and yron, finde money and bread, and not money and breade to finde men and yron. For men with yron may prouide both for bread, money, and all ſuch like neceſſaries as to the wars belongeth.
                     
                        And laſtly, I would wiſh you not to be ſlow in the exerciſing of your Souldiours in actiuitie when time and place ſerueth, for that is your greateſt ſtrength in ſeruice, for if your men haue not practiſe in theyr weapons, and ſo be expert and cunning in the vſe thereof, your Companies ſhall be much weaker then thoſe which are practiſed and perfect.
                  
                  
                     Not to giue battell without the aduice and counſaile of diuers olde Seruitors and men of experience.
                     
                        THere be many men of good ſeruice and experience, ſaith it is not good for a Generall or Leader of an Armie, to be ouer haſtie in gyuing battaile to the Enemies, except it be vpon ſome great aduantage: for that it is a matter of weight, and ought very wiſely and carefully to be foreſeene, for that his honour and wealth of a Realme lyeth thereon.
                     Wherefore firſt you are to conſider and to examine the eſtate and ſtrength of the enemies, howe they be furniſhed with men of ſeruice and experience, alſo with Armour and weapons both for Horſemen and footemen, as alſo with other ſtrengthes. Then you are to conſider with your ſelues of your owne ſtrength, and what number of men you haue, likewiſe how expert they be in theyr weapons, and whether they bee well appointed for ſuch ſeruice or no.
                     Then if you finde your owne partie good, you may proceede, if but indifferent, then it is the opinion of olde Seruitors of experience, not to be too haſtie to giue the battaile, if you may otherwiſe chooſe, although it hath béene oftentimes

ſéene that a few in number, hath forced to fight or els to retyre: and if that ſmal company doo tarry and fight it out, then they doo determine with thēſelues euery man to be reſolute, that one man is worth two at ſuch times, and commonly it is ſéene, that the greateſt number is careleſſe, and thinke themſelues moſt ſure of the victory, but victory is vncertaine, for God giueth victory where he pleaſeth. Wherefore I woulde wiſh all Leaders, though they be more in number then their Enemies, not to be too haſtie, but kéepe themſelues ſtronglie together: and if in caſe you giue the battaile, then doe it with courage and reſolute mindes, determined to abide the time of good fortune and victory, and doubtleſſe one of thoſe men ſo determined, is woorth three others.
                     
                        
                        
                        
                           A way to march and conduct foorth the Armie. Place this battell 293. fallio at this marke ******
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        ❧ A breefe Kalender for the better vnderſtanding how to augment your Companies by degrees, and in marching eyther by 3. 5. or 7. to bring them into a ſquare battell, as to ſay in the firſt number, adde three times 1. is 3. three times 2. is 6. three times 3. is 9. And ſo forth for the firſt Table, the ſeconde, and the third.
                     
                        
                           
                              Numb.
                              Addit.
                           
                           
                              1
                              3
                           
                           
                              2
                              6
                           
                           
                              3
                              9
                           
                           
                              4
                              12
                           
                           
                              5
                              15
                           
                           
                              6
                              18
                           
                           
                              7
                              21
                           
                           
                              8
                              24
                           
                           
                              9
                              27
                           
                           
                              10
                              30
                           
                           
                              11
                              33
                           
                           
                              12
                              36
                           
                           
                              13
                              39
                           
                           
                              14
                              42
                           
                           
                              15
                              45
                           
                           
                              16
                              48
                           
                           
                              17
                              51
                           
                           
                              18
                              54
                           
                           
                              19
                              57
                           
                           
                              20
                              60
                           
                           
                              21
                              63
                           
                           
                              22
                              66
                           
                           
                              23
                              69
                           
                           
                              24
                              72
                           
                           
                              25
                              75
                           
                           
                              26
                              78
                           
                           
                              27
                              81
                           
                           
                              28
                              84
                           
                           
                              29
                              87
                           
                           
                              30
                              90
                           
                           
                              31
                              93
                           
                           
                              32
                              96
                           
                           
                              33
                              99
                           
                           
                              34
                              102
                           
                           
                              35
                              105
                           
                           
                              36
                              108
                           
                           
                              37
                              111
                           
                           
                              38
                              114
                           
                           
                              39
                              117
                           
                           
                              40
                              120
                           
                           
                              41
                              123
                           
                           
                              42
                              126
                           
                           
                              43
                              129
                           
                           
                              44
                              132
                           
                           
                              45
                              135
                           
                           
                              46
                              138
                           
                           
                              47
                              141
                           
                           
                              48
                              144
                           
                           
                              49
                              147
                           
                           
                              50
                              150
                           
                           
                              51
                              153
                           
                           
                              52
                              156
                           
                           
                              53
                              159
                           
                           
                              54
                              162
                           
                           
                              55
                              165
                           
                           
                              56
                              168
                           
                           
                              57
                              171
                           
                           
                              58
                              174
                           
                           
                              59
                              177
                           
                           
                              60
                              180
                           
                           
                              61
                              183
                           
                           
                              62
                              186
                           
                           
                              63
                              189
                           
                           
                              64
                              192
                           
                           
                              65
                              195
                           
                           
                              66
                              198
                           
                           
                              67
                              201
                           
                           
                              68
                              204
                           
                           
                              69
                              207
                           
                           
                              70
                              210
                           
                           
                              71
                              213
                           
                           
                              72
                              216
                           
                           
                              73
                              219
                           
                           
                              74
                              222
                           
                           
                              75
                              225
                           
                           
                              76
                              228
                           
                           
                              77
                              231
                           
                           
                              78
                              234
                           
                           
                              79
                              237
                           
                           
                              80
                              240
                           
                           
                              81
                              243
                           
                           
                              82
                              246
                           
                           
                              83
                              249
                           
                           
                              84
                              252
                           
                           
                              85
                              255
                           
                           
                              86
                              258
                           
                           
                              87
                              261
                           
                           
                              88
                              264
                           
                           
                              89
                              267
                           
                           
                              90
                              270
                           
                           
                              91
                              273
                           
                           
                              92
                              276
                           
                           
                              93
                              279
                           
                           
                              94
                              282
                           
                           
                              95
                              285
                           
                           
                              96
                              288
                           
                           
                              97
                              291
                           
                           
                              98
                              294
                           
                           
                              99
                              297
                           
                           
                              100
                              300
                           
                        
                     
                     The ſquare roote of this 300. is 17. vnplaced 11.
                     FINIS.
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſecond Table.
                     
                        
                           
                              Numb.
                              Addit.
                           
                           
                              1
                              5
                           
                           
                              2
                              10
                           
                           
                              3
                              15
                           
                           
                              4
                              20
                           
                           
                              5
                              25
                           
                           
                              6
                              30
                           
                           
                              7
                              35
                           
                           
                              8
                              40
                           
                           
                              9
                              45
                           
                           
                              10
                              50
                           
                           
                              11
                              55
                           
                           
                              12
                              60
                           
                           
                              13
                              65
                           
                           
                              14
                              70
                           
                           
                              15
                              75
                           
                           
                              16
                              80
                           
                           
                              17
                              85
                           
                           
                              18
                              90
                           
                           
                              19
                              95
                           
                           
                              20
                              100
                           
                           
                              21
                              105
                           
                           
                              22
                              110
                           
                           
                              23
                              115
                           
                           
                              24
                              120
                           
                           
                              25
                              125
                           
                           
                              26
                              130
                           
                           
                              27
                              135
                           
                           
                              28
                              140
                           
                           
                              29
                              145
                           
                           
                              30
                              150
                           
                           
                              31
                              155
                           
                           
                              32
                              160
                           
                           
                              33
                              165
                           
                           
                              34
                              170
                           
                           
                              35
                              175
                           
                           
                              36
                              180
                           
                           
                              37
                              185
                           
                           
                              38
                              190
                           
                           
                              39
                              195
                           
                           
                              40
                              200
                           
                           
                              41
                              205
                           
                           
                              42
                              210
                           
                           
                              43
                              215
                           
                           
                              44
                              220
                           
                           
                              45
                              225
                           
                           
                              46
                              230
                           
                           
                              47
                              235
                           
                           
                              48
                              240
                           
                           
                              49
                              245
                           
                           
                              50
                              250
                           
                           
                              51
                              255
                           
                           
                              52
                              260
                           
                           
                              53
                              265
                           
                           
                              54
                              270
                           
                           
                              55
                              275
                           
                           
                              56
                              280
                           
                           
                              57
                              285
                           
                           
                              58
                              290
                           
                           
                              59
                              295
                           
                           
                              60
                              300
                           
                           
                              61
                              305
                           
                           
                              62
                              310
                           
                           
                              63
                              315
                           
                           
                              64
                              320
                           
                           
                              65
                              325
                           
                           
                              66
                              330
                           
                           
                              67
                              335
                           
                           
                              68
                              340
                           
                           
                              69
                              345
                           
                           
                              70
                              350
                           
                           
                              71
                              355
                           
                           
                              72
                              360
                           
                           
                              73
                              365
                           
                           
                              74
                              370
                           
                           
                              75
                              375
                           
                           
                              76
                              380
                           
                           
                              77
                              385
                           
                           
                              78
                              390
                           
                           
                              79
                              395
                           
                           
                              80
                              400
                           
                           
                              81
                              405
                           
                           
                              82
                              410
                           
                           
                              83
                              415
                           
                           
                              84
                              420
                           
                           
                              85
                              425
                           
                           
                              86
                              430
                           
                           
                              87
                              435
                           
                           
                              88
                              440
                           
                           
                              89
                              445
                           
                           
                              90
                              450
                           
                           
                              91
                              455
                           
                           
                              92
                              460
                           
                           
                              93
                              465
                           
                           
                              94
                              470
                           
                           
                              95
                              475
                           
                           
                              96
                              480
                           
                           
                              97
                              485
                           
                           
                              98
                              490
                           
                           
                              99
                              495
                           
                           
                              100
                              500
                           
                        
                     
                     The ſquare roote of this 500. is 22. vnplaced. 11.
                     FINIS.
                  
                  
                     
                     The third Table.
                     
                        
                           
                              Numb.
                              Addit.
                           
                           
                              1
                              7
                           
                           
                              2
                              14
                           
                           
                              3
                              21
                           
                           
                              4
                              28
                           
                           
                              5
                              35
                           
                           
                              6
                              42
                           
                           
                              7
                              49
                           
                           
                              8
                              56
                           
                           
                              9
                              63
                           
                           
                              10
                              70
                           
                           
                              11
                              77
                           
                           
                              12
                              84
                           
                           
                              13
                              91
                           
                           
                              14
                              98
                           
                           
                              15
                              105
                           
                           
                              16
                              112
                           
                           
                              17
                              119
                           
                           
                              18
                              126
                           
                           
                              19
                              133
                           
                           
                              20
                              140
                           
                           
                              21
                              147
                           
                           
                              22
                              154
                           
                           
                              23
                              161
                           
                           
                              24
                              168
                           
                           
                              25
                              175
                           
                           
                              26
                              182
                           
                           
                              27
                              189
                           
                           
                              28
                              196
                           
                           
                              29
                              203
                           
                           
                              30
                              210
                           
                           
                              31
                              217
                           
                           
                              32
                              224
                           
                           
                              33
                              231
                           
                           
                              34
                              238
                           
                           
                              35
                              245
                           
                           
                              36
                              252
                           
                           
                              37
                              259
                           
                           
                              38
                              266
                           
                           
                              39
                              273
                           
                           
                              40
                              280
                           
                           
                              41
                              287
                           
                           
                              42
                              294
                           
                           
                              43
                              301
                           
                           
                              44
                              308
                           
                           
                              45
                              315
                           
                           
                              46
                              322
                           
                           
                              47
                              329
                           
                           
                              48
                              335
                           
                           
                              49
                              342
                           
                           
                              50
                              350
                           
                           
                              51
                              357
                           
                           
                              52
                              364
                           
                           
                              53
                              371
                           
                           
                              54
                              378
                           
                           
                              55
                              385
                           
                           
                              56
                              392
                           
                           
                              57
                              399
                           
                           
                              58
                              406
                           
                           
                              59
                              413
                           
                           
                              60
                              420
                           
                           
                              61
                              427
                           
                           
                              62
                              434
                           
                           
                              63
                              441
                           
                           
                              64
                              448
                           
                           
                              65
                              455
                           
                           
                              66
                              462
                           
                           
                              67
                              469
                           
                           
                              68
                              476
                           
                           
                              69
                              483
                           
                           
                              70
                              490
                           
                           
                              71
                              497
                           
                           
                              72
                              504
                           
                           
                              73
                              511
                           
                           
                              74
                              518
                           
                           
                              75
                              525
                           
                           
                              76
                              532
                           
                           
                              77
                              539
                           
                           
                              78
                              546
                           
                           
                              79
                              553
                           
                           
                              80
                              560
                           
                           
                              81
                              567
                           
                           
                              82
                              574
                           
                           
                              83
                              581
                           
                           
                              84
                              588
                           
                           
                              85
                              595
                           
                           
                              86
                              6
                                    •
                                 2
                           
                           
                              87
                              609
                           
                           
                              88
                              616
                           
                           
                              89
                              623
                           
                           
                              90
                              630
                           
                           
                              91
                              637
                           
                           
                              92
                              644
                           
                           
                              93
                              651
                           
                           
                              94
                              658
                           
                           
                              95
                              665
                           
                           
                              96
                              672
                           
                           
                              97
                              679
                           
                           
                              98
                              686
                           
                           
                              99
                              693
                           
                           
                              100
                              700
                           
                        
                     
                     The ſquare roote of this 700. is 26. vnplaced. 24
                     FINIS.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧ Heerefolloweth a breefe diſcouerie of euery battaile before figured, the ſquare rootes whereof, I haue moſt plainelie ſette downe in Figure following, which ſerueth to imbattaile from 100. to 1000, and ſo you may proceede on forward as before, to 10. 20. or 30. thouſand: For ſuch occaſions of buſines at this preſent, driues me to conclude with more breuity, then at the firſt I determined.
                     
                        100.
                        FIrſt you ſhall vnderſtand, the ſquare roote of 100. is 10. none vnplaced: baſtard ſquare 11. in Front, 9. in flanck 1. vnplaced: broade ſquare 14. in Front, 7. in flancke, 2. vnplaced.
                     
                     
                        200.
                        The ſquare roote of 200. is 14. 4. vnplaced: baſtard ſquare 15. in Fronte, 13. in flancke, 5. vnplaced: broade ſquare 20. in fronte, 10. in flancke, none vnplaced.
                     
                     
                        300.
                        The ſquare roote is 17. 11. vnplaced: baſtard ſquare 18. in fronte, 16. in flancke 12. vnplaced: broade ſquare, 25. in front, 12. in flancke none vnplaced.
                     
                     
                        400.
                        The ſquare roote is 20. none vnplaced: baſtarde ſquare, 21 in fronte, 19. in flancke, one vnplaced: broad ſquare, 28. in front, 14. in flancke, 8. vnplaced.
                     
                     
                        500.
                        The ſquare roote is 22. 16. vnplaced: baſtard ſquare, 23. in front, 21. in flancke, 17. vnplaced: broad ſquare, 31. in front, 16 in flancke, 4. vnplaced.
                     
                     
                        600.
                        The ſquare roote is 24. 24. vnplaced: baſtarde ſquare, 25. in front, 24 in flancke, none vnplaced: broade ſquare, 35. in front 17. in flancke, 12. vnplaced.
                     
                     
                        700.
                        The ſquare roote is 26. 24. vnplaced: baſtard ſquare, 27. in

front, 25. in flancke, 25. vnplaced: broade ſquare, 38. in front, 18. in flancke, 16. vplaced.
                     
                     
                        800
                        The ſquare roote is 28. 16. vnplaced: baſtarde ſquare, 29. in front, 27. in flanck, 17. vnplaced: broad ſquare, 40. in front, 20. in flancke, none vnplaced.
                     
                     
                        900.
                        The ſquare roote is 30. none vnplaced: baſtarde ſquare 31. in fronte, 26. in flancke, 1. vnplaced: broad ſquare, 42. in front, 21. in flancke, 18. vnplaced.
                     
                     
                        1000.
                        The ſquare roote is 31. 39. vnplaced: baſtard ſquare, 40. in front, 25. in flancke, none vnplaced: broad ſquare, 45. in front 22. in flanck, 10. vnplaced.
                     
                     FINIS.
                  
                  
                     COurteous Gentlemen, great occaſions of preſent buſines calleth me from my penne, which driues me to conclude in more breefe manner, then I was determined. Wherein I haue erred through ignoraunce, I haue no doubt but you will pardon of curteſie: may opportunity ſerue, I will proceede further. In the meane time, I beſeech you accept of this my good meaning vnto you; ſo ſhall I with all willingnes, reſt thankefull vnto you, moſt louing and courteous Gentlemen.
                     
                        G. C.
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   