
      
         
            
               
               
TWO ROYALL Entertainments, LATELY GIVEN TO THE MOST ILLVSTRIOVS PRINCE CHARLES, Prince of Great Britaine, by the High and Mighty PHILIP the fourth King of Spaine, &c.
            
               At the Feaſts of Eaſter and Pentecoſt.
            Tranſlated out of the Spaniſh originals Printed at MADRID.
            LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be ſold at the Pide Bull neere Saint Auſtins Gate, 1623.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE LADIE VICTORIA COLONNA, DVCHESSE OF MEDINA RIOSECO, my Honourable Lady, whom God preſerue.
            
               THe retired life which your Excellency obſerues, beſeeming your Widow-hood, the Mirror and Preſident of this Court, permitted you not to view the Maske of my Lord Admirall: the ſolemnity thereof will not ſuffer me to paſſe it ouer in obliuion, nor the many fauours I haue receiued from your Excellency, allow mee, to forbeare the offering of it in writing vnto you by way of deſcription.
            
               Your Seruant, Andres de Mendoza.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  INtellect, or vnderſtanding participating ſo neerely with the Deitie, it cannot be ſhut vp vnder locke and key, eſpecially in capacious mindes and Iudgements, for as a fit obiect occurs, men beat againſt that iron with the flint, and then of neceſſitie it muſt needs ſparkle, and yeeld fire. I haue alwaies beene of this opinion, that the reputation of a wiſe man, ties him to more demerit, than an other ordinary man of repute, for the better ſatisfaction herein of generall expectation. And ſo in like manner one that writeth of all actions in generall, hee hath neede of the greater ſufficiency, to obtaine applauſe and liking; becauſe as men are different in their apprehenſions, ſo are they in their humors and approbations, as alſo beſides,

it is ſomewhat too curious to preſent them euery day with new inuentions. There is now both a conueniency and neceſſity to preſent to publique the Maske, with which the Lord Admirall of Caſtile and Leon honoured their Maieſties, in celebrating the arriuall of the moſt renowned Prince of England in theſe kingdomes, whom their Maieſties, for as many principall cauſes, as moſt important reaſons, doe honour and feſtiuate. A royall feſtiuity no doubt, both to them to whom it was dedicated, and to thoſe who celebrated the ſame, hee being more deepely tied and bound vnto this, than if other Lords ſhould feſtiuate and entertaine their owne Prince, becauſe they are extracted of his bloud (being the Baſis and foundation of all Nobility) in that both the ſame reaſon concurs with the Admirall, beſides the greateſt confluence in this, of all the principall States and Princes of Europe, a reaſon that may ſome waies excuſe my rude penne, in that the Admirall hath made good in reall action, the meere fictions of Turpine, and Arioſto; if it

be vnderualued for the breuity, it may be exalted in the acceptance, becauſe as the Prince of Philoſophers affirmed, Hiſtorie is the true touchſtone of men, and forgetfulneſſe of a benefit is the laſt and black cenſure of ingratefull men. The many benefits wherein (beſides my naturall affection) I ſtand bound to this great Prince, may excuſe me, let all rare ſpirits admit of this ſo good a reaſon, raiſed from ſuch an heroicall foundation.
               On Sunday being Eaſter day, a ſolemne day in all reſpects, which the Admirall made very good choiſe of, becauſe as much time muſt be allowed for ſacred, as for prophane exerciſes: The Queenes Maieſty, clothed in white, a colour of exhilaration and gladneſſe, which the Church obſerueth for the Annuali remembrance of the reſurrection of her deare Spouſe, ſet out with rare iewels, and precious ſtones, (whereof ſhe hath ſtore, and the preſent occaſion, gaue her cauſe to make ſhew of them) dined in publike. The Gallants of the Court tooke their place with the Ladies,

and the dinner drew out ſomewhat late, becauſe their Maieſties went before to the Chappell to ſolemnize the Feaſt. For neither their feſtiuities, nor their yeeres apt to take delight in them, can draw them to omit their religious zeale; it being the principall reſpect of this Monarchy, as it alſo hath beene of all other ages; for the zeale of Numa wrought greater effects in the Roman Monarchy, than the valour of Romulus.
               
               The Prince in like manner dined in publique, attended with the aſſiſtance and care of the Conde de Puebla, as Maſter of the feaſt, a valiant vnderſtanding Gentleman, and Mayor domo, or Lord Steward of the Court.
               The Gentlemen taſters attended, and the Earle of Briſtow miniſtred vnto him the towell.
               The King came out to euening prayer, and then there went for his Highneſſe, the reſplendent and noble troupe of all the honourable of theſe kingdomes, and other ſtrange Nobility, which are now heere in

great number: then followed the Mayor domos, with their Officiall ſtaues, and all the Grandes, the traine finiſhing in the Duke of Infantado: whoſe hoarie haires, when the Sunne of his youth had paſſed the Zenith of his more flouriſhing age, entred into the ſiluer Spheare of Cynthia, to illuſtrate the world with his countenance. The King was placed, and the Prince on his right hand, his Maieſty clothed in Aſhe colour: with a great golden fleece, and a chaine baudrick wiſe, which might haue bard in the Coloſsian Port of Rhodes, (I tooke this chaine to bee of many Crownes linked, by foure in a knot, cemented together with greene and blacke Emerald) and if the French ſay true in this, that euery action of a King is Royall, theſe foure Crownes linked together, and hanging at his Maieſties breaſt, ſhall be ſo many kingdomes. In his hat, his girdle, and for other Iewels of Diamonds, he diminiſhed the glory of Phoebus beames; wearing in his hat a large wauing and aiery Plume. The Prince was in blacke, richly garded after the Spaniſh

faſhion, with the George about his necke, hanging by a watchet riban. The enameld garter, exceeded that colour in brightneſſe, and his Maieſty might as clearely be diſcernd, as a Sunne a midſt the Stars, this not being the meaneſt action and remonſtrance of his prudence, that being a trauelling gueſt who came by Poſt, not being able at the inſtant, to ſhine with equall luſtre, he came to participate of the Spaniſh Sunne.
               Immediatly after came the Engliſh Admirall, and Oliuares, both Maſters of the horſe, The Counſell of Eſtate, the Embaſſadors of Princes, and the Chamber of the Citie, great in number, but greater in bloud and diſcent.
               Being come to the Queenes quarter, which was all hung with Tapiſtrie of Tunys, and Petrarckes triumphs, ſet forth in embroyderie, well knowne both for riches, and varietie of inuention: The Prince vrged by all meanes, that his Maieſtie would be pleaſed firſt to enter, but at laſt he yeelded to the Kings pleaſure.
               The Queene accompanied with the Infanta,
                  
who was then in her Quarter, to wiſh her an happy Eaſter, went out to receiue them, apparrelled in blacke, and gold, of wonderfull rich and ſtately, whether with naturall, or ſupernaturall beauty, for a modeſt paſſion, is a vertue ſupernaturall. After many complements paſt, they went to ſit downe vnder a cloth of Eſtate, which was of cloth of Gold, three ſeuerall degrees in height, of Mylan Carnation, and chaires of the ſame. The Prince tooke place on the right hand of the Queene, and the King on the right hand of the Infanta, they two remaining in the midſt. The Engliſh Ambaſſador in ordinary, diſchargd the office of Interpreter, by whoſe relation he ſaluted the Queene with a good Eaſter; he was anſwered with the like ceremony: and hauing performed theſe courteſies and complements before the Queene, hee came to diſcharge them to the Infanta, who entertained him with that modeſty and grauity, as might haue befitted greater yeares and more experience of time. Their Maieſties manifeſted their alacrity, by ſmiling twice, or thrice, and there aroſe ſuch beautifull

bluſhes in the Sunne of the Lady Infantaes countenance, which beheld without naturall affection, could cauſe no leſſe than admiration and wonder. They returnd to ſit downe, and while the ladies, who were courting it among the gallants, ſpent the time in expreſſing their ſeuerall conceits; their Maieſties departed, and returned in the ſame manner and forme as they came, and then ſhewed themſelues at the windowes of the ſouth Gallery Cierzo, accompanied by the Highneſſes, of the Illuſtrious Infants, to view the tryall of armes, wherein the youth of this great Court, ſhewed both dexterity, and valour. In the meane while Apollo fearing two Sunnes retired his light, and gaue way to a Maske, which was in this manner: There were diuers races for Careers made, rayld in with bord, and timber worke breſt high, within the Courtes of the Pallace, that of Deſcalzas, and the great Court. The trembling and watriſh beames of Diana, would fame haue ſupplied the defect of Apolloes Rayes, and one might perceiue that no borrowed light (though in the abſence, and obſcurity

of the principall) can be comparable to light naturall, though indeed thoſe artificiall did much eclipſe it, wherewith all the whole place, and the corners did ſhine, the progenie and effect, of the eſpeciall care of Iuan de Caſtilia Corrigidor, executed in the ſeruice and honour of his Princes, except it proceeded from the beames of that Spaniſh beauty, which expected to behold the Feſtiuitie, who did imitate herein the celeſtial Spheares, the Queene and the Infanta ſtood in the great gallery, and the Prince, and the Infant Cardinall, on the left hand, accompanied with the Engliſh and Spaniſh Nobility, that had no part in the Maske, and were appointed their places. There attended on the Queene, and the Infanta, beſides the chiefe Ladies of the Chamber, the Counteſſe of Oliuares, who can giue a life to all actions of greatneſſe, and courtſhip, as one who (beſides her own noble diſpoſition and nature) hath for her Inſtructor the Count, and the Honourable Ladie of the houſe of Mendoza my good Lady, and the Lady of Infantado, whoſe venerable gray haires gaue great reſpect, if the

hereditary ſplendor of her glorious progenitors had failed, with many other Ladies of theſe Kingdomes. There ſtood hard by her Maieſty, as her chiefe Mayor domo, or Lord Steward, the glory of the Illuſtrious Family Pimentell, the true heire of his Fathers houſe, as alſo of his vertues and perfections. The reſt of the out ietties, or galleries, were ſet with ſtars more relucent, (though leſſe erring, the glorious emulation of thoſe in the firmament) in the other Ladies, and Menimas, or noble youth of the Court, whoſe rich ornaments darted forth beames, ſent forth from their beauties, diſſembling both froſts and flames, the iuſt reuenge of ſome haughty ſoules.
               The quantity of fire which was exhal'd, contending to reach to their proper ſpheare, diſſolued the clouds of the middle region of the aire, which powred downe in ſhowers vpon the earth, (the Admirals happy fortune) as it ſeemed ſhe commanded them at ſuch a time, when ſhe moſt deſird to receiue them: Which being ſprinckled vpon the ground like deawes, as from the hand of a gardner, the Show began from his houſe, by

the royall Hoſpitall of Miſericordia, the ſtreet of the Streual, that of S. Philip, and the great ſtreet, euen to the Pallace, with fiftie drums, trumpets, and flutes, clothd in liueries of Orange colour and white, the colours of the Lady Maria Courtino, who deriues her glory and diſcent from the familie of Marialua, the ſupreameſt honour of the Luſitanian Spaine, after whom followed Diego Lopes de Zuniga, Generall of the coaſt of Granada, as Marſhall of the field, with a ſtaffe of ſiluer in his hand, and after him a good number of Pages and lack queies with axes, in the liuery of the Admirall, formerly ſeene and ſet downe in our relation of the Prince his entry, and Don Carlos de Zaualza Page to his Excellency, in a liuery of cloth of Orange colour and ſiluer, laid with lace, and ſet with blacke glaſſes or bugles all armed, and Don Ieronimo de Eſquiuel Page to the Marqueſſe de Alcanizas, apparelled in blacke, plated with ſiluer, and in like manner armed, mounted vpon excellent horſes, armed ſadles, and furniture embroidered with gold, with bucklers ſteele-plated, who brought along with them the cartels of chalenge,

which were ſet vpon the gates of the Pallace, by the defendants, Admirall & the Marqueſſe, the form or tenor wherof enſues.
               
                  Don Iuan Alfonſo Eurigues, Admiral of Caſtile, in the honour of the Ladie Maria Curtinio, will within the Court of this great Palace maintaine, That loue hath no need of the nouriſhment of hopes, for by them it is rather defamed than encouraged, being the reward of it ſelfe, and to loue againe the only end of its glory. And for a demonſtration, that the noblenes of her affection will auouch it, if any doubt thereof be made, he will maintaine a courſe at the Ring, from this day forward for threeſcore daies, before or after as his Maieſty ſhall appoint.
               And the Conditions ſhall be theſe.
               With three Launces according to the law of Armes, of ſufficient proofe and triall, any neglect wherein loſeth prize. As alſo, he that ſhall looſe a peece, or faſten it together againe with any binding, incurreth the ſame penalty. He that takes off the Ring, it ſhall anſwer for two Launces, that had not the like fortune. He that hits the Ring ſhall enioy the ſame benefit.
               
                  
The ſame lawes ſhall take place at the Combat, Barriers, or Tilt, for him that breakes vpon the Viſier, the Gorget, or the Target. Whoſe prizes ſhall not be lower than thirty Crowns, nor aboue an hundred. Leauing the prize of greateſt worth, and beſt valew to the election of the Ladies.
               The beſt Launce of the man of Armes, the beſt inuention, and the beſt Launce at Tilt, to be referd to the cenſure of the Iudges.
               Who ſhall be, The Duke of Buckingham Admirall of England.
               
                  Don Gaſpar de Guſman, Conde de Oliuares, chiefe Cupbearer to the Kings Maieſties perſon, great Maſter of his horſe, and one of his Counſell of Eſtate.
               
                  Don Iuan Hurtado de Mendoza, Duke of Infantado, high Steward of his Maieſties houſe, and of his Counſell of Eſtate.
               
                  Don Pedro de Toledo Oſorio, Marqueſſe of Villa Franca, of the Counſell of Eſtate vnto his Maieſty.
               
                  Don Auguſtine Mexia, a Gentleman of his Maieſties Chamber, and of his Counſell of Eſtate.
               
                  Don Fernando Giron, of the Counſell of Eſtate to his Maieſty.
            
            
               
               Another Cartell.
               THe Knight of the Forreſts who is tied by the order of his Knighthood, to trauell ouer mountaines, and trace wild beaſts, ſeruing the great Prince of both the Spaines to make knowne, that in the ruſticity of the Country, there is found the Courtly vrbanity of Loue; he affirmes, that they who make profeſſion of his exerciſes and Knighthood, are the Gallants that attaine to higheſt perfection in louing, becauſe not knowing what hopes or delayes are, they ratifie their fidelity by a ſilence taught them by the woods and mountaines: and this he will maintaine and defend being no wayes borne out by Magicke ſpels, but out of true valour and courage of minde, which he meanes to approue and make good in the market place of Mantua Carpentana, at the day appointed by the Caeſar of both Spaines, where they ſhall find him within the Liſts, from the ſtolne beames of Dianaes light,

while the ſight of true reſplendency, her brother the god of Delos, combating any ſuch as ſhall deny this verity: with three puſhes at the Pike, fiue fendants, or right downe blowes with the ſword, the great Prince of Selua Calidonia being preſent at this combat, of whom wiſe men ſpake by way of figure and ſhadow, in the famous actions of Amadis de Gaule, and Liſuare of great Britany: and referring their triall to the arbitrement of the Iudges, which ſhall be the Admirall of England, Don Pedro de Toledo, Marqueſſe of Villafranca, and Don Ferdinando Giron, preſuppoſing alwayes the conditions enſuing: That hee who yeelds a foot backe ſhall loſe his prize, fighting with the ſword: That he who giues one blow more or leſſe then ordained, ſhall loſe prize: That whoſoeuers ſword doth break he ſhall returne no more to the tournament, but the prize ſhall be giuen him who thitherto hath beſt deſerued it. Whoſoeuer breakes, or giues a puſh with his Pike, or a blow with his ſword beneath the girdle, hee ſhall loſe prize: Whoſoeuer encounters with the ſword, or the Pike, at the

halfe length, he ſhall loſe prize: Whoſoeuer lets his ſword fall out of his hand, or lifts vp the viſier of his helme, or lets any piece of his armes fall, he ſhall loſe prize. To the moſt forward and gallant, to the moſt skilfull, to the beſt effects with the ſword, to the pike of ſhocke, to the ſword pell mell, to the beſt inuention, and to the Ladies Pike, be the honor giuen.
               The whole Maske made their round, accompanying the troupe while they ſtayed, whoſe liuery coſt the Admirall a great number of crownes, who cloathed them all in nippons, and hoods of Orange tawny, and ſtryxt ſiluer cloath, ſet with flowers, and Romane deuices of blacke cloath, edged about with ſiluer in purles, with Talbants of Marroco of the ſame, and white plumes; onely Monterrey and Veragnas wore blacke. The Marqueſſe of Alcanizes wore one different from theſe two extreames. The beautie of horſes, and the riches of borders and furniture, ſhewed euidently the affection of thoſe that made this Feſtiuity. They ran two careirs in the Palace,

beſides their round, and ſo went out in Maskes: and I willſet them downe ioyntly to excuſe more worthy and famous Elegies then my ſhallow braines can inuent.
               
                  
                  The names of the MASKERS.
                  THE Admirall.
                  Conde de Monterrey.
                  Duke de Turſi.
                  Conde de Portalegre.
                  Conde de Annouer.
                  Don Juan Claros de Guzman.
                  Conde de Ʋilla franqueza.
                  Conde de Villamor.
                  Conde del Risco.
                  Conde de Ricla.
                  Don Fernando de la Cerda.
                  Don Franciſco de Eraſo.
                  Marques de Fromiſta.
                  Duke de Hijar.
                  Duke de Cea.
                  Coude de Ʋillalua.
                  Don Manuel Manrrique.
                  
                     
Don Gaſpar Bonifaz.
                  Conde de la Puebla del Maeſtre.
                  Marques de Caſtelrodrigo.
                  Don Diego Sarmiento.
                  Marques de Ʋelada.
                  Marques de Xaualquinto.
                  Don Luys de Cordoua Zuheros.
                  Conde de Saluatierra.
                  Morques de Almacan.
                  Don Lorenzo de Caſtro.
                  Marques de Alcan̄icas.
                  Duke de Ʋeraguas.
                  Marques de Camaraſa.
                  Don Rodrigo Enrriquez.
                  Don Fernando de Guzman.
                  Conde de Cantillana.
                  Conde de Corun̄a.
                  Don Luys de Guzman.
                  Don Antonio de Toledo Horcajada.
                  
                     
Don Fernando de Toledo Higares.
                  Don Pompeo de Tarſis.
                  Don Juan de Vera.
                  Don Iuan de Eraſo.
                  Conde de Tendilla.
                  Don Luys de Haro.
                  Conde de Pun̄oenroſtro.
                  Marques de Ʋalle.
                  Don Chriſtoual de Gauiria.
                  Conde de Ʋillafior.
                  Marques de Belmonte.
                  Don Gaſpar de Teues.
                  Marques de Toral.
                  Conde de Fuenſalida.
                  Don Bernardo de Benauides.
                  Marques de Orani.
                  Don Antonio de Moſcoſo.
                  Conde de Mejorada.
               
            
            
               
                  
FOure Maskes, their Lacqueyes apparelled after the Turkiſh faſhion in masking ſutes, and if my preſumption herein ſhould not bee too arrogant, I would attempt to diſcouer the Sunne, amidſt the darkneſſe of the Maske: The Andaluz cals that ſame doubtfull light, by reaſon of the interpoſition of darkneſſe; Calinas, and the Poet Zelajes: the vulgar opinion will needs haue it to be the King; for the radiant beames of his haire, and the ſtatelineſſe of his running, did make him knowne: Let it vaniſh away in vulgar report, if his Maieſty like not to be diſcouered, it was enough to make ſo great a gueſt as the Prince to reioyce, to ſee him in this, honor ſo great a Subiect, as the Admirall. There accompanied him his brother, the illuſtrious Infant, Don Carlos, who ranne with the Marques of Carpio, and with the King the Conde de Oliuares, by office chiefe Maſter of his horſe, his moſt truſty and confident, and his moſt eminent ſeruant. And although their running cauſed much ioy, yet feare, which euer accompanieth true loue, made vs in the night ſay in our hearts, God

preſerue the King (who euer loues them that ſerue him) as the firme and inuiolable foundation of his Church, and whoſe attempts are the proper offſpring of the heroycall vertue of his Progenitors, out of the generall wiſhes and deſires of his ſubiects.
               The Marqueſſe of Rentyn, Captaine of the Almaine guard (a gallant and louely Gentleman) who conducted it, was himſelfe guarded by Fernand Verdugo Lieutenant of the Spaniſh, one as diſcreet and circumſpect, as honored and well beloued.
               From the Palace they went to the Deſcalzas, 
                  A place ſo called becauſe it belongs to the bare legd Fryers. followed by more then foure hundred perſons on horſe backe, a triumphant and goodly company, becauſe euen in theſe trials of meere ſolemnity, for martiall exerciſes, the Nobility of this Kingdome haue euer beene affected to chiualry, as may bee teſtified by multiplied experience. To feſtiuate his Maieſty, there repaired to thoſe ſacred wals, for many ſpeciall reaſons, and as it was the houſe of the Admiral, Maſter of this feſtiuitie, where they were to participate of it, the greateſt number

of the Ladies, of that ſame great Court: And by the ſtreets of the Arenall, the Carreras and the market place of Atocha, which waies they made their returne, they did the like to the Palace, whither they returned to accompany and diſmide the maskes, the reſt conducted the Admirall home to his houſe: And now the Sunne beginning to reflect vpon the Mountaine tops, which being masked, did deſire to ſee the end of this feſtiuity, and enuying the Admirals glorie, hee proſecuted the ſame in cauſing it to raine the greateſt part of it. This is ſuch a narration as my ignorance could decypher in ſo rude a ſtile; I hope your Excellency will pardon it, ſeeing good will is a ſufficient ſupply of any defect in this behalfe, for ſo many important reaſons, I wholly remaine yours, April 
                     •
                  9. ſtylo nouo, 1623.
               
                  Andres de Mendoqa.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  DElius had ſcarce ſhaken off the mantell of the Night, nor had Taurus of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   fourth Spheare, who feedes on Lillies, ſcarce guilded his hayre with the moderate hea
                     •
                  e of the Spaniſh Hemiſpheare, with greater commodity to participate of the Feſtiuity, his beames not hauing fully bea
                     •
                  en off the Deaw of Diana, which watered that place, Eolus blowing vpon it, when, not on the Scaffolds of the Eaſt, but in the golden concurrence of ſo many Sunnes, which diſperced their beames in the Spaniſh beauties: the morning ſprouted forth, and the Nobilitie of the Court in numerous Aſſemblies being in the euening to come forth to the Citie Solemnities, for the enioying of the rurall Delights of the morning, with long ſtaues in their hands, cloathed after the Paſtorall manner, in armors of haughty minde and hot courage, more properly indeede her Children then thoſe ſwift Horſes which flowry Betis feedes on her ſweet bankes, who poſſeſſed the Fields encompaſſing the Buls, more fierce

then that Celeſtiall, being more capable of rare impreſſions, wherein paſſed noble attempts of Valour and Chivalry, being proper effects of the Spaniſh courage, obſerued and ſeene in ſo many reiterated Experiences and tryals.
               The Corrigidor very carefully preuented, that none beſides the ſelected Gentlemen might come forth to this Encloſure, with long Rods or Staues in their hands, that they might not aſſaile the Buls. They were encloſed, & the firſt Bull was ſet vpon by the Gentlemen: and the ſecond by thoſe of an inferior rancke, and ſo the morning was ioyful and triumphant, though Don Diego de Ramirez, & Don Pedro de Toledo fell, and the Horſes bare them downe, this man through incircumſpection, and the other by vnmeaſurable courage and forwardneſſe. Their fals were not of any dangerous conſequence. The Marques of Velada ſuccoured them, hewing the Bull in peeces with their ſwords, and the place was diſpoſed of in this manner and forme:
               
                  
The Panaderia, or Bullengerie, hath in the midſt of the office of Saddles, or Furniture, Within the twelue Arches of vnpoliſht ſtone, a guilded Scaffold, more eminent then the reſt, in that on the left hand of this, was another of equall proportion built, on which were ſpread on the lower part, Clothes of Gold and Silver, in three degrees one higher then another, Crimoſin and Gold, which were made for the comming of the Duke de Maine, to the affiance of the Nuptials of the moſt Chriſtian Queene. I obſerved out of this, that having hitherto beene put to no vſe for the ſervice of their Maieſties, it might happily be hand ſelled to their honour, in the Feſtivitie we expect, from the Eſpowſalls of her Siſter. There were divided from it in the midſt, with a partition of Crimoſin Damaske, ſpotted all over with Gold, two other partitions on the out-partes of the ſame, and that on the left hand, with a portaile or gate, to goe out at to the mayne Scaffold, traverſed with another partition, which ſeru'd for thoſe vſes, which ſhall herevnder appeare. On the two ſides,

were hung vp, thoſe hangings of Needleworke, wrought with wyer of Gold, ſo many times formerly ſeene, and on the top two Canopyes of cloth of Florence, of carnation colour, rayſed in the weaving two ſeverall higthes of gold, with a moſt rich Cover over head, and curtaines on both ſides, with the former part of plaine cloth of Gold, of Mylan, Crimoſin, ſpanne new, with Chayres of cloth of Gold, and Tiſſue, Stooles, and Cuſhions of the ſame, with Turkie peeces, hangings of moſt rich Tapiſtrie; and the places of the Counſell appointed, in manner and forme, ſo often heretofore ſeene. The Windowes were repleniſhed with the Nobilitie of this Court: the ſtandings and flore, with thoſe of inferiour Fortunes, and bloud. The moſt Illuſtrious Nuncio, to whom the firſt ſtanding was allotted, and next to the Royall ſeate, betweene his Maieſtie and the Queene, had for his Aſſociates, the moſt excellent Embaſſadors, of the Emperour, of France, Poland, and Venice, ſtarrs of great and rare Magnitude, the reſt were diſperſed all over the breadth of the place,

the Queene was placed next vnto them, and of the right ſide in Royall partitions, the Ladyes, Dames, and noble Pages of the Court: While you come to the Counſell of Royall Excellencie; for the Corrigidor and his Lieutenants being entred, with their vſuall Trayne of Officers; he went out to enterteine them, that high Senate entring with ſuch a wonderfull Maieſtie, that it may onely be an example, and preſident to it ſelfe. The Corrigidor gaue a glorious Liverie to eight Pages, and foure Laqueyes, of plaine blacke Velvet, furniture, and skirts embroydered with Snayles, and Gandurados, Cloakes of cloth, with baſes of feet, and Doublets of blacke Satten, garded with blacke Lace, and Feathers of a colour, which all the place admired, and wondered at.
               The other Counſells and Lordes being placed in their ſeverall roomes, the Maieſty of the Queene, and of the Infanta made entrie in their Carroches, clothed in a dark kind of gray, wrought with embroydery, and Lentills of Gold, with Iewells, and Plumes, (a thing very needleſſe to relate)

ſeeing all Rhetoricall colors of the tongue, cannot expreſſe the truth of their incomparable value, and eſtimation. Their Highneſſes, Don Carlos, and Ferdinando, one in Purple, and the other in Blacke, contended in Beautie, and yet prevented one another in affection. The Coches of the Ladies, and Minnies of the Court, the very Envie of Phoebus rayes, were Retraytes of the Moneth, which then raygned for Beautie, and varietie of collours, ſolemnized with the greateſt concourſe of Nobilitie, that ever the Empire of glory, and gallantrie beheld. And then firſt lighting on foot, the Marqueſſe of Reutine of Almaine made entrie for their Maieſties, betweene the Gardes, conducted by their Captaine; excellently ſet forth himſelfe, wearing a Plume, Preparations, and a braue Liverie of a darke yellow, and yellow furniture, and Don Ferdinando Verdugo, Lieutenant of Hiſpaniola, in white, and blacke, in a Liverie of darke greene, white furniture, both conteſting one with another, for greateſt riches and pompe.
               
                  
The whole Troope being conducted by the Alcaldes on Horſebacke, and by a great number of Engliſh, and Spaniſh Knights, Officers, and Grandes. The Prince of Wales was relucent, in white and blacke Plumes, mounted on a mingle-colloured Horſe, and the King apparelled in a darke colour'd Sute, with a Plume of the ſame, mounted on a dapple Gray; in their legeritie, implying the effects of the Stormie Boreas, and in their faire and quiet managing, ſhewing themſelues almoſt reaſonable, as if they had knowne the burdens, that they bare: And in that their mouthes were curbed with no Bitts, in this they ſignified, that in an high Degree, they layd downe, all their naturall, and brutiſh fierceneſſe.
               Behinde came the Admirall of England, and the Conde de Oliuares, the Maſters of the Horſe, Embaſſadours, and Engliſh Gentrie, with the Counſells of Eſtate, and Chamber of Spaine, encloſing Within the Guard of Archers, the Burgundian Nobilitie, having procured

admiration and loue, not with feare, or tyrannie, but with ſweet, and affable government, which in mens hearts purchaſeth loue, and good will. They light on foot, and having forſaken their Stooles and Chayres, the Queene our Ladie, and the Ladie Infanta remain'd in the Scaffold on the right hand, the Infant Charles, and the Prince being divided by one partition, and the King, and the Infant Ferdinando by the other, and in that which remayned enſuing, the Conde de Oliuares, the Engliſh Embaſſadors, the Counſells of Eſtate, the Chamber of Spaine and England, the other Knights and Gentlemen of this Nation, on Scaffolds erected vp into the ayre, in a corner of the ſtreet of the Amargura, and they made entrie for theſe Lords.
               Fiftie Laqueyes in high Dutch habite, of thynne cloth of Silver, white, and tawney, with tawney-doubletts, caps of wrought Silver, and Swords Silvered in every part, accompanied the Duke of Cea, who entred in, mounted on a large dapple Gray, with blacke habite, edged round about with ſilver of Goldſmiths-worke, with as great

gallantry as wiſedome, and as much wiſedome, as reaſon to winne mens hearts after him, two valiant Combatants at the Bull, with Caſſockes and Hoſe of tawney cloth, layd along with Silver lace, and great tawney Plumes, mingled Turquye and White. He had ſcarcely gone his round about the place, preſented himſelfe to their Maieſties, and beene received of the Prince, with the honor of diſcovering himſelfe to him, when there entred into the place (being clearly voyded, ſo as their entries were more eaſie and apparent) an hundred Lacqueyes clothed in darke coloured Serge, garded all over with Lace, with Belts ſhining like Silver, Doubletts and Hoſe, Lynings and Caps of Tawney colour, like furniture to their Swords, and white Garters: And after them came in Don Iuan de Ozeta, Don Ieronimo de Medinilla, Don Euan de Meneſſes, Don Antonio Guino, Don Iaſepe de Samano, Don Iuan Ieldre, the Conde de Cantillana, Don Diego de Zarate, Don Antonio de Moſcoſo, Don Pedro de Motezuma, the Conde de Tendilla, accompanyed with the Duke of Maqueda, whoſe entrie, both in reſpect of

his qualitie, as alſo for the Valour and aſpect of his perſon, might well haue ſtirr'd vp envie in the Romaine Triumphes, for the Duke lookt like one of the Caeſars, or rather in deed, he might more properly haue beene their patterne, and example. They went along their Round, and the Prince himſelfe did him honour, when by different gates, theſe herevnder ſpecified, made their entire: The Marqueſſe of Vela, in whom valour, dexteritie, and gallantrie contended for ſuperioritie, accompanyed with foure and twentie Lacqueyes, in white cloth, all laced downe, with blacke Caps, Plumes, and other furniture for their Swords of white. He drew vpon himſelfe the eyes of the whole multitude, for indeed he drew generally vnto him all their affections; the Prince did him honour, as he likewiſe did the other two Lords Grandes: When he had ſeene their Maieſties, he went to offer himſelfe vnto the Ladies, from thence to the Counſell Royall, and ſo in his going about, to all the reſt of the Company, and all of them deſired, and affected him.
               
                  
Preſently entred fiftie Lacqueyes in white Printed Sattin, guarded with a brancht Stuffe of Azur'd Silke, and Gold, and Breeches of the ſame, ſet out with tuffes of gold, and ſilver lace, with furniture and Plumes of white, that accompanied the Conde de Villamor, mounted on a darke Cheſtnut-colourd Horſe, with his mayne, and tayle, drawne out with ſilver twiſt, diſgracing thoſe Horſes of Phoebus Chariot, which ſeem'd to come out of them, as the ſome or ſweat of their bodies, eiecting that which was not naturall in them, retayning naturally the valour of their Maſter, communicated to them, and when I ſaw ſo many Feathers in the place, and ſuch a flittering and waving of them, I tooke them to be a moovible garden, or an Armie of Indians; as alſo the Conde his generous Grandfather, who alſo manifeſted amongſt them, the valour, and luſtre, incident to his race and blood: And becauſe the report is feſtivall, it is but like to that which was to be ſeene with the eye. You would haue ſaid as much, if you had but ſeene them fight with thoſe furious

Beaſts, ſhewing themſelues the more valiant, in that they were vndaunted, and reſolved Spanyards. There entred preſently Don Criſtoual de Gauiria, and Don Gaſper Bonifaz, whom they tearme kill Bulls, I know not which of them may envie the other, ſeeing they are the beſt Combatants knowne in all Spaine for this place, and fight; and both of them ſo well beloued, that their attempts being high and great, yet they are alwayes wiſhed to be greater, and we thinke them worthy of greater, and higher Fortunes. Bonifaz clad ſix Lacqueyes in excellent cloth in grane, exceeding that of Tyre, garded, with other furniture, and white Feathers, what they were, might be ſeene all the place over: and Gauiria had eyght, and two little Lacqueyes in darke greene Sutes, cutt, embroydered with Snailes of ſilver, and lyned with Tawney, and white furniture otherwiſe, it being a ſightly and braue Livery.
               There entred Don Ferrando de Yuiciedo, otherwiſe, the Cavallier de la Morzilla, who during theſe Tryalls, was that ſame Maſter

Burquillos of the Combates, of Lope de Vega, who came in to try his Fortunes, with Lawnce and Target.
               Though the Marſhalling of the place belong'd to the Conde de Oliuares, as to the grand Maſter of the Horſe; His Maieſtie yeelding precedencie to the Prince, the Admirall of England Marſhal'd it, ſtanding behind the Lord Infant Carlos, that he might be neare to the Conde de Oliuares, who was to him both an Interpretor, and Informer, for this great Lord, and circumſpect Courtier, hath omitted no rightes of complement, wherein he might expreſſe, either vnto the Prince, or Admirall, the loue, proceeding from his owne Noble diſpoſition and nature, and conformable to the honour, done him by the King of great Brittaine, in his Letters full of wiſedome and gravitie.
               The Combat beganne with the Bulls, when the Lacqueyes by Proclamation leauing their Lords, they reſembled Harveſt in Iune, crowned with blew and redd flowers, which Zephirus waues, and flitters vp and downe. The firſt encounter

belong'd to the Conde de Villamor, as the envie of all the reſt, which they revenged with ſuch a number of Darts, as the poore Bulles remayn'd like Quivers, or like the Thorne-buſhes, in the woods of Helvetia. To ſpeake more properly, ſeeing to the poore Beaſts wonderfull paine, they tooke them out with as great velocitie, as perill and danger. De Maqueda made many braue a tempts: de Tendilla, as many, but de Cea made excellent aſſaults, and Cantillana too, one of which might be the proper envie, of chivalrous attempts, and in the other he killed a Bull. Bonifaz, and Cauiria layd on ſo thicke vpon the Bull, that we could not number the aſſaults for their quantitie, and Don Chriſtovall with a Lawnce, overthrew one. De Velada ſhewed how agile, and nymble he was in this Art, for he overthrew two or three Bulls, with dynt of Sword, and gore of Lawnce, and one he wounded on his foretopp, betweene the hornes, while he turned his head, he ſtroke his horne into a ſupporting bord at his backe, a wound that ſtrooke more feare into the Aſſembly, then it

brought danger to the Marqueſſe, for this backe bord, was ſplinted all to ſhivers in the place: And his Maieſtie would not ſuffer him to enter the ſecond time within the Liſts: And Don Antonio de Moſcoſo, gaue ſuch a number, and ſo deepe Cuchilladaes, that he might be rather ſayd to revenge, then provoke or incite with his aſſaults, Cea turnd one round with a Cuchillada, and ſo moſt of the Beaſts were ſlaine, being hewen into mammockes by the hands of all men. Motezuna ſhewed, what belongd to his royall blood, and to the valour of his arme, for he put a Bull to flight, being afrayd of him, and reacht him ſuch a cleauing blow with his ſword, that he left him in the place for dead. Guino, Zarate, Ozeta, and Idchel, tooke revenge of the laſt Bulls liuing, becauſe the firſt had made them turne face. Don Gieronimo de Medinilla had good Fortune, both with his Lawnce, and Sword. This Cavallier being herein ſo meritorious, as the moſt copious Elegies would come ſhort of his due commendation, and praiſe. The Duke of Maqueda, made ſuch a thruſt, that the

Beaſt being batterd, and ſore goared with it, he reveng'd himſelfe in ſuch a ſtrange faſhion vpon his Horſe, that he ranne him quite through, from one ſide to the other, and the Duke beheld the Aſſault given on the one ſide of his Horſe, and the horne of the Bull, as it came out at the other, and the poore brute Beaſt gaue ſo many twitches and wrenches, enforced with paine, and griefe, that the Duke was fayne to vſe all valour, and dexteritie to prevent his owne falling, whereat we were all much afraid. Don Antonio Guino, ſecond to the Duke of Cea, made one of the braveſt Aſſaults, that ever the place beheld, vpon a moſt violent and furicus Bull, whoſe liuely force, and that of his valiant arme, ranne him in quite through the ſhoulders, leauing halfe his Lawnce within him, and his Horſe remaining with as much ſtilnes and lenitie, as his Maſter with valour and magnanimitie: and ſo the Bull fell downe hard by him. He received wonderfull applauſe, and generall grace, and ſo went out of the place, and though the Bulls overthrew many, yet there fell out no great

danger at all. When this Feſtivitie was ended, the Prince, the King, and their Highneſſes, returned to the Court in Carroches; and it rayn'd very ſtrangely. After that went the Queene, the Infanta, and the Coaches of Ladies, where amongſt the Clouds of water, there fell one of the Pages of Armes, theſe Clouds by day light innudating the dominion and acceſſe of the ſhaddows of the night, and baniſhing them for a great while. Thus a great part of the night being ſpent, they went to repoſe themſelues, after the repaſt and pleaſure of this Feſtivitie, and ſo my Penne ſhall doe no leſſe, till further and fitter occaſion be offered. &c.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   