
      
         
            
            
            THE DISCRIPTION OF
A TRVE VISIBLE
CHRISTIAN: RIGHT CONFORTABLE
& profitable for all such as are distressed
in Sowle about present controversies
in the Churche.
            DRAVVEN BY He. C
                  •
               .
but published by occasion (as will appeare in
the Epistle) by Io. I.
            Luke, 17.
            22. And he sayd vnto the disciples, the dayes vvil come,
vvhen ye shall desire to se one of the dayes of the Son of
23. man, & ye shall not se it. Then they shall say to yovv▪
Behold here, or behold there: but go not thither, neither
follovve them.
            Math. 24.
            25. Beholde, I haue tolde yovv before,
            In the Yeare from Christ his incarnation,
1599.
         
         
            
            
            To the Christian Reader.
            OUr beloued Brother Mr. He. Cl.
after no small trauell, he finished a
booke contayning fully all poynts
of Church-cōtroversie specially now turmoylinge
our English people. Which
booke lying in myne house for a season,
I procured the third chapter of the Booke
(the whole contaynes about 26. ch.) to
be copied out for myne owne vse, what
tyme both Mā ād Booke was presently
(by reason of busines in England) to be
sundred from me. In whose absence, as I
tooke no small delite in the same chapter,
so I demed it my duty (not knowing
when the whole might be published) to
put it in print for publike vtility. If curteous
Read thow fynde it comly ād profitable
in it self whē thow hast read it, thē
easily iudge of the whole, when all the
members knit togither shold presēt it self
vnto the, as a reasonable body. Meanetyme
my desire is of all such faithfull

people as to whom the whole or any part
of the said booke shall com, that (if it be in
theyr pouwre) they will for the edificatiō
of me ād others procure the printinge thereof.
The miserable distractions of the
Catholike confused ād scatred Church it
requireth such a salue: nor knoe I any
who of experience is better able to guide
distressed sowles in this fore-prophecied
tyme of disorder, whereyn if it were possible
the very Elect should be deceived. An
age wherein more heed is to be had of rē
               dinge
Wolues clad in sheepish conversation,
as in skynnes: rather then of open
Beares, Lyons, and Leopards sittinge
in the midst of the temple and Catholike
wheatfeilde I meane the Church. And
thus, desiring the praiers of the faithfull
for my happy progresse in the wayes of
holynes, I leaue the to the gracious government
of Christ his Spirit.
            
               Amsterdam,1599.
                Amongst Christians, the least
of a thousande, Io. Ioope.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Uvho is a true
visible Christian.
            
               IT beinge once
knowen, who of
vs may be adiudged a
true visible Christian,
an easie entrance and
firme ground is giuen
to the substance off
Church disputation.
And because no factious Spirit may haue
an hole to creep out at, such a christian
must be considered, Baptised or Unbaptised.
In the state of Unbaptisme som
true christian may be, and such a one I
Describe thus:The definitiō of a true visible Christian, as yet in an vnbaptised estate: vvhose particulars are aftervvard
                     •
                   proved. 
               1. Vnto vs such a sowle cō
                  fesseth
it beleiueth, that Iesus Christ is com
in our nature, by the holy Ghost his ouershadowinge
the blessed Virgin Mary: and
that for the absolute salvatiō of his people:
Of which nomber, this Sowle confesseth it
to be. And 2. professeth it self willinge to
stand subiect to all the Sauiours Lawes (as
by the ministry of his worde shalbe revealed
vnto it) & this only, for bringing Glory to

our Father in heauen. More then this (for
substance) cold not be in any to whome
our Sauiour his ymmediate disciples
preached: as anie (reading theyr sermons
of Conuersion) may easily perceiue. Nor
vpon such bare confession of Faith and Obedience,
was any sowle debarred Baptisme,
for it self and the subiect family, as
may also appeared by Iohn Baptists
procedinge, and the Apostles Arts. Now,
Baptisme being (as will appeare in his
owne Chapter) not the exhibiton of Christianity,
but the seale of Christianity presumed
first to exist, it so is evident, that
a true visible Christian may be before
Baptisme (and that by the former Confession)
feinge such a one to vs-ward
hath by Fayth apprehended Christ:Rom. 8. ād
with Christ, how shall he not haue all
things also? But let me labour breifly to
explaine the particulars.
            
               Vnto vs.] The manifestation of a
Christian lieth not in the worlds approbation:
1, Iohn. 3 1. 
               for the world knoes neither God
nor his Sons. The reason is:1, Cor. 2 10. 14. 
               we haue
the spirit that searcheth all things, euen the
deep things of God: but the Naturall man
perceiueth not the things of the spirit of
God, for they are foolishnes to him, neither
can he knoe them, because they are

spiritually discerned. Yea, though those
Naturalls be crep into the Church, they
shalbe so farre from acknowledging them
in truth, as oftentymesIohn, 16. 2. 
               They shall put
them out of theyr Synagogues, yea, kill
thē & think they therein do God good service.
               Mark, that persecutors shall somtymes raigne within the Church, as did Diotrephes.
               
And in sayinge, To vs, rather thē 
               To
me, it is because the faithfull theyr approbation
it must not depend vpon any one,
no, not on Elijah: for euen in Israel there
were true visible people to Obadiah (who
hid them by 50. and 50. in a caue) when
it may be Elijah demed all slayne by Iesabel.1 King. 18 4. 13.
So we se the blyndman in Iohns
GospellIohn, 9. 
               To be cast out of the Iuish church
for an heretick, who by and by was found
out of Iesus for a Patrone of Christianity.
            
               Such a sowle confesseth it beleiueth.]
Beleif and Confession is ioyned togither
of S. Paul:Rom. 10 10. 
               with the heart man beleiueth
vnto righteousnes, & with the mouth
mā conf
                     •
                  sseth vnto salvation.
               Psa. 116. 10 So the psalmist,
I beleiued and therfore haue spoken.
Nor without confession of faith, can any
of the church take particular knowledge
of such, that so they may proclame them
visible Christians. Nay, how is it possible
that anie now s
                  •
               old haue true faith in
God, ād the same be hid from the whole

Church? Som must haue intelligence
thereof, except it shold be begottē without
the ministrie of mankynd. But this the
Apostle denieth thus:Rom. 10 15. 17. 
               How shall they
beleive without a Preacher, & how shall
they preach except they be sent?This scripture not heded, people ron into leud factions, and speak euell of things they vnderstand not: yea, do curse theyr owne spirituall father, mother, brethrē ād Systers. then Faith
is by hearing, and hearing by the word off
GOD: concluding hereby, 1. that there
cannot be faith without hearing: 2. that
such hearing is tyed to preaching: 3, and
it must be the word of God preached, that
only begets true faith: 4. that such begetters
of true apprehending faith (for calling
vppon God as a father in Christ Iesus,
whereof before he spoke) they are sent of
God: and therefore theyr feete (or governing
affections) to be proclamed Beauteous,
not Antichristian: for Ministers
sent of Satan, or els of God in his wrath
vnto Sowles, they beget not such true
applyinge faith in theyr hearers. Now, if
a Sowle cannot be possessed with faith,
but it must be by the minister of faith (no
more then there now can be a childe without
a father, or an apple without a tre)
so, the spirituall father (at least) must haue
intelligence of such fruite: nor can they
hide it from the Teacher. Consider this
in the Eunuch, Lidia, the Iaylour, yea,
in all those that were pricked in the heart
at Peters sermon, at Iohn Baptists

sermon,Though the Church before the law, vnder the law, ād vnder the ghospell cold easily loose her orderly establishmēt, yet she cold neuer loose her Being at all, visible. or at the preachinge of anie who
haue begotten faith by the blessed worde.
By the way therefore to say, that the
Church (which consistes of manie beleiuers)
it hath bene somtymes wholy invisible,
it is passing false. For as none can
be members of Christ without faith, and
there cannot be such apprehendinge iustifying
faith without preaching of the Evangell,
and that cannot so be preached
of anie except they be sent of God: so, all
this cannot be without externall Confession
of the same faith, according to that
of Peter and Iohn:Act. 4. 20. 
               we cannot but speak
the things which we haue seen & heard.
Now, what is it that such do confesse they
beleiue?
            
               That Iesus Christ, son of the liuing God
is com] As before his comming it was
required man shold beleiue He shold com
(for so was he darkly preached to Adam,
more plainly to Abram, but far more openly
by the Prophets to auncient mother
Zion) so synce his manifestation, it
is required mankynd confesse they beleiue
He is com. The not beleif whereof
is cawse the Iewes stand reiected. Nor
can they be regraffed into the body of the
Church,Zech. 12 12. &c. with chap 13. vntill they se and confesse lamenting-wise,
that already He is com

and pearced. But vpon such sight ād confession,
they shall haue the fountaine opened
vnto them for syn and vncleannes, to
the expellinge of the false prophet.2 Cor. 3 15. 16. The
literall vayle of Moses so removed, the
Catholike bodie of Israel shall so be saued.Rom. II. 25. 26. 27 Revel. 22 2.
And whereas the Gentiles labour
(and are like still to labour of spirituall
errour) by theRom. 11 12. 15. leaues then of that naturall
tre, the faithfull of the nations
shalbe healed. Who therefore wisheth an
end to contentiō arising from such errour,
let them pray that the kingdom may quicly
be restored to that naturall Israel.
Which Iesus (in english, Sauiour) must
be confessed the Christ (in english, Annoynted:
in hebrue, Messiah) that is,
that blessed One which from Adams fall
was frely promised of God to be sent in
tymeGe. 3. 15. 
               for sauinge his people from theyr
synnes.
               Math. l. 21 Which work of salvation he accomplished
by prophecy, sacrifice and
invisible powre: weakly fore-figured
by the annoynted Prophets, Preists and
Rulers, giuen to Auncient Israel. For
how can anie be sayd to haue faith in
him, that confesse not they beleiue him to
be that One which saueth his people, as
the Lord had appoynted. Nor can this
be without beleyuing him to be the
Math. 16 16. 17. Son of the liuing GOD, the beleif

whereof is sayd, not to com by the Revelation
off flesh and Blood, but by our
father which is in heauen. And vppon
the confession of this,Act. 8. 37. Philip baptised
the Eunuch. Nor is this to be marvayled
at, seing the epithet Livinge, it distinguisheth
the true GOD from all false
Gods: and the beleiving Iesus to be
his Son sent for sauing such as com vnto
God by him, it is to flesh and blood vnreasonable.
And that we se in the Iues,
who held it blasphemy (or an euell speach)
in him, to make himself the Son of God.
To haue made himself the Son of God
but only in regard of this obedience to
God, that they wold not terme an euell
speach (for they thought so of themselues
and theyr princes but teaching himself so
to be Son, as he is and euer was one
with the father (that is, the sameMicah. 5 2. for essence
and eternity of essence) that they
helde blasphemie.Pro. 8. 23. The impossibility of
beleiving this Son-ship is to be considered
in the following words.Iohn, 1. l. &c.
            
            
               Com in our Nature] This nature of
Man (body and sowle) assumed of him,
this the Iues sawe: but that nature
whereby he was the only begotten of the
father (figured in Isaac, thonly begotten
of Abram hy-father) that the naturallcy
sawe not, and therefore beleiued not.

The humaine nature was not in question
amongst the Iues (for that they verily
sawe ād felt without ani guiste of faith)
but to acknowledge this visible nature
assumed of the former invisible nature,
that required the fathers revelation: as
the humaine nature the mothers declaration.
And this nature was figured by
the Ramme that was sacrificed for Isaac.
And both of them foretyped
                  Levit. 16 the Lot-gat represented his manhood, body and sowle: the scapegoate, his Godhead, withdrawing (as it were) till the resurrection. by the two
Hegoates, whereof the One died (Body
in his kynd, and the sowle in his kynde,
both being but Man, and death otherwise
raigning ouer both: which a late writer
shold haue obserued, before herein he had
so easilie contradicted the Auntients) that
One died for satisfying Iehouah for Israels
synnes (although with Ionah it came
out of the earths wombe not feeling corruption)
thother scaped (but the Sowle,
which som wold haue only to be typed
hereyn, it by lot was with the bodie
caught and throwen into the Seas off
God his boyling indignation, so far was
it from scapinge) thother scaped carying
Syn (as Captiuity captiue) into the place
cut of from the habitation of Synners.
And yet in this same humaine nature,
touching the manner of generation, the
reason of faith is also required. For that
cawse I adde:
            
               
               By the holy Ghost his ouershadowing,
&c.] As by the spirit of God his mouth ech
treature first had existence:Psa. 33. 6. so, for
causing this glorious manhood in the
first fruites of our nature (that was to
be vnited with the Godhead for euer) the
sameHeb. 9. 4 eternall spirit (called also the spirit
of Christ, because he procedeth both from
Father and Son) he ouershadowes the
Virgin, and is Agent to her seede patient,
for the Manhoods existence.Ge. 3. 15 That
womans seede shold conquer the Head of
the serpent:Gal. 3. 16 that in Abrams seede (not
seedes) all Nation̄s shold be blessed:Isa. 7. 14 & 8. 6. 7. that
a virgin shold conceiue and bring forth a
Son, whose name shold be Gnimmanuel.
&c. God with vs, wonderfull, Counsailour,
the might God, the euerlasting Father,
Prince of peace &c. all this was
preached of old: but the mysterie touching
the manner of his Conception, that was
concealed till his comminge. And yet this
mysterie was before preached vnder couert
shadowes. For as our Sauiour him
self was foretyped in Isaac, Samson and
Samuel: so we se theyr mothers (Satah,
Monahs wife. and Hannah) to bring forth,
not by naturall course (though Nature
not reiected) but by promise and Grace.
Touching the end of whose comming,
this must be confessed:
            
               
               That it vvas for the absolute salvation
of his people.] That he came to saue, it
was noted. from his name, Iesus: but
it must be confessed that his worke is absolute,
that this, that to the beginning,
continuance and endinge thereof, he hath
no One to help or vpholde that, according
to that his speach in Isaiah:Isa. 63 
                     •
                  . 3. 5. 
               I am mighty
to saue, I haue trod the vvynepresse alone
& of all the people (hearken Meritmonger)
there vvas none vvith me. And I looked
and there vvas none to help: and I
vvondred that there vvas none to vpholde,
therefore myne ovvne arme helped me, &
my vvrath it self sustayned me. And this
is the same which Peter teacheth thus:
Act. 4. 12 
               Nor is there salvation in any other: for
amongst mē there is giuen no other Name
vnder heauen, vvherby vve must be saued.
And therefore, not vnto vs O Lord,
not vnto vs, but vnto thy name we giue
prayse. As he came thus to saue his
people (euen all the father had giuen him
accordinge to election, not works) so.
            
               Of that nomber this Sovvle beleiveth
it to be.] The former beleif and Confession
is only Generall (and so farre, togither
with many particulars flowing
from thence, the devels and many of reprobate
mankinde do comprehend) to the

effecting and making vp of a true visible
Christian therefore is required,To lay euery thing downe in his proper matter an
                     •
                   forme, it is the very substance of all wisdome: and therefore people shold learne to Define, before they dare
                     •
                   to dispute. A particular
application of the former mercy exhibited
in Christ Iesus. The first beleif
and confession, it is of Logitians
termed the Generall or Matter whereof a
visible Christian consists: but this seconde
(namely. the particular or personall
application of the former) it is termed
the Difference or Forme, because it differenceth
the thing from other things by
his forme: euen as the forme of an
howse doth difference the howse from tyber
and stone lying loose and vnapplyed
togither: which in such vnmortised estate
may be termed the matter of an howse,
but not called an howse, because the different
forme is lackinge. Both the parts
of this definition (nor is any thing truly
defined without them two) blessed Paul
layeth downe for himself thus:1. Tim. 
                     •
                   15. 
               Christ
Iesus came into the vvorld to saue synners
(that is the Generall: the Difference foloweth
thus:) of vvhome I am cheife:
that is, the Annoynted Saviour came to
saue his people that lay captiued in Syn:
of which nomber he was thus to saue. I
beleiue my self to be One. Which poynt
of apprehēding fayth as it is the fre worke
of God his spirit through the ministry
of the ghospell: so, the same Apostle testifies

that the testimony to be giuen vnto
all the true Christians, saying:Rom. 8. 16. 
               The
same spirit beareth vvitnes to our spirit,
that vve are the Children off GOD.
I knoe very well, that our iustification
with God, it lyeth ratherPhil. 3. 9 12. 
               in our being
comprehended of Christ, then in our comprehending
of him (so farre is all merit
from vs) but it is impossible we shold be
comprehended of Christ and neuer haue
intelligence thereof by his word and spirit
(for Christ is not tongueles,Christ is not altogither vn-living in any of his instified members. and he lookes
the Saued shold prayse his father for
such a mercy) and impossible (as before)
that such can be possessed of the spirit, ād
not vtter theyr faith vnto others. So
much for faith Generall and Particular
Now followeth the fruites.
            
               Secondly, such a sowle professeth it
self willing to stand subiect to the saviours
lawes, as by the Ministry of the word shalbe
revealed vnto it. Having Hope of salvation
administred by the ministrie of faith,
such a Sowle cannot but promise obedience
to the Author and Finisher of his
sayth, Christ Iesus: as also, to square obedience
vnto his Saviours hests alone.
The equity whereof,Iosh. 24 
               Ioshua (theHeb. 4. 8 9. figure
of Iesus, who is to seat vs in heauēs
Canaan, where he is gone to prepare

Mansions for his trybes) he vrgeth it to
Israel (the type of the Catholike Church)
whoVers. 16. 18. 21. 22. 24. willingly agayne and againe to the
Lo. his Minister professed themselues
bound to the Lord alone, and that him
alone they wold serue. And the holy man
David, for tyinge the ronagate heart vnto
dutifull obedience he bynds it to the
Goodabearinge thus:Psal. 119. 106. 
               I haue sworne
and will performe it, that I will keep thy
righteous iudgments. And because such
a vowe may be currant, I adde:
            
               And this only for bringing glory to the
father in heauen.] Obedience is not promised
to the end the promiser shall merit
thereby (for our Merit-obedience fully
and wholely abideth in Christ) but that
by such orderly cariage (specially) God
may receive glorie from the mouths of
Many, who beholde such conversation,
according to that our Saviour:Math. 
                     •
                  0 16. 
               Let
your lighte so shyne before men, as they
may se your good works & glorify your
father which is in heauen.
               1. Cor. 10 31. And that of the
Apostle Paul:The Glory of God, it is the ēd off al our good works▪
                
               Whatsoeuer ye do, do all
to the glory of God. So that vowe of obedience
and obedience it self, all is alone
to be referred vnto the Lord his glorie:
seing his Glory is the end of all things.
Thus much touching a visible Christian

vnbaptized, who by reason of such fayth
and avowed allegiance cannot but couet
baptisme: nor may be denyed Baptisme.
Who, as he is by the ministrie of Som
begotten vnto the fayth, so is he not to
refuse the seale of his fayth by such ministrie:
euen as the Males vnder the lawe
received Circumcision by the ministrie of
theyr Parents. And such subiection is
due vnder payne of being cut of from Israel.
I meane, such refusers of Baptisme
by the ministry of such as haue begot
them (notwithstanding all other protestations
of fayth and obedience) they are
to stand excommunicate to the Church,
because they rebell agaynst the glorious
seale of entring into the Church: forGe. 17. 14 so
they cast themselues out of the Covenant,
whereinto they were entred by such a spirituall
Parent.
            
               NOW touching the Baptized somwhat.
               VVhat is further required in the Baptized.
The former two poynts of fayth
and confession, they being essentiall to vsward
for visible Christianity, they at no
hand may be lacking in the Baptized.
Wherevnto I also adde: being so com vnder
the outwarde Couert of the Church,
it is of absolute necessity that they be found
in the Catholike Church, holding communion

with som particular congregation,
although the same assembly be as a member
passing corrupt and vlcerous. Touching
spirituall defects we are to admonish,
but not in paine of death to forsake the fellowship,
according to that of the Ho. Gh.
vnto the Hebrues:Heb. 10. 24. 25. 
               Let vs consider one
another, to provooke vnto loue & to good
works: not forsaking the fellowship we
haue amongest our selues as the maner of
som is: but let vs exhort: & that somuch
the more, because ye se the day draweth
nere. For if we syn willingly (that is, forsake
the fayth and fellowschip afore spoke
of) after we haue received knowledge of
the truth there remayneth no more sacrifice
for synnes. Now, though the cawse
of a Schismatike yet retayning the fayth
in opynton, it be not so incurable as his
who schismes both from the Church, and
apostates from the fayth, yet, that meere
schismatike withdrawes vnto perdition.
And therefore (asVers. 38 
               the Lords sowle shall
haue no pleasure in such, so) the Author
of that epistle cleares himself and others
of such iudgment, thus: But we are not
they which withdravve our selues vnto perdition,
but followe faith vnto conservation
of the sowle. Nor doth Iohn 
                  〈…〉
               e
them otherwise then s
                  ••
               ing:
1 Iohn. 2.
                     ••
                  .
                     •
                  9. 
               Euen now are many Anti-christes they

vvent out from vs,Schismatiks euer haue the cloke or bifor of Purity and sheepish cōversation: but inwardly rending wolues, thornes and thistles. but they were not of
vs: for if they had bene of vs, they would
haue continued with vs. Nor can they be
otherwise then opposit vnto Christ, seing
they are opponed to the Body of Christe:
though it may be, cloked with a zeale agaynst
the vlcers in Iobs body, I meane
the corrupted Church. For if there can
be no true faith without Loue, then those
in breaking Loue (the bond of perfection
and the end of the lawe) they breake
faith and highly violate the same. Nor
can they be termed beleiuers of Noahs
doctrine, seing they are found without the
Arke, when the church is within. Nor
if they deny to tary in Rahabs house because
she tavernes bad with good, shall
they be fre from Ioshuahs sword and Israels
iust censure of cuttinge off, when the
Lords sword is lifte vp agaynst Iericho:
for our salvation is not by the goodnes of
Rahabs howse, but by the blood of the
Lamb sacramentally fore-typed by the
coard ofIosh. 2. 18. red thred tyed in Rahabs wyndowe.
To avoyde this iudgment, our
Saviour therefore sayth, Go not out,
            
            Secondly, as they are to keep in the
vnity of the Church, so, the are to vvalk
in the obedience of faith tovvards God and
his people, ād this to-vs-ward truly, though

infirmly. Such regular cariage the Lo.
enioynes on Abraham, thus:Gen. 17. 
                     •
                  
                
               vvalk before
me & be thovv vpright.
               Luke, 1. 74. 75. To that end
(sayth Zecharias) we are deliuered, namely:
for serving him vvithout feare all the
days of our lyfe, in holynes & righteousnes
before him. Nor is it possible to haue the
spirit of adoption, but there must be the
powre of sanctificatiō: because,Eph. 4. 24. 
               the nevvman
put vpon (instead of thold Adam cast
of) he is after god (his likenes) created in
righteousnes and true holines. Otherwise
walking, persons may be within the
Church but not of it,Gal. 5. 12. euen as the Apostaticall
persons whome S. Paul could
haue wished cutt of from the churches of
Galatia,Cleaninge tares cānot be pulled vp, but with dāgering the wheat. if so it might be don with safety
of the body: whereof more largely in his
owne chapter. Whereas I haue added,
truly though vveakly, it is because there
wilbe (euen amongst true Christians,
whither in a church established, or in a
church scatred in the mountaynes) asmuch
difference in obedience, as there is
difference of strength in an army of Soldiers.
And thereforeRō. 14. 1. the Stronger is
commaunded (not to cast of,Gal. 6. 2. but) to beare
the infirmities of the vveak: yea, to beare
one anothers burden & so fulfill the lavve
of Christ. Yea, som will somtymes prove
so weak, as the spirituall Phisitian can

only gather they haue Christ liuing in
them by motion of the pulses, or spirit
moving. In the person of such an infirme
sowle the Apostle thus speaketh:Rom. 7. 15. 17. 18. 
               That
I do, I allovve not: for vvhat I vvold I do
not: but that I hate I doe. It is not therefore
I any more that do it,That this place is vttered in the Person off the Regenerate (for Romanists wold haue it of the vnreg.) those are so mynded: Hierom in Epist to Ctesiphō Augustin in 2. b. against Iulian Pelagian: alleadging also Ambr. there. Beda and Tho. Aquinas on. Rom. 7. with others but syn that dvvelleth
in me. For I knoe that in me (that is, in my
flesh) there dvvelleth no good thing: for to
vvill is present vvith me, but I attayne not
to that is good. In a word he thus concludes:
In the mynde I do service to the lawe
of God, but in the flesh to the lavve of syn.
Which crazie estate of a Christian, we
must not condemne for dead: no more thē
men (who wold not be thought to burye
the Quick) will tumble a person vnder
board, who yet hath som breathinge The
husbandman seing his vyne in wynter
season to haue lost his leaues, hang downe
bruized, he therefore commits it not to
the fyre: because in the roo
                  •
               e, and Bole
next aboue it he perceives som sappe. Nor
must such shaken infirme sowles be proclamed
Antichristian, whē as the wyse by
touching theyr conscience, may perceive a
sense of spirituall feelinge. They are but
blynde spitefull brethren that condemne
David for no Soldier, because he cannot
hea
                  •
               e the waighty harnesse of Saul. Not
vnlike to the errour of Bro
                  〈…〉
               e, which

cannot knoe a violet but in an established
Garden: nor knoe a sheep from a swyne,
if it be tangled in briers. Somuch for
that.
            But to make som further vse of that
hath bene sayde, as there must first be Cō
               fession
of apprehēding the true Christ vnto
salvation sufficient: secondly, that such
Confession must be found within the Catholike
Church, whither yet baptised or
but callinge for Baptisme (for out of the
Church he cannot be, who is so ioyned in
his will or spirit,2, Cor. 8 11. 12. 
               god acceptinge (in all
such turnes) the vvill for the deed) it now
wil be demaunded, if the schriptures haue
bene for thē two points so vnd
                  •
               rstood,
as I myself haue thereon concluded? I
answer, yea: First, that confession is to
he made, all learned Readers will witnes
with me, how all auncient writers, not
only testify that to be the rule wherby the
Church walked (theyr Classis of Catechumenists
proves that) but they euer haue
enioyned Christiās to be fre and faithfull
in such Confession, Those are read
can testify also, how ernestly the Catholike
writers ever vrged Baptisme (som leauinge
no hope of salvation to anie one, in
any case dying vnbaptised) togither with
a Dying to syn ād a Living to holines ād
righteousnes, publikly avowed by such

baptisme. Touching them points, I need
not here vtter any particular testimonye:
seing they are graunted of all such as reuerence
the trauels of Auncients. As for
satisfaction of Hogs and Dogs I am not
to produce pearles. Touchinge my testimonie
of Iesus his two distinct Natures
vnited for constitutinge One person Mediatour,
what gates of hell cold euer prevayle
against that? The first generall
Councell held at Nice
               Yeare of our Lo. 327. vp 318. Episcops,
it condemned Arius for denying Christ to
be One with the father for eternity of essence,
ād for teaching him to be ōly a Creature.
The secōd generall Councell vp 150
fathers at Cōstātinople,
               383. y. it cōdemned Macedonius
for denying the spirit to be God,
ād so by consequent denying the Father,
Word ād Spirit to be one ād the same Essence.
Which right conceipt of the Spirit,
although som may haue bene true Christiās
before they attayned so far vp particular
knowledge, yet to gain say it (being
of the Church taught it) it maketh the
case of such condemnable. In the former
description therefore, as I vrged not such
particular knowledge of the spirit, so it
was, because I put downe a visible Christian
in the lowest degre: whose ignorances
are to be termed Infirmities, not wilfull
or obstinate rebellious. In the third

generall Synode, held at Ephesus
               y. 433. by 200.
Episcops, Nestorius was condemned for
teachinge Christ to be two Persons. And
in the fourth vniuersall councell heald at
Chalcedon
               y. 455. vp 630. Presbyters (I vse
Isidors worde) was Eutiches anathematized,
for teaching Christ to consist but on
One nature, and that diuyne. And in euery
of the sayd Councels (as was by all
mē of good reporte before ād synce taught
by word or writinge) our saviour Christ
Iesus was concluded (for Natures, Person,
and office of redemption) in the same
sort as I haue written and no otherwiser
as all read-scholers can testifie with me.
            
               But two poynts there be whereof I
must speake more particularly. The fiest
for satisfaction of the equall Romaniste:
the seconde for our Protestants contentment.
For the Romaniste he denieth Iustification
with God to be only by Faith.
Vnto whome I oppose those Auncients.
               Origen on Rom. 3. 27. Origen writes so: The Apostle sayth,
Iustification by Fayth ALONE it is sufficient:
so that the beleiuer whosoever is
ONLY so justified: yea, though no worke
haue bene performed by him. Wherevnto
he addeth the theif his iustification
on the Crosse,so doth Beda on Rom. 4. 
                        •
                     
                   sayinge: The Lord required
not of him what before he had wrought
nor did expect what vvork he shold fulfill

after he beleived, but being iustified by SOLE
confession (namely, of fayth) he ioyned
him companyon vnto him, being redy
to enter into Paradise. And that Origen
may not be demed wauering herein, he
afterward sayth:
               on ch. 4. Abraham might haue
glory for his vvorks vvith holy & iust
men that savve them, but this glory vvith
God vvas ONLY by Fayth hid. And so he
straight reconciles S. Paul, and S. Iames,
adding this: The Apostle elsvvhere
saith, the stipend of Syn is death, but here
he sayth not, the stipend of Righteousnes is
lyfe eternall, But, the Grace of God is life
eternall. And Clemens his Mr. writ thus
before him:
               Clem. in histromata, b 7. By Faith ALONE the beleiuer
is perfected. Cyprian hath this:
               Cypriā, b. 3. to Quirine, chap. 42. Faith ALONE profils, & somuch vve
can as vve beleiue. After him Victor Antiochian
preacheth thus:
               Vict. on Mark chap. 534 These vvordes
(thy faith hath made the hole) they shevv
that the ga
                  •
               ments touched cured her not,
but Faith. Therefore, neither place, nor
vvords, nor any such thing externall doth
saue a man, but euery man is saued by his
fayth. And Ambrose treades the same
tract, so:
               Ambr. on Rom. 3. 24. They are justified GRATIS,
because Working Nothing, nor restoring
any thing in the rovvne thereof, by Fayth
ALONE they are iustified through the
guifte of God. And at large the same Elder

presseth th'opposition (not betwene
the works of the law and the works off
faith, as the Romanist wold haue it, but)
betwene the works of the lawe ād (SOLA
FIDES) Faith alone. For Chrysostom
he thus syngs the same songue:
               Chrys. on Rom. 3. here the Apostle shevveth the vertue off
God, not because he only saueth, but also
iustifieth & leadeth into glory, vsing no
vvorks herevnto, but exacting ONLY
faith. And Basilius Magnus writeth so
               Basil. in ser. of humility. That glorying in God is then by all meanes
perfect, vvhen as a Man is not extolled
by reason of his ovvne righteousnes: but
acknovvledgeth himself verily to be destitute
of Righteousnes, but to be justified by
Faith ONLY in Christ. And Paul so glories
in that, as he contemnes his ovvne Righteousnes.
Pope Leo writes thus:
               Leo primus. in 4. serm. of Christs Natiuity. Euen
as righteousnes is by Faith, so likevvise by
true fayth is life eternall obtayned. Rabanus
walks in the same padde with his
predecessors, sayinge:
               Rab. b. 7 c. 2. on Ecclus. By the Grace of
Christ ALONE, the Elect are deliuered
from every Scādale. Thus Remigius:Remig. on ps. 29. Lyfe
eternalis not by Merit (because of our selues
vve cā fall, but of our selues vve cānot ryse)
but by his vvill, that is, by his Mercy. But
yet lower to corrupted tymes. The Idiote
Idiot ch 6. of conflict. 
               writes so: To justify is better then to
create: seing by creating, Nature is giuen:

but by justifyinge,flesh and Spirit. both the falt is taken avvay,
and Grace is conferred. Then Giselbert
foloweth on with his pen thus:
               Giselb. in Altercation. ch 8. I say the righteousnes of God, not vvhereby
god is just, but vvhereby he cloths
man, vvhē as he justifies the vvicked Gratis.
Afterwards Theophilact so subscribes:
               Theoph. on Rom. 10. It is the Righteousnes of God vvhich
is by Fayth. This nedeth not our Labours
or vvorks: but the WHOLE partaineth
to God his grace. But I will yet descend
to corrupter tymes: Abbot Barnard hath
this:
               Barn. on the Annunc. of Marp. If thovv shalt beleiue that thy synnes
cannot be blotted out, but Only of him
agaynst vvhome thovv hast synned, & in
vvhome syn is not, thovv dost vvell: but
adde therevvithall & se also thovv beleiue
it, That is, because by him synnes are forgiuen
vnto the. This is the testimony vvhich
the H. Gh. beareth in our heart, saying:
Thy synnes are forgiuen the. For so the Apostle
thought (namely) that Mā vvas iustified
by Faith, GRATIS. And abbot
Rupertus so:
               Rupert on Iohn, b. 1. c. 1. It is expedient to knoe
Christ, & he must seek him, vvho being
found doth bring profit: in vvhome to beleiue
it is Salvation. And afterwards
               book. 7. chap. 7. In
Iesus Christ, neither circumcisiō nor vncircumcision,
nor Gentile nor levve, but
FAITH ONLY is required. And the
Manke lo. Baptista Folengius protesteth

his fayth thus:
               Foleng. on Psa. 2. vvhat greater Signe can
there be, both of God his justice vvherby
of Synners he hath MADE vs lust: as also
of his Goodnes, vvhereby vve are GRATIS
invited to the inheritance of Eternall
happines: & after a manner, euen dravven
vs, being vnvvillinge. But to alleadge all
I cold alleadge, it were to make a Booke
and not to conclude a Chapter: and none
of the former writers can be reiected off
the Romanist. With whose so euident
testimony, if so He will not be satisfied,
neyther is a Clowde of witnesses moe,
likly to be accepted. As for works whereby
Fayth is declared to Man (according
to that of Iames, Shevve me thy
Fayth by thy vvorks) 
                  
                     •
                  noue of those writers
but euer vrged them, as men wold
thereby receive assurance of theyr Election:2 Pet. 1. 1
                        •
                     
                  
according to that of S. Peter: make
your callinge & election sure, namely, by
works. Not that thereby our Election
is made sure with GOD, but vnto vs.
wherevnto lo.This Interpretation of the Papist doth ouerthwart the Romanist 1. in the cause of Election: 2. theyr 
                     〈…〉
                   works: and so Midiās sword is turned into his owne guts. Viguerius Doctor of Theologie
amongst the Papists (in his Theologicall
Institutions approved by Sorbon,
priviledged by the King, Ao. 1549.)
he thus cōsenteth By those vvords (2, Pet.
1. 10.) no vvay can be had, that Election
shold be by reason of vvorks follovvinge:
but that by perseverance in good vvorks,

Praedestination vvhich is vnmoveable, it is
by conjecturall assurance so shovven, Certaine
vnto vs.
            Touching the Euer-visibility of the
Church, it is One way then proved, whē
there be found in Catholike vnity such as
holde the former two poynts: 1. Christ.
2. so apprehendinge Christ vnto perfection
of salvation. But that there haue bene
som who haue so beleiued and confessed
(euen through the corruptest tymes) it
may appeare vp that is already sayde.
Obiection: But som of them liued vnder
Antichrists externall Church-gouernment,
therefore such visible Antichristian.
This blynd argument of Brounisme.
I answer with the like:3. Iohn. 9. 
               Diotrephes,
Reuel. 2. 6. 13 14 15 20. &c. Nicolaitans, Satans throne, Balaamites,
Iesabel prophetisse,1 Cor. 15. 12. Denyers of Resurrection
&c. they liued vnder Christ his
externall church-gouernment, therefore
all they were true visible Christians. If
this be sottish, thē the former for if Christ
his church-gouernment be not able to
make all true visible Christians vnder it:The gouernment externall of the spirit it is not only to 
                     〈◊〉
                   distinguished, but also can without Nullity be seuered, from externall Church-government.
then neither can Antichrist his externall
regiment make all vnder it visible Antichristian.
There is a greater government
then the church-government, and
that is, the government of Christ and

Antichrists Spirit: and that is it which
maketh the sowle visible Christian or
Antichristian. But hereof as also of
the Church her euer-visibility in his
owne chapter: for the probation whereof,
variety of Arguments shall
not be lackinge. That is already
sayd, it may suffice to manifest,
vvho is a true visible
Christian.
            
            All glory to God.
         
      
   