
      
         
            
            
            THE LIFE OF THE GLORIOVS VIRGIN S. CLARE. Togeather with the Conuerſion, and life of S. Agnes her ſiſter. And of another S. Agnes, Daughter to the King of Bohemia. Alſo the Rule of S. Clare. And the life of S. Catharine of Bologna.
            
               Tranſlated into English.
            
            
            Permiſſis Superiorum, M. DC. XXII.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST GLORIOVS Virgin S. Clare.
            
            
               Moſt Glorious Saint,
            
            
               BEING to publiſh thy Bleſſed Life, traſlated into Engliſh for the publik benefit of our Coūtry; I found no creature heere on Earth, ſeeming worthy inough, to be preſented therewith, by way of Dedication: And therfore, were my Thoughts preſently, tranſported hence to the glorious Cittizens of Heauen; whither ariuing, they forthwith made choice of thy Bleſſed

               Selfe, as beſt (& in particuler) deſeruing ſo true an Honour.
            Accept then (B. Saint) this my ſmall labour which in all Humility & Reuerence I heere offer vnto thy Holy NAME, togeather with my vnworthy Selfe; that by thy Interceſſion, & Piety, I may be made partaker of ſome little glimpſe of that ſpiritual Influence, which out of the huge Maſſe of thy Glorious merits, thou vouchſafeſt to impart vnto thy deuout Suppliants; amongſt whom I humbly begge (O Glorious Virgin) to be accepted for one.
            
               I. W.
            
         
         
            
            THE TABLE.
            
               
                  OF S. Clare her Countrey, Family & Byrth. Chap 1.
               
               Of her Education, Charity, Prayer, mortification and Virginity. Chap. 2.
               
               Of her knowledge, & acquaintance with S. Francis. Chap. 3.
               
               Of her forſaking the world, & entring into Religion. Chap. 4.
               
               How her friends laboured to reclayme her from Religion. Chap. 5.
               
               Of the cōuerſion of her ſiſter Agens by her prayers. Chap. 6.
               
               
                  
Of her Humily. Chap. 7.
               
               Of her voluntary Pouerty Chap. 8.
               
               Of the miracles wrought by her Pouerty. Chap. 9.
               
               Of her great mortifications & abſtinence. Chap. 10.
               
               Of the ſpirituall profit procured ouer the whole world, by the fame of S. Clare. Chap. 11.
               
               Of her feruent Prayer. Chap. 12.
               
               How the Mores were expelled the Monaſtery, by S. Clare. Chap. 13.
               
               How the Citty of Aſſiſium, was deliuered by her prayers. Chap. 14.
               
               Of her Reuerence & deuotion to the moſt B. Sacrament. Chap. 15.
               
               Of a meruailous conſolation ſhe receyued vpon a Chriſtmas day. Ch. 16.
               
               Of the ſpirituall doctrine with which ſhe nourſed her daughters. Chap. 17.
               
               Of the deuotion which Pope Gregory

the IX. had to S. Clare. Chap. 18.
               
               Of her feruent loue to Ieſus Christ: & of an extaſy wherin ſhe was. Ch. 19.
               
               Of the many Miracles ſhe wrought by the ſigne of the Croſſe. Chap. 20.
               
               Of the ſigne of the Croſſe remayning vpon Bread bleſſed by her. Chap. 21.
               
               Of her Infirmity & ſicknes. Ch. 22.
               
               How ſhe was viſited by Pope Innocent the fourth. Chap. 23.
               
               How ſhe comforted her ſiſter Saint Agnes. Chap. 24.
               
               Of her Death, & Obſequies. Chap. 25. & 26.
               
               Of the miracles wrought by her Interceſſion. Chap. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31.
               
               Of her Canonization by Pope Alexander the fourth. Chap. 32.
               
            
            
               
               The life of S. Agnes.
               HOVV S. Agnes was ſent to Florence to build there a monaſtery. Chap. I.
               Of a Letter ſhe wrote to her ſiſter S. Clare, & the reſt of the monastery of S. Damian. Chap. II.
               Of an extaſy of S. Agnes, and of her thrice crowning by an Angell. Chap. III.
               How ſhe ſent S. Clares veyle to the Monaſtery of Florence, and of her death. Chap. IIII.
               Of the many Miracles wrought by the merits of S. Agnes. Ch. V. & VI.
               Of the Life of another S. Agnes who was daughter to the King of Bohemia, & Religious of the ſame Order. Pag. 207.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  Of the intention of our Lord in the vocation of S. Clare. Of her Countrey & Family: & of a Reuelation to her mother touching her birth, & ſanctity.
               
               CHAP. I.
               
                  SIx yeares after the conuerſiō of the holy Father S. Francis, & the fourth yeare, after the confirmation of his Rule by Pope Innocent

the third, the yeare of grace 1212. the omnipotent Father of light, hauing framed, and ſent into the world a new man, his ſeruant S. Francis, by him to repayre, and reforme his faithful people in that age; would alſo, that a valourous woman ſhould by his worke appeare in the world, to accompany that his great, & faythfull ſeruant, to the end, that of thoſe two, ſhold be new borne a perfect regeneration of the children of God. And as the firſt naturall generation came of man and woman, as of an vnited beginning: ſo this ſpirituall generation of the imitatours of the life and counſailes of Ieſus Chriſt proceeded in al the Church, and in all the eſtates, and qualityes of perſons, of the one & ſame

ſpirit of zeale, of perfection, of humility, and of pouerty, from one man, and one woman. And to the end it might not be vnlike the creation, almighty God hauing firſt perfected his ſeruant S. Francis, would frame of the ribb, or ſide of his life, doctrine and Santy, the glorious Virgin S. Clare, his true, and legitimate daughter in Ieſus Chriſt for his companion, as zealous alſo of perfection, and angelicall reformation. With great reaſon therfore hath ſhe her place in the Chronicles of the Friars Minors; for ſhe being a ribbe, and party of the ſame order, it is very requiſite a ſpeciall mention ſhould be made of her ſanctity of life, as we ſhall heere performe: and if it be not according to her merit, ſhall

at leaſt be done, with the leaſt defect we can poſſible; being reſolued to imploy therein, that little force of ſpirit, which God hath giuen vs, both to the honour of his diuine maieſty, & his holy ſeruant, and to the edification of ſoules.
               The glorious S. Clare was borne in the Citty of Aſſiſiū
                   in Italy, ſcituate in the prouince of the valley of Spoletum, which is a territory apperteyning to the Pope, and Roman Church. Her Father and Mother were noble, of a famous and very welthy family: her Mother was called Hortulana, which in our tounge may be tearmed Gardener, and not without miſtery, conſidering ſhe was to produce ſo noble, and vertuous a plant, in the garden of the holy Church. This woman

was exceeding deuout, and compleate in the fruites of good workes: and albeit ſhe were marryed, and conſequently obliged to the care, and gouernement of her houſe, and family, yet did ſhe not omit with all her power to be exerciſed in the ſeruice of God, and imployed in the works of mercy.
               She was ſo feruent in the loue of Ieſus Chriſt, that with great deuotion ſhe paſſed the ſea with many other pilgrimes, & viſited thoſe holy places, which our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt God and man, conſecrated with his holy preſence, and retourned exceedingly comforted, and inriched with many meritts. She alſo viſited the Church of the Archangell Saint Michael, on the mount Gargan, and with a pious,

and feruent deſire, viſited the Apoſtles S. Peter & S. Paul in Rome: in ſuch ſort did that vertue and feruour ſhine in thoſe dayes in many holy perſons, but now ſo weakned is the feruour of Chriſtians touching the viſiting of holy places, & the Reliques of our Lord, and his Saintes, that it is almoſt loſt by the continuall warrs of heretikes, and puniſhment for our ſinnes.
               Now our Lord began to power out the aboundance of his celeſtiall graces vpon the roote, that afterwardes the ſproutes of farre greater ſanctity might follow, and diſperſe into the boughes. Neyther would he, that this deuout woman Hortulana, ſhould be depriued of the cōſolations, & knowledge of this grace: for being neere

her child-birth, ſhe one day with great feruour prayed in a Church, before a Crucifix, where ſhe beſought Almighty God to deliuer her from the danger of death in her child birth, which ſhe much apprehended; & ſhe heard a voice that ſayd: Woman, feare not for thou ſhalt ſafely, and without danger, bring forth a light, that ſhall illuminate, and lighten all the world.
               Being thus comforted, and admoniſhed by this diuine anſwere; ſo ſoone as ſhe was deliuered of a daughter, ſhe cauſed her to be called in Baptiſme Clare, firmely belieuing that in her ſhould be accompliſhed the ſplendour of the light promiſed, according to the prouidence, and the ordinance of the diuine bounty.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the Education, Charity, Prayer, Mortification, and Virginity of S. Clare.
                  
               
               CHAP. II.
               SAINT Clare being borne into the world, ſhe began incontinently to appeare, and ſhine as a morning ſtarre in the obſcure night of that age, for in the moſt tender yeares of her firſt infancy, ſhe already diſcouered euidēt ſigns of notable and pious works, wherin ſhe made to appeare her naturall worth, and the graces which God had communicated vnto her: for being naturally of a very delicate conſtitution, ſhe receiued of

her Mother the firſt foundations of faith: afterwards being inſpired of God, to apply herſelfe to vertuous, and pious workes, ſhe ſhewed herſelfe to be a veſſell aptly prepared for diuine grace; and as ſhe abounded in interiour piety, aſwell by nature as by grace towardes poore beggars; ſo according to the ſmall meanes which then ſhe had, ſhe ſupplyed their neceſſities. And to the end her Sacrifice might be more pleaſing vnto God, the moſt delicate meates that vvere giuen her, for the nouriſhment of her little body, ſhe hid, and gaue it ſecretly to the poore. Thus did piety augment and increaſe in her, & nouriſhed charity in her ſoule, preparing her to receiue the grace & mercy of Almighty God. Her greateſt

contentment was in prayer, wherby ſhe was often ſuſteyned, made ioyfull, and comforted as by an Angelicall milke, and in a moſt delicious manner eleuated to the diuine pleaſures of the conuerſation of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. In theſe beginninges, hauing no beades, ſhe vſed inſteed thereof certaine little ſtones, ſome to ſerue for the Pater noſters, and others for the Aues, and ſo offered her prayers to God. Wherupon beginning to feele the firſt feruours of diuine loue, ſhe iudged that the muſt contemne all tranſitory apparence, & painted flowers of this world: and being by prayer well inſtructed of the holy Ghoſt, ſhe reſolued, as a wiſe ſpirituall Merchant, to haue no more regard of terreſtriall affayrs

acknowledging them vnworthy to be eſteemed: & with this ſpirit ſhe did weare, as another S. Cecily, vnder her gay apparrell, a haire-cloth; ſo exteriourly ſatisfying the world, and interiourly her Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
               But hauing attayned the age of marriage, ſhe was importuned by her Father, & other kindred, to chooſe a husband; whereto ſhe would neuer conſent, but vſed lingrings, and delayes, putting off, and differring what ſhe could all humane marriage, & euer recommended to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt her Virginity, with other vertues wherwith ſhe was indued; by ſuch exerciſes indeauouring to pleaſe almighty God, that he might beſtow on her his only Sonne for her

ſpouſe. Such were the firſt fruits of her ſpirt, and ſuch the exerciſes of her piety: ſo that being anoynted with ſuch a ſweet, and pretiousoyntment, ſhe yielded a moſt pleaſant ſauour, as a cloſet repleniſhed with moſt delightfull liquors, whoſe perfumes, though they be ſhut vp, diſcouer, and manifeſt themſelues; and in ſuch ſort this holy virgin beganne without her knowledge to be commended by her neighbours; the true fame of her ſecret pious workes ſo publiſhing themſelues, that in an inſtant they were exceedingly ſpread abroad, & euery where diuulged.
            
            
               
               
                  How the virgin S. Clare had knowledge of the Vertues of the holy Father S. Francis.
                  
               
               CHAP. III.
               THIS vertuous Virgin Clare, hearing the great fame of the admirable life of Saint Francis, who then renewed vnto the world the way of perfection in the ſame Citty, with a maruelous example of piety and vertue; & conſidering that many gentlemen did follow him, and that his life was already approued by our holy mother the Church, ſhe exceedingly deſired to ſee, and heare this ſeruant of God, moſt worthy, and eminent

in all vertues; thereunto inſpired by the ſoueraigne Father of ſpirits, to whome had already byn preſented the firſt fruites of their deuotions, though differently. S. Francis hauing byn aduertiſed of this her deſire, and hauing heard the bruit of her vertues, and holy affections, deſired alſo exceedingly to ſee her, and to conferre with her, with intention to fruſtrate the world of ſo noble, and pretious a prey, to preſent her to our ſoueraigne redeemer, to ſerue him in ſome notable enterpriſe, as preordayned of God to deſpoyle the great prince of the world. Neither did his diuine maieſty fayle, to open vnto them both the meanes, to attaine thereunto: he inſpired this vertuous woman to rely vpon

a very honorable & graue matron, that gouerned her in her houſe, as her Mother. And to the end that this holy purpoſe might not be ſiniſterly interpreted of men, and to hinder publike murmure, ſhe went out of her Fathers houſe with this good woman, & found out the holy Father; by the ſeruour of whoſe pious diſcourſes, ſhe was preſently inflamed with diuine loue, and moued by his holy actions which ſhe admired, as ſeeming vnto her to be more then humane; and therfore ſhe began very exquiſitely to diſpoſe herſelfe to the effecting of the wordes of the holy ſeruant of God; who hauing very louingly intertained her, began to preach vnto her the cōtempt of the world, and by euident reaſon to demonſtrate

vnto her, that all the beauty of thinges preſent is but a vanity, filled with falſe, and deceitfull hopes. Then he perſuaded vnto her pure eares, the honourable & amiable Eſpouſall of Ieſus Chriſt, and counſailed her to cōſerue thoſe moſt pretious pearles of virginall purity, for that glorious Spouſe, who out of the loue he bare to the world, being God became man, & would be borne of a virgin.
               This holy Father ſollicited this affayre, and played the part of a true Paranymph, & Embaſſadour of the heauenly King. The holy virgin on her ſide beginning already to taſt the ſweetnes of contemplation, and the proofe of the eternallioyes; the world beginning to ſeeme vnto her vile, and contemptible,

as indeed it is, ſhe as it were melted for the loue of her celeſtiall ſpouſe, whome ſhe already deſired with all her hart. Thēce forth therfore ſhe deſpiſed pretious ſtons Iewells, gold, ſumptuous apparrell, all other worldly trash as filth, and dunge, and abhorring the deteſtable delights of the flesh, she reſolued intierly to dedicate herſelf a liuely temple to Ieſus Chriſt, & to take him for the only ſpouſe of her body and ſoule, and ſo ſubmitting herſelfe wholly, and totally to the counſayles of the glorious father S. Francis, him, next after our Lord, ſhe tooke for guid, and director of her life.
            
            
               
               
                  How S. Francis drew the virgin S. Clare out of the world, and made her Religious.
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               AND to the end the moſt cleare mirrour of her ſoule might not be ſtayned, and blemiſhed vvith the duſt of this world, and that the contagious ſeculer life did not corrupt her innocency, the holy Father prudently indeauoured to ſequeſter this virgin from worldly people. And the ſolemnity of palme-ſonday approching, the holy Eſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, with a great feruour of ſpirit, repayred to this man of God,

and moſt inſtantly demaunded of him, when, and how ſhe ſhould make her retyre from the world▪ wherupon the holy Father ordayned, that on the day of the ſayd feaſt ſhe ſhould goe to the proceſſion of Palmes with the people, decked, and adorned the moſt richly, and gorgiouſly that ſhe could procure, and the night following going out of the Citty, and withall, out of al conuerſation of the world, she should change ſecular pleaſurs into lamentations of the paſſion of our Lord.
               Palme-ſonday being come, the glorious S. Clare went in the company of her mother, and other Ladyes to the great Church, where there hapned a matter worthy to be recorded, as not done without the

prouidence of the diuine goodnes, which was, that all the other Ladyes going, as is the cuſtome of Italy, to take holy Palme, and S. Clare, out of a virginall bashfulnes, remayning alone without mouing out ofher place, the Biſhop deſcended frō the ſteps of his ſeate, & put into her hand a branch of Palme.
               The night approaching ſhe began to prepare herſelfe for effecting the commaundment of the holy Father, and to make a glorious flight, and honorable retyre from the world, in honeſt company. But it ſeeming to her impoſſible to goe forth at the ordinary, and chiefeſt doore of the houſe, ſhe bethought herſelfe to take the benefit of a backe doore, which (though it were dammed, and cloſed vp with

groſſe ſtones, and mighty blocks) ſhe with an admirable courage, & force rather of a ſtrong man, then of a tender yong woman, herſelfe broke open. Thus then leauing her Fathers houſe, her Citty, kindred, and friendes, ſhe with extraordinary ſpeed arriued at the Church of our Lady of Angels, where the Religious, that in the houſe of God were imployed in pious watchings, receiued, with burning wax lights in their handes, this holy virgin, that ſought her ſpouſe, and redeemer Ieſus Chriſt with a lampe not extinct, and empty, but filled with diuine loue: and incontinently in the ſelfe-ſame houre and place, hauing left, and abandoned the impurityes of Babylon, ſhe gaue the world the ticket of defiance,

and vtter adieu before the Altar of the ſoueraigne Queene of Angells; where the glorious Father S. Francis, inſpired of God, & neglecting all other worldly reſpects, cut off her hayre: then he cloathed her with a poore habit of the order, cōmanding the Iewels, & gorgeous attire which ſhe brought, to be giuen to the poore of Ieſus Chriſt. It had not beene indeed conuenient, that the new Order of floriſhing virginity towardes the end of the world, ſhould otherwiſe begin, then in the Angelical pallace of that moſt Immaculate Queene, who before had alone byn a mother, and a virgin, and conſequently more worthy then all others vvhatſoeuer.
               In the very ſame place had the

noble Chiualry of the poore of Ieſus Chriſt, the Friars Minors, their beginninge, vnder the valourous Captaine S. Francis, to the end it might euidently appeare, that the Mother of God in this her habitation ingendred, and produced the one and the other Religion. And ſo ſoone as this new Eſpouſe had receiued the habit, & enſignes of holy pēnance, before the Aultar of the moſt ſacred virgin Mary, the hūble ſeruāt was accepted by Ieſus Chriſt for his Eſpouſe, and the glorious Father S. Francis conducted her to the monaſtery of S. Paul in Aſſiſium, where were Religious womē of the order of S. Bennet; there to remaine till almighty God had prouided another monaſtery.
            
            
               
               
                  How much the kindred of S. Clare laboured to rerire her from Religion: and how she was conducted to S. Damian.
                  
               
               CHAP. V.
               THE kindred of this holy virgin vnderſtanding what ſhe had done, and the bruit of her reſolution being diuulged ouer all the Citty, many of the friendes of her Father and Mother aſſembled, and conſulted to preuent this vertuous virgin of her holy reſolution; and coming to the monaſtery of the Religious of Saint Bennet, whither ſhe was retired, they purpoſed to execute

by violence, what they could not compaſſe by humane policy, trying their forces againſt the meeke lambe of Ieſus Chriſt, and by their malice & peruerſe counſell ſeeking to delude that ſimple doue; the did they make her deceiptful promiſes, exhorting her to retire herſelfe frō ſuch baſe condition, and abiection, demonſtrating vnto her, that it was a matter vnworthy her noble deſcent, and that the like neuer hapned in the Citty. But the virgin firme and ſtable in Ieſus Chriſt, approaching to the Altar, diſcouered her haireleſſe head, alleadging, that ſhe could no more be ſeparated frō the ſeruice of Ieſus Chriſt, for whoſe loue ſhe had already forſaken all the world, & themſelues alſo; and the more they tormented

her, the more was her hart inflamed in the loue of God, and of her ſweet ſpouſe Ieſus Chriſt, who ſupplyed her with new forces to reſiſt. Thus for many dayes togeather diſturbed with many iniuries, ſhe indured great contradictions in the way of God: and albeit her kindred perſeuered in their attempts to withdraw her from her pious deſigne, her feruour yet did neuer wax cold, nor her hart feble: but on the contrary, ſo many iniurious wordes, and violent threats did ſo much confirme her confidence in God, that her kindred were conſtrayned to forbeare any more to vexe, and diſquiet her, retyring themſelues as all aſhamed, & confounded. Thus did almighty God make appeare, how much

the power of thoſe that are his, though of themſelues feeble, did exceed the ſtrong, and puiſſant of the world.
               But in regard that her ſoule had not perfect repoſe in that place, ſhe was by the holy Father S. Francis placed in the church of S. Damian, and there, as in a ſecret harbour and ſecure, ſhe caſt the anker of her ſoule neuer changing place, nether in reſpect of the great reſtraint therof, nor for feare of ſolitude, this Church being without the Citty. This was the Church in reparatiō wherof the Glorious S. Francis laboured in the beginning of his conuerſion: and where he did alſo offer money to the Chaplaine to repayre it: this holy Father being once alſo in this Church, and praying

with aboundance of tears, merited to heare the voyce of the crucifix, before which he was, that thrice reiterated vnto him: Goe Francis, and repayre my houſe, which, as thou ſeeſt, is ready to fall. The glorious virgin Clare, for the loue of her heauenly ſpouſe, ſhut herſelfe vp in that little place, and there impriſoned herſelfe during her life, ſequeſtring her body 
                     〈◊〉
                   the turbulent tempeſt of the world. This ſiluered Doue there building her neſt in the concauities of that Church, ingendred the colledge of virgins of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, & there inſtituting a holy conuent, gaue a beginning to the order of poore Religious women. And thus being ſetled in the way of pennance, ſhe bruized the hard

turfes of her members, with the coulter of the Croſſe, and perfectly ſowed the ſeede of ſanctity and iuſtice, making with her very ſoule ſtepps and traces of vertuous progreſſe, for them that were to follovv her.
            
            
               
                  How the virgin Agnes, ſister to S. Clare, was by her feruent prayers conuerted: and of the perſecutions she indured by her kindred; and how she was miraculouſly freed of them.
               
               CHAP. VI.
               SAINT Clare had a younger ſiſter, who both in regard of bloud & of pouerty, was really

her ſiſter; and ſhe exceedingly deſiring the conuerſion of this young virgin, neuer failed in her moſt feruent deuotions, which in her firſt dayes ſhe offered to almighty God, as feruently & deuoutly as she poſſibly could, with a perfect zeale, to beſeech him, that as ſhe had liued with her ſiſter in the world, there might be alſo betweene them an holy vnion of body, & will, in his feruice; moſt inſtantly importuning him to make it appeare to her ſiſter, whome she had left in her mothers houſe, what a notorious delunder the world is, & how ful of diſcontenment▪ & on the contrary how ſweet, and pleaſant is Ieſus Chriſt; and that conſequently he would pleaſe to change her deſired reſolution of carnall marriage, and

cauſe her to imbrace the vnion of diuine loue, and to take for her ſpouſe the King of glory. Now in regard that our Lord had already ſetled ſuch an amity betweene theſe two ſiſters, that their ſeparation was afflictiue & troubleſome vnto them, (though then their deſires & willes were farre different) he made no delay to fauour this his poore ſuppliant, and deuout ſeruant, euen in this her firſt petition, which she ſo inſtantly required of him, and which his diuine maieſty ſo readily graunted.
               Sixteene dayes then after her conuerſion, her ſiſter Agnes inſpired of God, with a ſtrong and prompt reſolution gaue a ſlip, and farewell to the world, & came to her ſiſter Clare, to whō diſcouering

the ſecrets of her hart, she ſaid ſhe was reſolued to ſerue God in her company: which the glorious Clare vnderſtanding, she moſt amiably imbraced her, and with a very ioyfull & contented countenance ſaid: my moſt deare Siſter, I giue infinit thankes to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that it hath pleaſed him to heare me, and deliuer me from the afflion I endured for your ſake. This noble conuerſion of Agnes, by the prayers of her ſiſter Clare, was ſeconded by as many contradictions of her kindred, as that of S. Clare: but theſe bleſſed ſiſters ſeruing our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and imitating his ſtepps, ſhe that had moſt taſt of God, and was in higher progreſſe, inſtructed her ſiſter Nouice. Their kindred knowing that Agnes was

with her ſiſter Clare, twelue men of their neereſt bloud, as Brothers, vncles, and coſen germanes aſſembled to aſſault them, and to combat the Eſpouſes of Ieſus Chriſt. The day following then, with an extreme rage and fury they came to thoſe holy virgins, yet at their firſt cōming diſſembling their lewd intention, they ſhewed them ſome fauorable countenance: then addreſſing themſelues to the virgin Agnes, deſpayring of all hope to withdraw S. Clare from her holy purpoſe, they demaunded of her, wherfore ſhe was retyred into that place? thē willed her to deliberate, and reſolue to retourne with them to her Fathers houſe: whereto ſhe anſwered, that ſhe was reſolued, (the grace of God aſſiſting her)

to remayne with her ſiſter: which anſwere one of them diſdayning, full of paſſion, and tranſported with choler, took her by the haire, and gaue her many blowes with his feet and fiſtes; then vſed all his force to pull her out of the place, which at length by the help of others he performed: for taking her in their armes, they forcibly trayled her out.
               But this little daughter of Ieſus Chriſt, ſeing herſelfe violently wreſted by thoſe furious lyons out the armes of her God, ſhe began to cry to her ſiſter, Help me ſiſter, & permit me not to be ſeparated frō our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and your louing company. Her carnall kindred trayled a long the valley this virgin of Ieſus Chriſt agaynſt her

will, and in deſpight of her feeble, though couragious reſiſtance, renting her cloathes from her tender body. In the meane while S. Clare, vnable by other meanes to relieue her ſiſter, had recourſe to prayer, with aboundance of teares, beſeeching God to vouchſafe to giue a couragious confidence, to her ſiſter, that his diuine fauour defending his faythfull ſeruant, humane forces might be ouercome: and our Lord heard her. For at the inſtant of her prayer, the body of the virgin Agnes miraculouſly became ſo weighty, that her kindred were at length inforced to leaue her on the ground: and albeit ſo many men, and their ſeruantes, put all their forces to lift her vp, yet could they neuer doe it, but called labourers,

and workemen of the vineyards that wrought therabouts to aſſiſt them, yet their great number no more auayled then the leſſe.
               Finally the forces fayling of her kindred, and thoſe that attempted to aſſiſt them, they acknowledged the miracle, though ſcornefully, ſaying: it is no maruayle though ſhe be ſo weighty, hauing layne all night as lead. Whereupon Signor Monaldo her vncle in extreme paſſion lifting vp his armes to ſtrike her, he preſently felt an extreme payne therein, which did not only torment him for the preſent, but a long tyme after. Then S. Clare after her prayer, ariuing, beſought her kindred to forbeare in vaine to contend with God, and to leaue her the care of her ſiſter,

who lay as halfe dead. They perceiuing their labour loſt to hinder their pious reſolution, being exceedingly vvearyed, left the two ſiſters togeather. The troup then being departed, the tormented Agnes aroſe from the ground, full of ioy in Ieſus Chriſt, for whoſe loue ſhe had fought, & ouercome in this her firſt conflict againſt the world, and his prince the Diuell, by fauour and aſſiſtance of diuine grace; & her ſiſter aſking her how ſhe felt herſelfe, ſhe anſwered, that notwithſtanding all the affliction they had procured her by buffets, beatings, ſpurnes with their feet & fiſtes, tearing her by the hayre, trayling her through ſtony wayes, ſhe had felt in a manner nothing, eſpecially by the vertue,

and force of diuine grace, and next by the merits of her good prayers. Shortly after the holy Father S. Francis cut of her haire, ſhe retayning ſtill her proper name of Agnes, in memory of the innocent lambe Ieſus Chriſt, who offering himſelfe in ſacrifice to his Father, gaue reſiſtance to the world, fought valerouſly, and ouercame: and ſo the holy Father inſtructed her with her ſiſter, and taught her the way of God in ſuch ſort, that ſhe ſo increaſed, and profited in Religion, & all vertue, and ſanctity, that ſhe was an admiration to al the world.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the humility of the Virgin Saint Clare.
                  
               
               CHAP. VII.
               PROFOVND humility was the firſt aſſured ſtone, & foundation, which the holy virgin layd in the beginning of her Relion, after ſhe had begun to labour in the way of God, ſo to aduance, and ſet forward the building of all other vertues. She vowed Obedience vnto S. Francis, which vow in all her life, ſhe neuer tranſgreſſed, and for three yeares after her conuerſion, ſhe deſired rather with great humility to be ſubiect, then a Superior, ſhūning the title, & office

of Abbeſſe, taking more content to ſerue among the ſeruants of Ieſus Chriſt, then to be ſerued. But being at length by the holy Father S. Francis thereunto conſtrained, ſhe vndertooke the gouernment of the Religious, which bred in her hart more feare, then preſumption: ſo what ſhe rather continued, and became a ſeruant, then free from ſubiection. For the more ſhe ſeemed to be rayſed to the office, and title of dignity, the more did ſhe repute herſelfe vile, and the more ſhewed herſelfe ready to ſerue, and made herſelfe more contemptible then all her religious, both in habit and baſe ſeruice. She diſdayned not to doe the office of ſeruants, giuing water to the Religious to waſh, whom ſhe made often to ſit, herſelf

ſtanding, and ſeruing them at table.
               When ſhe commaunded any thing, it was vnwillingly, rather deſiring to do, then to commaund others. She performed to the ſicke all kind of ſeruices, were they neuer ſo loathſome, as to make cleane any thing that was defiled or foule, ſhunning with ſo worthy a ſpirit al pleaſant, and delightfull actions, neuer abhorring, or deſdayning the moſt offenſiue ſmells. She often waſhed the feete of the lay ſiſters, whē they came from abroad, made them cleane, and with great humility kiſſed them. It one time chaunced, that washing the feete of a ſeruant, and offering to kiſſe them, the ſeruant vnwilling to permit ſuch humility, pulled away her

foote to auoid it, but ſhe did it ſo rudely, that ſhe gaue the holy virgin a daſh on the face: yet ſo farre was this Saint from being offended therewith, that on the contrary ſhe mildly tooke the foote of the ſeruant againe, and kiſſed the ſole therof. Thus did this true eſpouſe of God accompliſh the doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt, & the example which he left, when he waſhed the feete of his Apoſtles.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the voluntary pouerty of the Virgin S. Clare, and of her zeale to that holy vertue.
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               THIS holy virgin made an vnion & correſpondence betweene her pouerty in all externall thinges, and her holy pouerty of ſpirit; and firſt at the beginning of her conuerſion ſhe made ſale of her patrimony, and birth-right, all which diſtributing vnto the poore of Ieſus Chriſt, ſhe reſerued nothing to herſelfe. Hauing ſo abandoned all the world exteriourly, and inriched her ſoule

interiourly, freed from the burthen of worldly affayres, ſhe ran farre more lightly after Ieſus Chriſt, and thereby contracted ſuch an inuiolable amity with holy pouerty, that ſhe would haue poſſeſſion of no other thing then her glorious ſpouſe Ieſus Chriſt, nor would ſhe permit her ſpirituall daughters to poſſeſſe any thing els. And with this Euāgelical traffique, ſhe purchaſed the moſt pretious pearle of celeſtiall deſire, in place of all the other thinges, which ſhe had ſold, acknowledging, that the ſame could in no ſort be inioyed togeather with the diſtraction, and occupation of temporall things.
               Giuing inſtructions to her Religious, ſhe would ſometimes ſay vnto them, that this their company

ſhould be then grateful to God, and become very rich in pouerty, and ſhould by ſuch meanes conſerue it ſelfe firme and ſtable, if it were alwayes fortifyed, and enuironed with the rampiers & ſtrong bulwarkes of pouerty. She alſo admoniſhed her beloued daughters in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, to conforme themſelues to him, lying poore in the bed of pouerty, who was no ſooner borne, but was by the moſt ſacred virgin his Mother layd in a ſtraite Cribbe.
               Now deſiring to call her Rule by the tytle of Pouerty, ſhe demaunded of Pope Innocent the fourth the priuiledge of Pouerty, who as a magnanimous Prelate reioycing at the great feruour of this holy virgin, exceedingly commended

this her deuotion, aſſuring himſelfe that the like priuiledge had neuer byn demaunded of the Apoſtolike ſea. And to the end a new & extraordinary fauor might anſwere this new and vnacuſtomed demaund, the holy Pope with an exceeding contentment vvrote with his owne hand the firſt Pa
                     •
                  
                  tent of the priuiledge; which Pope Gregory the ninth his predeceſſor of holy memory had alſo done, who with a Fatherly affection louing this Eſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, once gaue her counſayle, in conſideration of diuers alterations of matters, and the ſtrange euents of rymes, yea and in regard of the perills of future ages, to be content that her Order might haue ſome poſſeſſions, himſelfe offering to

beſtow it vpon them: but ſhe couragiouſly withſtood it, and as a true, poore, and legitimate daughter of the holy Patriarch poore S. Francis, would neuer accord therevnto.
               The Pope alleadging, that if ſhe feared the breach of her vow, he would abſolue her theerof: but this virgin anſwered very humbly in this manner. Holy Father I ſhall be very ioyfull, if it pleaſe your Holynes to abſolue me of all my ſinnes, but to free me from performing the Counſayles of God, I will accept no abſolution. This holy virgin with an exceeding ioy receiued the morſels of bread which the Religious brought from begging, and had gotten for the loue of God: but ſhe was much troubled,

when ſhe ſaw whole loaues; labouring much to conforme herſelfe in all things to perfect pouerty with him, who was poorly and nakedly Crucified: & in ſuch ſort, that no tranſitory thing might at any tyme ſeparate the moſt poore virgin from her beloued, nor hinder her from her moſt ardent feruour to follow our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               
                  Of the miracles of the pouerty of the glorious S. Clare.
                  
               
               CHAP. IX.
               IT hapned one day that the glorious virgin S. Clare knew, that there was but one loafe of bread in her Couent, and ſo the houre

of dinner being come, ſhe called the ſiſter that was the Deſpenſier, and willed her to cut the loafe ſhe had in her cuſtody in two, and to ſend the one halfe to the Religious that were without, and to keep the other for themſelues, vvhereof ſhe ſhould make fifty portions, there being ſo many Religious, & then ſhould ſet it vpon the table of pouerty: whereunto the Deſpenſier anſwered, that the miracles of Ieſus Chriſt were needfull to make ſo many portions of ſo ſmall quantity of bread: but S. Clare replyed▪ ſaying, Daughter doe only what I doe comaund thee.
               The ſiſter went preſently to effect the commaundmēt of her Abbeſſe, who in the meane while togeather with all the other Religious

applyed themſelues to prayer, preſenting their deuotions, & tears to their ſpouſe Ieſus Chriſt, and inſtantly by his infinit bounty the little morſells of bread ſo augmented in the handes of the Deſpenſier that they ſufficed to feed al the Religious.
               It hapned another tyme that the ſeruantes of Ieſus Chriſt wanted oyle, ſo that they had not ſufficient to dreſſe meate for the ſicke. S. Clare being aduertiſed of this neceſſity tooke a pot, which (as miſtris of humility) ſhe waſhed with her owne handes, then ſent it to the turne wheele, that a Religious man there might take it, to go, and demaūd oyle for the loue of God. Hauing to this effect cauſed a Religious mā to be called to ſend him, (as

matters doe not ſucceed as men propoſe, but according to the pleaſure of the diuine, and mercifull prouidence) S. Clare hauing recommended this neceſſity to Almighty God, the ſayd Religious found the pot full of pure oyle; which perceiuing he thought the Religious within had required it without need; & with a kind of murmure he ſayd: I know not why the ſiſters haue called me, their pot being ful of oyle▪ ſo that the miracle was diſcouered. Almighty God did often alſo by extraordinary means ſupply the neceſſityes of his poore ſeruants by the meritorious prayers of S. Clare.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Of the austere mortifications, abſtinences, and faſts of S. Clare.
                  
               
               CHAP. X.
               I Doubt whether it be not more expedient to conceale, then to diuulge the admirable affliction, and rude pennance of S. Clare, becauſe this holy virgin hath performed ſuch extreme mortifications, that many, who ſhall reade them, acknowledging themſelues cowardes, and ouercome in this conflict, (as we are all) and put into admiration of theſe marueylous actes, will perhapps call in queſtion her proweſſe, which is to oppugne the very truth. Is it not a great matter, that vſing one only

habit, all patched, and a poore cloake of the groſſeſt cloath, ſhe rather couered her body, then defended it from the importunityes of the ſeaſons? But it is more admirable, that ſhe neuer wore ſtockings, ſhooes, nor any other things on her feete after ſhe became Religious. It was alſo a ſtrange matter that ſhe faſted daily, and neuer fayled for whatſoeuer occaſion that hapned. She neuer lay vpon mattreſſe, though that were no ſinguler prayſe vnto her, all her Religious doing the like.
               This eſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt wore more then the reſt, a hayre-cloath as great as halfe a tunicke, made of hogges haire, the haire being halfe ſhorne, next her fleſh. She alſo wore a hayre-cloath, which a Religious

very importunatly once borrowed of her, but prouing it to be ſo rude, and ſharpe, ſhe reſtored it three dayes after to S. Clare more readily, then ſhe had ioyfully borrowed it. Her ordinary bed was the bare ground, except ſomtymes ſhe ſlept vpon dry branches or twigges, vſing for a pillow a blocke of wood. But in regard that the rigorous life, wherwith ſhe afflicted her body, brought her to ſicknes, the holy Father S. Prancis commanded her to lye vpon chaffe. The rigour of her abſtinence in her faſtes was ſuch, that ſhe could not maintaine her body in life, ſo little did ſhe eate; wherby it is eaſy to iudge that ſhe was ſuſteyned by diuine vertue.
               When ſhe had her health, ſhe

faſted all the Aduent, and Lent, & from all Saints to Chriſtmas with bread and water, the ſondayes excepted: and which is more admirable, three dayes of the weeke, monday, wedneſday, and friday in the Lent, ſhe did eate nothing at all: ſo that the commaundment of faſt, and the rigour of her voluntary mortification, ſeemed to haue a contrariety ech with other, becauſe vpon the eue of a commaunded feaſt, ſhe vſed but bread & water: neyther muſt it be admired, if ſuch a rigour of ſo long continuance bred many infirmityes in this holy virgin, vvhich vvaſted her forces, and ouerthrew all the naturall ſtrength and health of her body.
               The deuout Religious daughters

of this holy mother had exceeding compaſſion of her, and they bitterly lamented the voluntary procuring of her owne death: for remedy wherof, S. Francis, & the Biſhop of Aſſiſiū forbad her thoſe three dayes of faſt, which euery weeke ſhe vſually inflicted vpon herſelfe, and commaunded her not to paſſe one day without taking at leaſt an once and a halfe of bread, to conſerue her life. And albeit ſuch grieuous afflictions of the body doe accuſtome to breed alſo ſome affliction to the hart, yet did the contrary ſucceed in her; for ſhe carryed a countenance ſo gratious and ioyfull in all her auſterities, that ſhe ſeemed eyther to haue no feeling of them, or not to feare any inconuenience thereof: yea ſhe

in a ſort made light of corporall afflictiōs: which ſufficiētly demōſtrated, that the ſpirituall ioy, wherwith ſhe was interiouly nouriſhed, appeared exteriourly in her holy face, becauſe the true loue of the hart maketh always corporall afflictions eaſy and light.
            
            
               
                  Of the deuotion, and ſpirituall proſit, which the fame of the Glorious S. Clare procured ouer all the world.
               
               CHAP. XI.
               THE fame of S. Clare began within little tyme to ſpread ouer all Italy, which cauſed women from all partes to begin to

run after the odour of the pretious liquour of her Sanctity. The Virgins after her example approached vnto Ieſus Chriſt, and made him preſents of their virginity: marryed vvomen endeauoured to liue more chaſt and vertuouſly: gentlewomen and Ladyes, contemning their fayre houſes, and ſumptuous tables, ſhut themſelues into monaſteries, eſteeming it a great glory to liue in ſtrict pennance for the loue of Ieſus Chriſt. This Saint was alſo a ſpur vnto men to excite in them a violent feruent, and principally to youth, that began to take courage in the contempt of the world, & by exāple of the frayler ſexe, to fight agaynſt the temptations, and deceiptfull pleaſures of the fleſh. Many marryed perſons

with mutuall conſent obliged theſelues to continency, the men entering into couents of men, & the women into monaſteries of Religious women. The mother induced the daughter to ſerue Ieſus Chriſt, the daughter the mother, one ſiſter another, & briefly ech one by a holy enuy deſired to ſerue Ieſus Chriſt, all of them ſeeking to participate of the euangelicall life, which by this Eſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt vvas demonſtrated vnto them.
               An infinite nūber of virgins, that by her fame were induced to piety, vnable to become Religious, or to leaue their fathers houſes, indeauored yet to liue there more religiouſly, leading a regular life without rule. S. Clare by her exāple produced

ſuch & ſo many brāches of ſaluation, that it ſeemed the ſaying of the Prophet was to be accompliſhed in her: The fruits of the deſolate, and barren are farre greater, then of the marryed. Whiles theſe matters thus proceeded in Italy, the deſcent of this benediction, which diſtilled downe in the valley of Spoletum, grew by diuine prouidence to ſo ſpatious and large a flood, that the violent current therof ouer flowed al the Cittyes of the holy Church, ſo that the nouelty of ſuch admirable things, was ſpeedily diulged ouer all the world, & with ſuch prayſe, and admiration gaue ſuch ſplendour, that the nature of her vertues filled the chambers of great Ladies with beames of vnſpeakable charity, and penetrated

euen into the chambers of great Dutcheſſes; yea thoſe moſt pure beames of her brightnes pierced into the very cabinetts of Queenes, and Princeſſes; and that in ſuch ſort, that eminency of bloud, and height of nobility ſubmitted, and debaſed it ſelfe to follow the ſtepps of this glorious virgin, many reiecting the greatnes of their honour, and the ſublimity of their eſtates; ſo that ſome Ladyes, who could haue byn marryed to Kings and Dukes, induced by the fame of S. Clare, tooke vpon them the practiſe of ſtrict pennance, and many already marryed to men of great nobility, deſired in their eſtate to imitate this ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt.
               An infinit number alſo of Citties

were by this exāple adorned with monaſteries of young women: the fieldes, and mountaynes were enriched and inobled with the ſtructures of theſe celeſtiall buildings: The exerciſe and honour of chaſtity did multiply in the world, S. Clare carrying the ſtādard of the order of virgins, which being then almoſt extinguiſhed, she reſtored to perfection, renewing it by the bleſſed flowres of her example & conuerſation. But returning to the hiſtory, let vs ſpeake of the perfection of the prayer of this glorious virgin, by meanes wherof ſhe obteyned of God ſo great graces for her ſelfe, and her daughters.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the feruent and perfect prayer of the virgin S. Clare.
                  
               
               CHAP. XII.
               AS Saint Clare was mortifyed in her fleſh, and farre more from all corporall recreations, ſo did ſhe cōtinually buſy herſelfe in deuotions, and diuine prayſes. This virgin had fixed, & imprinted the ſubtility of her feruent deſire in the eternall light, and as ſhe was remote from earthly occupations, and rumors, ſo did ſhe the more largely dilate the boſome of her ſoule to the influence of diuine grace. She continued in long prayer together with her religious after Complin, the riuers of teares

that flowed from her eyes awaking and bathing the harts of her companions: when the ſleep of others gaue her opportunity to be ſolitary, being often in prayer, she wold lay her face agaynſt the earth bathed with teares, kiſſing it ſweetly, and with ſuch contentment, that she ſeemed alwayes to hold in her armes her ſpouſe Ieſus Chriſt, at vvhoſe feete her teares trickled downe, and her kiſſes left their impreſſions.
               It hapned one time, that as this holy virgin powred out her teares in the ſilence of the night, the Angel of darknes appeared vnto her in figure of a blacke young man, ſaying, If thou continueſt this extreme weeping thou wilt become blynd, wherto she anſwered, he that is to

ſee God, cannot be blynd: wherwith the diuell being confounded vaniſhed & fled. The ſame night this Saint being in prayer after Mattines, all bathed in teares, the Tēpter appeared againe vnto her, and ſayd, Weepe not ſo much, vnles thou wilt haue thy braynes to melt, and diſtill in ſuch ſort, that thou ſhalt auoyd them at thy eyes and noſtrels, & therwith ſhall thy noſe be croked. S. Clare with great feruour anſwered him, ſaying, He that ſerueth Ieſus Chriſt can haue no crookednes, and preſently the wicked ſpirit diſappeared.
               Many ſignes did diſcouer, and make knowne the great alteration ſhe receiued in herſelfe, in feruour of her prayer, & how ſweet & delectable the diuine bounty was vnto

her in this ioy & holy conuerſation: for when ſhe returned from prayer, ſhe with admirable contentmēt brought words inflamed with ſhe fire of the altar of God, which kindled the harts of her Religious, and procured in them a great admiration at this extreme ſweetnes that appeared from of her face. It is without doubt, that Almighty God had coupled, & conioyned his ſweetnes with her pouerty, and did manifeſt exteriorly in her ſoule what was interiourly repleniſhed with diuine light. In this manner did ſhe ordinarily liue full of ſupreme delights, paſſing ouer this deceiptfull world with her noble ſpouſe Ieſus Chriſt, and being placed vpon this wheele of motion, ſhe was theron ſuſteyned with an

aſſurance, and firmity of vertue, very ſtable; and preſerued with the celeſtiall eleuation of her ſoule in the height of heauē, keeping the treaſure of glory ſecurely ſhut vp within a veſſel of fleſh heere below vpon earth.
               This holy virgin accuſtomed to call vp the yonger Religious a little before Mattines, & to awaken them with the ordinary ſigne, to excite them very often to prayſe God. All her Religious ſleeping, ſhe did watch, lighted the lampe, and rung at mattins, ſo that negligence found no entrance into her monaſtery: nor ſloath had there any place. She alſo by the ſting of ſharpe reprehenſion, and of her liuely and effectuall examples, expelled tepidity, and irkeſomnes

in prayer, and the ſeruice of God.
            
            
               
                  How the Mores were expelled the Monaſtery by the prayers of Saint Clare.
                  
               
               CHAP. XIII.
               THIS being the place, where we ſhould record the miracles of this holy virgin, it is not conueuient that we pretermit them in ſilence; for as the marueilous effects of her prayers were veritable, ſo alſo are they worthy of honour and reuerence. In the time of the Emperour Federike the ſecond, the holy Church in diuers places indured great perſecutions, but particulerly in the valley of Spoletū, which being ſubiect to the

Roman Church, dranke of the veſſel of wrath by this miſcheuous tyrant, his Captaynes and ſouldiers being ſcattered ouer the feildes as graſſe hoppers with ſword to murther people, and with fire to burne their houſes. The impiety of this Emperour did ſo augment, that he had aſſembled all the Mores that dwelt vpon the mountaines, and amongſt the deſerts, to make himſelfe the more fearefull to his vaſſells: & after he had by large promiſes gayned theſe Mores, and diſpoſed of them in diuers places, he gaue them at length for retire a very auncient, but ruinated Citty, which yet to this preſent is called Mourades Mores, which they fortified, and then thither retyred about twenty thouſand fighting mē,

who did much miſchiefe ouer all Apulia, and in other Chriſtian places.
               Theſe enemyes of the faith of Ieſus Chriſt came one day vnexpectedly towards the Citty of Aſſiſium, who being already cloſe at the gates▪ a great number of them came to the monaſtery of S. Damian, as a lewd and diſloy all nation, that continually thirſteth after the bloud of Chriſtians, and dareth to commit villanouſly all kind of execrable actes, without eyther ſhame of men, or feare of God. Theſe Mores then brake euen into the monaſtery of S▪ 
                  Clare, where ſhe was with her Religious daughters, who had their harts ſurpriſed with an extreme terror; but much more, whē they heard the barking

and cry of thoſe dogges ſo neere them, ſo that they were euen dying with the apprehenſion, not knowing where to ſeeke reliefe, nor of whome to hope for deliuerance frō ſo eminent peril, but only by the merits of their holy Mother, whome with infinit ſighes & teares they aduertiſed of what they heard and ſaw.
               This holy virgin (though ſicke) incouraged her Religious, & cauſed herſelfe with incredible conſtancy to be carryed to the gate of her monaſtery, at the entry wherof, in ſight of all her enemies, ſhe with great reuerence placed the moſt bleſſed Sacrament of the Euchariſt in the Pix, before which falling proſtrate vpon the earth, ſhe with aboundance of teares thus

ſpake to her beloued ſpouſe Ieſus Chriſt▪ Is it poſſible (my God,) thy will ſhould be, that theſe thy ſeruants, who cannot vſe materiall weapons to defend themſelues, & whome I haue heere brought vp, and nourſed in thy holy loue, ſhould now be deliuered into the power of the infidell Mores? O my God preſerue them if thou pleaſe, and me likewiſe; for albeit thy diuine maieſty hath committed them to my gouernement, yet it is not in my power to defend them from ſo great a perill, ſith this protection cannot be, but by a worke of thine omnipotency: therfore doe I recommend them to thy diuine maieſty with al the affection that I am able.
               As ſoone as this holy virgin had

ſent theſe prayers vnto heauen, ſhe heard a voice ſo delicate, as if it had bin of a ſucking child that ſaid, I wil protect you for euer. The holy mother did not yet giue ouer to preſet her prayers ſaying: my God I humbly beſeech thee, if ſo it be thy holy will, to preſerue, and defend this thy Citty of Aſſiſium which doth nouriſh vs for the loue it beareth to thy diuine maieſty. Wherto God anſwered, this Citty ſhall ſuffer much, but in the end I will by my fauour defend it. Saint Clare hauing heard ſo gratious newes, lifted vp her face bathed with teares and comforted her beloued daughters, ſaying: Deare ſiſters, I aſſure you that no euill ſhall befall you, only be carefull to haue a firme faith, and confidence

in Ieſus Chriſt. The diuine aſſiſtāce making no long delay, for the preſumption and rage of the Mores was in continently cooled, ſo that a ſuddaine vnknowne terrour hauing ſurpriſed them, they ſpeedily retyred ouer the walles, which they had ſcaled, to enter. They being thus by the vertue of the prayers of Saint Clare expelled, ſhe priuately called the Religious, that had heard the ſaid voice of God, and commaunded them, that howſoeuer it were, they ſhould not diuulge what they had heard during her life.
            
            
               
               
                  How the Citty of Aſsiſiū was at another tyme deliuered by the prayers of this holy virgin.
               
               CHAP. XIIII.
               VPON another time, one of the principall Captaynes of the Emperour Frederike called Vitalis Auerſa, a man very ambitious of glory, full of courage, and a notable Captaine, conducted his troupes to beſiege Aſſiſium, & hauing inuironed it, he propoſed to waſt, & ſpoile the plaine Countrey thereabout, making a totall ruine to the very trees which were hewed downe; and then laying his ſeige, he vttered menacing

and vaunting oathes, that he wold not ſtirre thence, till he had giuen the Citty a victorious aſſault: and this ſiege ſo long continued, that the beſeiged began to looſe courage, as wanting many thinges extremely needfull vnto thē? wheroſ the ſeruāt of Ieſus Chriſt being aduertiſed, ſighing in her hart, ſhe called all her Religious, to whom ſhe thus diſcourſed: My deare ſiſters, know that all our neceſſities haue euer bin ſupplied by the charity of this Citty, ſo that we ſhould be very vngratefull, if we ſhould not according to our ability aſſiſt them in this extreme neceſſity: then ſhe commanded to be brought her aſhes, and all her Religious to diſcoife their heades▪ and to giue them example, ſhe began to couer her

bare head with aſhes, wherin all the other Religious following her, ſhe ſaid: goe yee to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and with the greateſt humility, and moſt feruent prayers that you can poſſible, demaund of him the deliuerance of your Citty.
               It cānot be expreſſed, with what feruour and teares theſe deuout Virgins inceſſantly offered their prayers, vnto God the ſpace of one entiere day and night, demaunding mercy in behalfe of the ſaid Citty beſeiged by their enemies. Theſe prayers and teares were of ſuch force and vertue, that the omnipotent bounty and mercy had compaſſion of them, and from the day following ſent them his puiſſant hand, and aſſiſtance in ſuch

ſort, that the enemies campe was defeated, & the Captaine conſtrained ſhamfully, & in deſpight of his forces, without ſound trompet to raiſe his ſeige: for he fled without euer troubling the Aſſiſians, being ſhortly after ſlaine.
            
            
               
                  Of the Reuerence & deuotion which S. Clare had to the most bleſsed Sacrament: and of the vertue of her prayers agaynst the Diuells.
               
               CHAP. XV.
               THE deuotion of Saint Clare towardes the moſt Holy Sacrament of the Altar was ſuch, that ſhe made it apparent in

many of her actions: for though ſhe were moſt grieuouſly ſicke in her bed, yet would ſhe ſo diſpoſe herſelfe therin, & be ſo propped, and ſtayed vp, that ſhe might conueniently ſpinne, an exerciſe which ſhe exceedingly affected, & wherin ſhe wholy imployed herſelfe; doing it ſo delicately, that with the threed of her labour ſhe cauſed to be wouen very curious, and fine cloath, which ſhe imployed in furniture for the Altar. She one time got made 50. Corporalls, which ſhe ſent in caſes of ſilke to many Churches of the valley of Spoletum. When ſhe was to receiue the moſt Bleſſed Sacrament, before ſhe preſented herſelfe therunto, ſhe was alwayes bathed in teares, and ſo with exceeding feare

approaching, she did reuerence him that was preſent in the Sacrament, as acknowledging him to be the ſame that gouerneth heauen & earth; therfore did the Diuells ſo much feare the prayers of the Eſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, S. Clare, as they haue ſuudry times declared.
               A very deuout womā of the Biſhopricke of Piſa came to the monaſtery of S. Damian, to thanke God and his ſeruant S. Clare, for hauing bin by her merits deliuered of fiue diuells that poſſeſſed her, which in going out of her body, confeſſed that the prayers of S. Clare did burne them, and to their great confuſion expelled them out of the humane bodies which they poſſeſſed.
            
            
               
               
                  Of a meruaylous conſolation which S. Clare receiued vpon the feaſt of the most holy Natiuity.
               
               CHAP. XVI.
               AS the glorious S. Clare was alwayes in her ſicknes with a liuely memory myndfull of her beloued Ieſus; ſo was ſhe correſpondently viſited by him in all her neceſſities. Once in the night of the Natiuity, when all the world and Angells did ſo ſolemnely feaſt for the birth of our Redeemer, all the Religious went to the quier to Mattines, and left their mother accompanyed only with her grieuous infirmity: wherfore

hauing begun to meditate vpon the great miſtery of that night, and lamenting exceedingly, that ſhe could not aſſiſt at the diuine ſeruice, ſhe ſighing ſayd: O my God, thou ſeeſt how I remaine here alone; and ending this, ſhe began to heare the Mattines that were ſung in the Church of Saint Francis in Aſſiſium, very diſtinctly vnderſtanding the voice of the Religious; and the very ſound of the Organs: yet was ſhe not ſo neare the ſaid Church, as ſhe might humanly heare what was ſung there; but it muſt neceſſarily be concluded, that this was miraculouſly done in one of theſe two ſortes, eyther that the ſinging of the ſaid Religious was by the will of God carried to S. Clare, or her hearing was

extended extraordinarily, & by the ſpeciall grace of God, euen to our Lady of Angells neere vnto Aſſiſium.
               But this Saint was further fauored by a diuine reuelation which exceedingly comforted and reioyced her, for ſhe was by almighty God eſteemed worthy to ſee in ſpirit his holy Cribbe. The morning following, her Religious coming to ſee her, ſhe ſayd; Deare ſiſters, bleſſed for euer be our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that it hath pleaſed him not to leaue me alone, as you haue done; but know that by the grace of his diuine maieſty, I haue heard all the ſeruice that this night hath byn performed in the Church of our holy Father S. Francis.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Of the ſpirituall doctrine, wherwith S. Clare nourſed her daughters.
               
               CHAP. XVII.
               THE virgin S. Clare acknowledged, that ſhe was committed to the pallace of the great King, for gouerneſſe and miſtres of his deare eſpouſes, therfore did ſhe teach them a ſublime doctrine, comforting, & aſſiſting them with ſuch loue and pitty, as with words cānot be expreſſed. Firſt ſhe taught them to cleare their ſoules of all rumors of the world, that they might the more freely attaine to the high ſecrets of God. She alſo taught

them to haue no affection to their carnall kindred, and intierely to forget their ownehouſe, the better to pleaſe Ieſus Chriſt. She admoniſhed them alſo to ſurmount and miſpriſe the neceſſities of their bodies, & to get a habit of repreſſing the deceiptes, and appetites of the fleſh, by the bridle of reaſon. She likewiſe taught them that the ſubtill enemy armed vvith malice, continually addreſſeth his hidden ſnares to ſurpriſe the pure ſoules, and that he tempteth the pious in another ſort then worldlings.
               Finally ſhe would haue them ſo imployed in handy labour for certaine houres, that they might afterwards be more prompt, and better prepared to the deſire of their Creatour by the exerciſe of prayer,

which after their labour they ſhold vndertake, not leauing for ſuch payne the fire of holy loue, but rather expelling by it the tepidity of deuotion already purchaſed. There was neuer ſeene a ſtricter obſeruation of ſilence then amongſt them, nor a greater forme, and example of vertue. There was neuer ſeene done in this holy houſe one act of vanity, neyther by wordes, nor ſignes; nor was there diſcouered by any vaine diſcourſe any deſire of lightnes, ſo much were they mortifyed, their holy Miſtres giuing good example by wordes, and pious, and briefe documents; likewiſe teaching her diſciples feruent deſires, and admoniſhing them to poſſeſſe, and conſerue them vnder the key & cuſtody of ſtrict ſilence.

By meanes of deuout preachers ſhe procured to her daughters the holy word of God, wherof her owne was not the leaſt part, ſhe being filled with contentment and ioy, when ſhe heard the word of God preached, and would with ſuch deuotion, and conſolation, reioice in the memory of her ſweeteſt ſpouſe Ieſus Chriſt; that one time hearing the ſermon of brother Philip de Adria, a moſt famous preacher, there was ſeene before this holy virgin a moſt beautifull child, which there remained during almoſt all the ſermon, comforting her with his ioifull delectations, of which apparition ſhe receiued ſuch a ſweetnes and delight, as ſhe could no way explicate.
               
                  
Albeit this moſt prudent virgin had neuer ſtudyed, yet did ſhe much delight to heare a learned man preach, vnderſtanding very well that vnder the wordes of ſcience lay hidden the ſweetnes of ſpirit, which herſelfe ſubtily obteined, & taſted vvith much more guſt. She accuſtomed to ſay, that the Sermon of whoſoeuer preaching the word of God was exceeding profitable to ſoules, conſidering that it is no leſſe prudence to know how ſometimes to gather beautifull, and ſweet flowers from amongſt groſſe, and rude thornes, then to eate the wholſome fruits of a good plant.
               Pope Gregory the ninth one time at the inſtance of diuers Prelates cōmaunded, that no Religious man

ſhould preach at the monaſtery of poore Religious women, without his expreſſe permiſſion: wherat the pittifull mother complayning, in regard that thence forward her deuout & Religious daughters ſhold ſeldome be ſpiritually fed vvith holy doctrine, with teares ſhe ſaid: let then all my Religious be taken hence, ſince they are taken away, who gaue vs the food of ſpirituall life; withall ſending away the Religious, that appertained to her monaſtery to ſerue them in getting almes abroad, refuſing to haue Religious, that ſhould prouide them bread to relieue the body, ſith they were depriued by this meanes of all ſpirituall teachers that gaue thē bread to nouriſh their ſoules; wherof his Holines being aduertiſed,

he preſently reuoked his former prohibition, referring all to the diſpoſition of the generall of the Friars Minors.
               S. Clare had not only a prouident care of her Religious daughters ſoules, but of their bodies alſo that were feeble and tender, for whoſe neceſſary wantes ſhe daly prouided with exceeding feruour and charity; ſhe oftentimes in the night, when it was cold, going to viſit and couer them whiles they ſlept; and if ſhe found any one ouer much benummed with cold, or otherwiſe in il diſpoſition through ſtrict obſeruation of the common rigour, ſhe inſtantly commaunded her to take ſome recreation, till her neceſſities were ſatisfied.
               If any of her Religious daughters

were any time afflicted, or much grieued in mind through temptations, or were ſorrowfull and melancholy, ſhe would call her apart, and moſt louingly comfort her. She would ſometimes fall proſtrate herſelfe at the feete of thoſe that were heauy and afflicted, therby to put away the force of their griefe by her motherly cheriſhings, for which they in all ſubmiſſion yealding themſelues to this their holy Mother, did not proue vngratefull. They likewiſe reuerenced the office of Prelature in their Miſtres, following all their life time the conduct of ſo diligent and ſecure a guide, directing their actions by the eſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, admiring with all the excellency of ſuch ſanctity & charity.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the deuotion which Pope Gregory the ninth had to the holy virgin S. Clare: and of a letter which he wrote vnto her whiles he was yet Cardinall.
               
               CHAP. XVIII.
               POPE Gregory the ninth had a meruailous confidence in the prayers of S. Clare, hauing experienced their great vertue & efficacy: and oftentimes when he was in any difficulty, both whiles he was Cardinall & Biſhop of Hoſtia, and afterwards when he was Pope, he would by letters recommend himſelfe to this glorious virgin, demaunding help of her, knowing

aſſuredly of what importance her aſſiſtance was; this being in him not only a great humility, but alſo worthy to be diligently imitated, to ſee the vicar of Ieſus Chriſt vpon earth to begge help of a ſeruant of God, in recommending himſelfe to her prayers.
               This great Paſtour knew very well what diuine loue could doe, & how freely pure virgins do find the port of the conſiſtory of the diuine maieſty open. There is exſtant a very deuout letter of this Pope written to S. Clare, whiles he was Cardinal, which is heere inſerted, to make it appeare that the ſpirit of God made his reſidence in this Prelate, and what deuotion he carryed to the ſanctity the glorious virgin Saint Clare.
               
               
                  
To the moſt deare ſiſter in Ieſus Chriſt, and mother of his holines, Siſter Clare, the ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt; Vgolin miſerable ſinner, & Biſhop of Hoſtia recommendeth himſelfe, whatſoeuer he is, and what he may be. Well beloued ſiſter in Chriſt Ieſus, ſince the houre, that the neceſſity of my returne ſeparated me frō your holy ſpeaches, and depriued me of that pleaſure to conferre with you of celeſtiall treaſures, I haue had much ſorrow of hart, aboundance of teares in mine eyes, and haue felt an extreme griefe; and that in ſuch ſort, that if I had not found at the feete of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt the conſolation of his ordinary piety, I feare I had fallen into ſuch anguiſhes, as my ſpirit would haue

forſaken me, and my ſoule vtterly melted away; and not without reaſon, becauſe that ioy failed me, with which I diſcourſed with your good company of the ſacred body of our ſvveet Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, and of his preſence vpon earth, celebrating the feaſt of Eaſter with you, and the other ſeruants of our Lord.
               And as whiles our bleſſed Sauiour by his dolorous paſſion and death was abſent from the preſence of his dilciples, they were poſſeſſed with an extreme griefe & affliction; ſo doth your abſence procure my deſolation. And though I acknouvledge my ſelfe a grieuous ſinner, conſidering the prerogatiue of your meritts, and the rigour of your moſt holy Religion; yet

without doubt, the multitude of my ſinnes is ſuch, and ſo much haue I offended God the vniuerſall Lord, that I am not worthy to be vnited to the glory of the elect, nor to be ſequeſtred from vvorldly occupations, if your tears & prayers doe not obtaine me pardon of my ſinnes; and therfore to you I commit my ſoule, to you I commend my ſpirit, as Ieſus Chriſt vpon the Croſſe recommended his ſpirit to his heauenly Father, to the end that in the terrible day of the vniuerſall iudgement you giue an account for me, if you be not diligent & carefull of my ſaluation: for I confidently belieue, that you may obtaine of the ſoueraigne iudge whatſoeuer by your deuotion and teares you ſhall at any time

aſke or demaund of him. The Pope ſpeaketh not of coming to Aſſiſium, as I deſire, but I purpoſe to viſit you and your ſiſters at my firſt commodity. Recommend me I pray you to Agnes your ſiſter & mine, and to all your other ſiſters in Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               
                  Of the most feruent loue of Ieſus Christ which inflamed the hard of Saint Clare: and how the Diuell tormented her: of an extaſy wherin she continued a night and two dayes togeather.
               
               CHAP. XIX.
               VVHEN S. Clare heard any ſpeake of the paſſion of our Redeemer Ieſus

Chriſt, ſhe oftentimes was accuſtomed to weepe in compaſſion, in ſuch ſort, that out of the ſacred wounds ſhe would ſomtimes draw dolorous feelings and affections, and at other times vnſpeakable ioyes & conſolations of admirable ſweetnes; and the croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, which with her deareſt ſpouſe ſhe carryed in her ſoule, the weight thereof gaue her ſo much more taſt of contentment as ſhe felt more griefe. The great aboundance of teares, which ſhe powred out for the moſt bitter paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, kept her ſomtimes out of herſelfe; and the internall loue, which ſhe had imprinted in her hart, in manner continually repreſented vnto her Ieſus Chriſt crucified.
               
                  
She ordinarily gaue example by workes, of what ſhe taught her Religious by wordes: for admoniſhing them often, and inſtructing them likewiſe ſecretly touching ſome exerciſe, before ſhe had ended her diſcourſe, ſhe was ſeene to power out of her eyes aboundance of teares. Among the houres of the diuine office that are ſung in the Church, ſhe was preſent with greateſt deuotion at the ſixt and ninth, by reaſon that at ſuch houres ſhe vvas crucifyed with her Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt.
               The holy virgin retyring one tyme to her priuate deuotion after the ninth houre, the diuell came to her, & did beate her outragiouſly, hurting her withall ſo much in the face, that her eye was all bloudſhoot,

the ſigne remayning vpon her cheeke: but S. Clare omitted not for that to perſeuer in her prayer. And to the end ſhe might with the more deuotion apply herſelfe to the ſweet contentments which ſhe conceiued in the often meditating of Ieſus Chriſt crucifyed, ſhe ordinarily contemplated the ſacred myſtery of the fiue woundes: and therfore ſhe learned by hart the office of the holy Croſſe, as the true louer of the holy Croſſe of Saint Francis had taught her. She accuſtomed to vveare next her naked fleſh a girdle of thirteene knottes, vvhereunto alſo were little ſtones faſtned in forme of knottes: vvhich ſhe did in memory of the ſacred vvoundes and dolours of our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt.
               
                  
One Lent vpon Maunday Thurſday, wherupon our Lord Ieſus Chriſt ſhewed a particuler loue to his diſciples, at the houre of the agony, that our Redeemer did ſweet bloud and water in the garden, this holy Virgin retyred into her Oratory full of deep ſorrow, ioyning herſelfe with Almighty God in prayer, as if ſhe had ſeene him praying, and as if by contemplation of the ſoule of Ieſus Chriſt ſorrowfull euen to death, ſhe herſelfe had felt and ſuffered his priſon, his deriſions, his iniuries, reproaches, affrontes, beatings, ſentence, Croſſe, and moſt ignominious death, carrying in her memory a like ſorrow: wherfore as wholly tranſported ſhe ſate vpon a ſtraw bedd, and all that night, and the

day following, ſhe was ſo abſorpt and rapt out of herſelfe, that her eyes being open and without motion, ſhe ſeemed to hold them fixed in one place, and remayned ſo inſenſible, being conioyntly crucifyed with Ieſus Chriſt, that a Religious, familiar vnto her, coming often to ſee if the wanted any thing, ſhe found her alwayes in one manner.
               But vpon the night of holy Saturday, this deuout Religious came to her deare mother with a candle, partly by ſignes, and partly by wordes, making her the beſt ſhe could to vnderſtand the commaundment that the holy Father S. Francis gaue her, that ſhe ſhould not let paſſe one day without taking & eating ſomthing, ſo that in

the preſence of this Religious, Saint Clare, as if ſhe came out of another place ſayd vnto her, what need haue you to light this candle, is it not day? wherto the Religious anſwered: Mother the night of holy Thurſday is paſt, as alſo good Friday, and we are now in the night of Eaſter eue; the Saint replyed, my daughter bleſſed be this ſleep, which Almighty God at length after my long deſire hath graunted me, but I admoniſh and commaūd you, not to ſpeake hereof to any creature liuing, whiles I ſhall liue in this world.
            
            
               
               
                  Of many miracles wrought by S. Clare, by the ſigne and vertue of the holy Croſſe.
               
               CHAP. XX.
               OVR Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt recompenced well the pious deſires, and good workes of his beloued virgin S. Clare: for as ſhe was inflamed with an infinite loue of the miſtery of the holy Croſſe, ſo by the vertue and power of the ſame Croſſe, ſhe became noble in the ſignes and miracles of Ieſus Chriſt, that oftentimes in making the ſigne of the holy Croſſe vpon the ſicke, they were miraculuoſly cured, and inſtantly healed of

ſortes of diſeaſes.
               A Religious man called Stephen, hauing a hoat feuer that exceedingly vexed him, the holy Father S. Francis ſent hin to S. Clare, to make the ſigne of the Croſſe vpon him, as one that well knew her perfection and verue, which he exceedingly honored. Now the vertuous Lady Hortulana Mother to Saint Clare, was then in the couent of S. Damian, for a little before, conſidering that her daughters had eſpouſed Ieſus Chriſt, ſhe came to them to Religion, where this happy Lady ſerued as a true gardiner in the garden incloſed with thoſe Virgins, our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, with the glorious virgin Agnes ſiſter to Saint Clare, and the other Religious, all repleniſhed with the holy

Ghoſt, to whome the holy Father Saint Francis ſent many diſeaſed, whome they cured, after hauing made vpon them the ſigne of the holy Croſſe, which they moſt hartily honored. The ſayd Religious then being ſent to S. Clare, ſhe as the daughter of obedience thereto commaunded by the holy Father S. Francis, preſently made vpon him the ſigne of the Croſſe; then left him a little to ſleep in the Church, in the place where ſhe was accuſtomed to pray, and the Religious hauing a little repoſed aroſe ſound, ſecure, and freed of his infirmity: then he returned to Saint Francis, by whome he had byn ſent to S. Damian, & conſequently was cured.
               A child of three years old of the

Citty of Spoletum called Matthew, had by chaunce a ſtone thurſt into his noſe, whence it could not be gotten out, ſo that the child was in extreme perill, wherupon he was brought to Saint Clare who hauing made the ſigne of the Croſſe vpon him, the ſtone incontinently fell out of his noſe, and he was perfectly well.
               Another child likewiſe of Peruſia hauing a filme vpon his eyes was brought to S. Clare, who touching the eye of the child, and making the ſigne of the Croſſe thereupon, willed thē that had preſented the child vnto her to carry it vnto her Mother Hortulana, that ſhe might alſo make the ſigne of the Croſſe vpon it, which hauing done the eye became cleere, and being

purged of the filme that obſcured it, he was preſently cured: wherupon S. Clare affirmed, that this miracle was wrought by the merits of her mother, who finding ſuch glory to be attributed vnto her, reputed herſelfe vnworthy thereof.
               One of her Religious called Beneuenta, hauing had for 12. yeares togeather an impoſtume vnder her arme, which did purge by fiue ſeuerall iſſues, S. Clare had compaſſion therof, and made vpon her the ſigne of the holy Croſſe, then with her owne hands taking away the playſter, ſhe was cured of her long continued ſoares. Another of her Religious called Amia, being for more then a yeares ſpace afflicted with the dropſy, togeather

with an extreme paine in her ſides, and a burning feuer, S. Clare conceiued a very ſtrong compaſſion of her, and therefore hauing recourſe to her noble and infallible medicine, ſhe made vpon her body the ſigne of the holy Croſſe in the name of her beloued Ieſus Chriſt, and the Religious was perfectly cured. Another ſeruant of God borne at Peruſia had for two years togeather ſo loſt her voice, that one could ſcarſely heare her ſpeak; but hauing vnderſtood by a viſion which ſhe had the night of the aſſumption of our bleſſed Lady, that S. Clare ſhould cure her, the poore afflicted creature hauing very patiently expected the breake of day, repayred with a ſtrong confidence vnto that holy virgin, and

by ſignes craued her benediction, which fauour hauing obtained, her voice, which ſo long time ſhe had wanted, became as cleere and ſhrill as euer it had byn.
               Another Religious called Chriſtina, that had bin long time deafe in one of her eares, and hauing in vaine tryed many remedies, Saint Clare making the ſigne of the croſſe vpon her head, and with her hand touching her care, ſhe recouered her hearing as perfectly and clearly as before. Another Religious call Andrea had a diſeaſe in her throat, the griefe wherof procured her much impatience: it being admirable, that among ſo many prayers inflamed with diuine loue, their ſhould be a ſoule ſo could, & among ſuch prudent virgins one ſo

indiſcret and moderate.
               This Religious feeling herſelfe one night more tormented with her infirmity then ordinarily, afflicted & impatient, that her paine did rather increaſe then diminiſh, ſhe ſo cruſhed and preſſed her throat, making thereby appeare her intention to choake herſelfe, thinking by violence to expell that ſwelling, ſo to auoid longer torment, & through ignorance attempting to do more then was the will of God. But whiles that poore Religious buſied herſelfe in this folly, Saint Clare by diuine inſpiration had knowledge thereof, wherfore calling one of her Religious, ſhe vvilled her to haſten downe, boyle an egge in the ſhell, & cauſe ſiſter Andrea to ſwallow it, which

done to bring her to her preſence. The Religious inſtantly dreſſed the egge, and forth with brought it to the ſicke party, whome ſhe found little better then dead, hauing ſo cruſhed her throat, that her ſpeach was vtterly gone, yet ſhe made her ſwallow the egge ſo well as ſhe could, then rayſing her from her ſtraw bed, ſhe with much labour led her to Saint Clare, who thus ſpake vnto her; Wretched ſiſter confeſſe thee to God, & haue contrition, for what thou intendeſt to doe, & acknovvledge that Ieſus Chriſt wil giue thee health far better, then thou with thine owne handes hadſt purpoſed to doe: change this euill life into a better, for thou ſhalt neuer recouer another ſicknes that shal ſucceed this,

but ſhalt dye therof. Theſe words procured in this Religious a ſpirit of compunction and contrition, ſo that ſhe being intierly cured of this grieuous infirmity, amended her life, falling a little after into another ſicknes, which Saint Clare had foretold, wherof ſhe ended her life piouſly.
               It doth manifeſtly appeare by theſe examples, and by many other marueylous thinges, that the tree of the Croſſe of our bleſſed Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt was deeply planted in her hart, & that in a meruailous māner the fruits therof did interiourly recreate her ſoule, ſith the leaues did worke exteriourly ſuch remedies by the hands & merits of his glorious Saint.
            
            
               
               
                  How Saint Clare bleſſed bread, vpon which the ſigne of the Croſſe miraculouſly remayned.
               
               CHAP. XXI.
               SAINT Clare was a diſciple of the Croſſe, and of ſo notable ſame & ſanctity, that not only great Prelates & Cardinalls much deſired to ſee her, to heare and diſcourſe with her, for which cauſe they often viſited her; but the Pope himſelfe bare her alſo this affection, in ſo much that Pope Innocent the fourth repayred to her monaſtery, to heare of her, as a ſecretary of the holy Ghoſt, celeſtiall and diuine diſcourſes. And hauing a

long time conferred with her of matters of ſaluation, and of the prayſes of God, whiles they intertayned themſelues in ſo pious a diſcourſe, S. Clare cauſed dinner to be prepared, and the tables for the Religious to be couered, cauſing bread to be brought thither, with intention to procure the vicar of Ieſus Chriſt to bleſſe it, to be afterwards kept of deuotion. Their diſcourſe then being ended, S. Clare fell vpō her knees before the Pope, beſeeching him to bleſſe the bread. vvhereto his holines anſvvered: daughter Clare, I will that you bleſſe it your ſelfe making therupon the ſigne of the Croſſe: the Saint therto anſwered, moſt holy Father, pardon me if you pleaſe, for if I ſhould doe it, I ſhould deſerue ſharpe reprehenſion,

in preſuming to giue my benedictiō in preſence of your holines. The Pope againe replyed: well, that no preſumption be imputed vnto you, and that you may merit thereby, I command you by holy Obedience to bleſſe theſe loues, making vpon them the ſigne of the Croſſe. This daughter of obedience lifted vp her hand, making the ſigne of the Croſſe vpon the bread; whence inſued an admirable accident, for the Croſſe remayned vpon the bread, whereof part was eaten of deuotion, & the reſt reſerued as a holy Relique, which euent filled the Pope with admiration, for which he gaue thankes to God; then gaue his benediction to S. Clare, who receiued it with great humility, and was

much comforted withall.
            
            
               
                  Of many infirmityes of the glorious virgin S. Clare: of her weakenes; and how she was viſited by the Protectour.
               
               CHAP. XXII.
               THE Glorious virgin S. Clare had now forty yeares run the race of the moſt eminent vertue and practiſe of pouerty, hauing broken the alabaſter of her body in the moſt ſtrict priſon by faſting and rigorous diſciplines, and by this meanes filled the houſe of the holy Church with the moſt pretious oyntment of her vertues, wherwith ſhe drew after her an infinit

number of ſoules to the ſeruice of Ieſus Chriſt. And as ſhe already approached to the recompence of eternall glory, hauing ſupported diuers infirmities, and conſumed the forces of her body in her firſt yeares by the rigour of pennance, ſhe was alſo in her latter dayes oppreſſed, and afflicted with diuers grieuous ſickneſſes. And becauſe in the time of her health ſhe was alſo enriched in ſuch ſort with the merit of good workes, that being ſicke ſhe gayned the true riches of the merits of patience, ſhe yet inioyed the fruits of her vertues, that were ripened in afflictions and moleſtations, occaſioned by diuerſity of diſeaſes. But the vertue of her patience doth euidently appeare, in that hauing

byn twenty eight yeares togeather afflicted with diuers diſeaſes, ſhe was neuer heard to vtter the leaſt murmure or complaint: but continually were heard to proceed out of her mouth pious wordes, and thankes-giuing to Almighty God.
               Now being exceedingly weakened with infirmity, and euery moment ſeeming to her the drawing on of her life towardes an end, it pleaſed our Lord Ieſus Chriſt to prolonge it, till ſhe might be viſited by the eminent Prelates of the Roman Church, wherof ſhe was a ſeruant, and a ſpeciall child; for the Pope being yet at Lyons, and this Saint beginning to be more tormented with her infirmities, then ſhe was accuſtomed to be, a ſword of ſorrow pierced through

the ſoule of her beloued daughters. But a virgin, ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt, a very deuout Religious of the monaſtery of S. Paul, and order of S. Benedict, had at that time this viſion following. It ſeemed to her that ſhe did viſit S. Clare with all her ſiſters at Saint Damian, whome ſhe ſaw in a ſorrowfull, yet pretious bed, about which they all lamented expecting her death, and withall ſhe ſaw come to the bolſter of the ſayd bed a very beautifull woman, who ſayd to them that wept▪ my daughters weep not for her that is yet to liue, for ſhe cannot dye, till our Lord and all his diſciples doe come. A little after the Roman Court came to Peruſia, where the increaſe of S. Clares ſicknes being diuulged, the Cardinall

of Hoſtia haſtened with great diligence to viſit the Eſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, whoſe Father he was by office, gouernour by ſpeciall ſollicitude, foſterer and friend in moſt pure and chaſt amity; & he comforted her, and vvith his ovvne handes adminiſtring vnto her the moſt bleſſed Sacrament of the Euchariſt; and then made a very deuout ſermon to the Religious, S. Clare with great humility, & in the name of our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, beſeeching him to accept into his Protection that her family, & all her other poore ſiſters of other monaſteries; but aboue all ſhe moſt inſtantly beſought him, obtaine of the Pope, & the Colledge of Cardinalls, a priuiledge & confirmation of holy pouerty,

Whereto the Cardinall gaue his word, & as a faithfull Father of her Religiō, & one moſt deuout & affectionate to S. Clare, did afterwardes effect it: for Pope Innocent the fourth at her moſt inſtant requeſt, confirmed the Rule, which the holy Father S. Francis had inſtituted for her, as is formerly recorded, wherof S. Clare had neuer vntill then other confirmation written but that of the ſaid Cardinall, becauſe the Popes ſuppoſing to induce S. Clare, not to bynd her Religious to ſuch an extreme pouerty, did ſtill deferre to confirme her Rule by writing. But Innocent the fourth ſeing the perſeuerance, & laſt will of Saint Clare, graunted the ſame vnto her by a Bull, the eleuenth, and laſt yeare of his

reigne, as we haue before recorded. And the yeare being almoſt expired, the Pope came with his Cardinalls from Peruſia to Aſſiſium; whereby the firſt viſion touching the death of the holy virgin was accompliſhed. For the Pope being in his office more then a mā, by the authority which he hath of Ieſus Chriſt vpō earth, whoſe perſon he repreſenteth in the temple of the Church militant, the Cardinalls accompanying his Holines, repreſented the diſciples of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               
               
                  How Pope Innocent the fourth viſited Saint Clare in her laſt ſicknes, and gaue her abſolution.
               
               CHAP. XXIII.
               THE diuine prouidence wold no longer deferre the accompliſhment of the will of Saint Clare, but her Spouſe Ieſus Chriſt came to eleuate into his celeſtiall pallace his poore Eſpouſe & Pilgrime vpon earth, who deſired nothing more▪ that being deliuered of this mortall body, ſhe might haue the ſight, & full fruition of her moſt glorious ſpouſe Ieſus Chriſt in his celeſtiall Kingdome.

Now then the members of this ſacred virgin being by continuance of her ſicknes wholy decayed, there befell her a new weakenes, which being an euident token that ſhe should in short time be called of God, which ſhe vſed as a ladder to mount vp to eternall ſaluation: wherupon Pope Innocent the forth came to the monaſtery of S. Damian, accompanyed with many Cardinalls, to viſit the ſeruant of God, not doubting but she, whoſe life he had already approued, was the moſt perfect in ſanctity of all vvomen of his tyme; and therefore worthy to haue her death honored by his preſence. His holines then being entred, he went directly to the glorious Virgin, & comming neere to her bed, he gaue her his

hand to kiſſe, which fauour Saint Clare vvith exceeding ioy receiued.
               But beſides that, she with great humility beſought him to affoard her his feete to kiſſe: the Pope to content her ſat downe vpon a little bench, and deuoutly preſented vnto her his Apoſtolicall feete, vpon which this glorious Saint reuerently layd her face and mouth, moſt affectionatly kiſſing them: then with the ſerenity of an Angelicall countenance, ſhe demaunded of him remiſſion of all her ſinnes; wherto the Pope anſwered: would to God my deare ſiſter, I had no more need of ſuch a pardon: but finally he gaue her the benefit of abſolution, & the gift of his benediction, & then left her in peace.
               
                  
She hauing that morning receiued the moſt ſacred communion at the hands of the Prouinciall of the Friars Minors of that Prouince, with her hands ioyned togeather, & her eyes eleuated towards heauen, ſhe weeping ſaid to her Religious: My daughters, prayſe Almighty God for the benefit it hath pleaſed him to beſtow vpon me this day, which is ſuch, that the heauens & the earth are not ſufficient to recompence it, ſith this day I haue both receiued my Lord God, & am made worthy to ſee his Vicar vpon earth.
            
            
               
               
                  How S. Clare comforted her ſister S. Agnes.
                  
               
               CHAP. XXIIII.
               THE daughters were all about their mother, without whom they were in a ſhort tyme to remaine as orphans; the conſideration whereof deeply pierced their ſoules with a moſt bitter griefe, that neyther heauines of ſleep, nor hunger could withdraw thē frō the preſence of their mother; the preſent contentment, which they receiued in beholding her, making them forget to eate and ſleep, becauſe al their exerciſe was to weep, and particulerly her moſt deuout ſiſter Agnes, who was expreſly

come from the monaſterv, which ſhe had newly erected at Florence to be preſent at her death.
               Being then in this anguiſh, ſhe turned to wardes her ſiſter, & moſt inſtantly prayed her, not to depriue her of her preſence: wherto Saint Clare anſwered, Deare ſiſter, whome I cordially loue, ſith it hath pleaſed God that I depart, be you ioyfull, & weep no more, for I anſwere you, our Lord will ſhortly come to you, to viſit you with an exceeding conſolation before your death.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the death of the bleſſed Virgin S. Clare: and of a viſion, which one of her Religious ſaw.
               
               CHAP. XXV.
               THE holy virgin, and ſeruant of Ieſus Chriſt, was many dayes to wards the end of her life afflicted with diuers diſeaſes, the fayth and deuotion, which at that time ech one bare her, exceedingly increaſing, yea ſo farre forth, that ſhe was honored as a Saint, being ordinarily viſited by Cardinalls, and other Prelates: but which is more admirable to heare, hauing byn ſeauēteene dayes without force to receiue any ſuſtenance

that was preſented vnto her, ſhe vvas neuertheles ſo fortified of God, and incouraged of his diuine maieſty, that ſhe exhorted all thoſe that would comfort her, to be prompt in the ſeruice of God.
               A Religious man intending to comfort her, and to perſwade her to haue patience in ſo grieuous a ſicknes, that procured her ſo much torment, ſhe with a ſmiling countenance, and cleare voice anſwered him: brother, ſince the time that I knew the grace of my God, by the meanes of his moſt humble ſeruant Saint Francis, no payne hath byn troubleſome vnto me, no pēnance hath ſeemed difficult, nor any ſicknes irkſome.
               And as almighty God approached neere vnto her, and her ſoule

being as it were at the doore to goe forth, the bleſſed virgin wold haue the moſt pious and ſpirituall Friars Minors to be preſent, to diſcourſe vnto her of the dolorous and bitter paſſion of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, & by their pious words to inflame her hart more in the loue of God: wherfore ſome of them, who were vnto her true brethren in our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt were preſent, and among other brother Iuniperus, the familiar of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who often vttered vnto her ſuch fiery and inflamed words of the omnipotent God, that ſhe by his preſence being filled with an extreme ioy, one day demaunded of him, if he then, knevv nothing new from almighty God: wherupon brother Iuniperus opening

his mouth to anſwere her, there iſſued out of the fornace of his inflamed hart, infinite ſparkes of ſuch ſublime wordes, that this holy virgin receiued therof much conſolation. Finally turning her Angelicall face towardes her deare and beloued daughters & ſiſters there preſent, all of them bitterly weeping, ſhe recommended vnto them the pouerty of our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt in this her laſt paſſage, prayſing and thanking God for the infinit benefitts, which they had receiued of his diuine maieſty, which ſhe particulerly recounted vnto them; then ſhe gaue them all her benediction, and alſo to all the Religious of her monaſtery preſent and abſent, & likewiſe to all thoſe, who ſhould hereafter enter into her order.
               
                  
There were preſent two companions of S. Francis, to wit brother Angelus, who though much afflicted, did yet comfort the others, & the right ſimple brother Leo, who ceaſed not to kiſſe the bed of the holy virgin who was leauing the world, & was much lamēted of her daughters, becauſe they were left orphanes, and were no more in this life to ſee their moſt holy mother, and therfore they accompanyed her ſoule to heauen with aboundance of teares, without power to admit any other conſolation, then to deſire to goe with her: wher with being ſo afflicted, they could not without difficulty forbeare with their nailes to rent their faces, but not being permitted them to diſcharge themſelues of ſuch griefe

exteriourly, it did inflame in them a more burning fire within: for thoſe Eſpouſes of Ieſus Chriſt were ſufficiently mortifyed by rigour of Religion, albeit the force of griefe did conſtreine them to caſt forth lowd cryes and ſighes, and to powre out riuers of teares. The holy virgin at length being turned towardes them, began very ſweetly to ſay vnto her ſoule, Go my ſoule, go out ſecurely, thou haſt an aſſured guide to performe this voiage▪ for he who is thy Creatour hath ſanctifyed thee, and hath alwayes cōſerued thee, affecting thee with a tender loue, equall with that of a mother towardes her child: and thou my God be prayſed for hauing created me.
               A Religious ſiſter aſking her

what ſhe ment thereby, ſhe anſwered; I ſpeake to my bleſſed ſoule; her moſt glorious ſpouſe Ieſus Chriſt not being far from her, attending for her: then turning to one of her Religious ſhe ſayd: doe you not ſee my daughter the King of glory whome I ſee? Almighty God alſo laid his hand vpō another Religious, who ſaw with her corporall eyes through the teares that diſtilled from them a glorious viſion; ſhe being pierced through with the dart of ſorrow, caſt her eyes towards the gate of the houſe, & ſaw to enter a great proceſſiō of ſacred virgins richly cloathed in white, hauing ech one a crowne of gold vpon their head: but one of them appeared more beautifull, ſumptuous, and glittering then the reſt,

hauing vpon her head an imperiall Crowne garniſhed with pretious ſtones, from whoſe countenance proceeded a light ſo ſhining, that it conuerted the obſcurity of the night into cleare and bright day, it being without doubt the moſt glorious virgin Mary, Queene of virgins, who came to the bed of the Eſpouſe of her Sonne, to whome inclyning ſhe moſt gratiouſly imbraced her, and incontinently ſhe was couered & the bed alſo by the other virgins vvith an extreme ſumptuous mantle: ſo the day following, which was the eleuenth of August, her holy ſoule aſcēded to heauen, there to be crowned with perpetuall glory.
               Happy was her departure out of this miſerable life, ſith it was the entry

into that of eternall felicity: for the faſtes, which this Saint performed in this exile, ſhe is now ioiful, hauing her fill at the magnificall table of the Cittizens of heauen; & for the humility and baſenes of her habit, ſhe is now gloriouſly attired with the glory of paradiſe. The continuall ſighes & deſires, which ſhe had for the preſence and loue of her deerly beloued ſpouſe, are accompliſhed by the bleſſed viſion of God face to face, and by the aſſured fruition of the ſoueraigne good: leauing the way open to the example of ſanctity, that we blind and miſerable mortall Creatures, reiecting theſe ſhort, falſe, and deceiptfull pleaſures of this world, may purchaſe the permanent, true, & aſſured delightes that indure eternally.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the honorable obſequies that were performed for Saint Clare.
                  
               
               CHAP. XXVI.
               VVHILES the ſoule of S. Clare departed this life, the report of her deceaſe was incontinently diuulged through Aſſiſium, frō whence both men and women in ſuch aboundance ſpeedily flocked to the monaſtery, that none ſeemed to be left in the Citty, each one preſently eſteeming her a Saint, calling her the Eſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, and accōpanying their diſcourſes with great a boundance of teares of deuotion. The officers of iuſtice repayred

thither accompanyed with many warlike Champions, and a great number of armed men, which that night guarded the monaſtery, for feare that pretious treaſure might be bereaued thē. The night following, the Pope with all his court came thither, accompanyed withall the neighbour people.
               The Religious men of S. Damian being ready to begin the office of the dead, the Pope would haue had ſaid the office of the holy virgins, wherin he would haue canonized her before her buriall: but the Cardinall of Hoſtia hauing demonſtrated vnto him, that it was fitting in this affayre to proceed with more humane prudence, the Pope permitted the ſaid Religious ſolemnely to proceed in the office

of the dead, according to their ordinary & accuſtomed manner.
               The ſaid Cardinall hauing taken for his text, vanitas vanitatum, & omnia vanitas, made a very worthy and deuout Sermon, to manifeſt the vanity of thinges appertayning only to this world, where he exceedingly exalted that moſt eminent contemner of vanities which ended, all the Cardinalls and other Prelates accompanyed her holy body with an exemplar deuotion. All the funeralls being very ſolemnely ended, then Cittizens of Aſſiſiū thinking it not ſecure, that this pretious treaſure ſhould remaine ſo far out of their Citty, they cauſed her holy body with exceeding great pompe to be tranſported, ſinging pſalmes and Hymnes

with the ſound & melody of diuers muſicall inſtruments, in a very ſolemne proceſſion, carrying it into the Chuch of Saint George within their Citty, where the body of S. Francis had formerly byn repoſed. And it was very reaſonable, that he, who in his life had giuen a patterne of the way of life vnto this holy virgin, ſhould as it were prophetically preparre her a place of ſepulture.
               There was then a great repaire and confidence of people from diuers Cittyes, townes, and villages vnto Aſſiſium, to thanke Ieſus Chriſt, and to pray vnto this bleſſed creature, proclayming this holy virgin to be really a Saint & glorious, who now liueth in paradiſe with the Angells, hauing bin already

ſo much honored of men vpon earth. O bleſſed virgin pray now to God for vs, & gayne our ſoules to Ieſus Chriſt in heauen, as thou haſt conuerted and gayned ſo mamany liuing vpon earth. The holy virgin paſſed this tranſitory life to the other of reſt, the yeare of grace 1253. the tweluth of Auguſt, forty yeares after her perfect vocation to God, and the 60. yeare of her age. She was interred the 12. of Auguſt, vpon which day her feaſt is ſolemnized at Aſſiſium, and ouer all the holy Roman Church.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the miracles wrought by the merits of S. Clare: and first of poſseſſed perſons that haue byn deliuered.
               
               CHAP. XXVII.
               THE chiefeſt marks that ſaints can haue, and the worthyeſt teſtimonies of fayth and reuerence, are ſanctity of life, and the perfection of good workes: for S. Iohn Baptiſt wrought no miracles during his life, and yet they who haue wrought many, ſhall not be eſteemed more holy then he: and therfore the notable renowne of the Religious life of Saint Clare, might ſuffice to make her appeare

ſuch as ſhe is, if the tepidity, coldnes, and remiſſnes of the world, &c partly alſo deuotion did not otherwiſe require. But ſince this holy virgin was not only in her lifetime by her merits ſwallowed vp in the depth of diuine illuminations, but was alſo after her death a meruaylous ſplendour ouer all the world by the light of her miracles: and as the moſt pure Verity hath cauſed the recording of many of her miracles, that they remayne as teſtimonies, memory, & denuntiation of her Sanctity: therfore alſo the multitude of them inforce me to recount ſome, that they may be generally diuulged & knowne.
               A Child called Iames, ſeeming not ſo ſicke as poſſeſſed, in regard that ſomtimes he caſt himſelfe into

the fire, or into the riuer, fell rudely vpon the ground, and with ſuch fury did bite the ſtones, that he brake his teeth withall, forced bloud out of his head, and wreſted his mouth moſt ſtrangely, yea ſomtimes would ſeeme a monſter, ſo doubling & foulding his members, that his feete would be vpon his necke. He was ordinarily twice in the day afflicted with the like torments in ſuch ſort, that two perſons ſufficed not to reſtraine him from tearing of his cloathes, yea there was great difficulty to keep him from murdering of himſelfe▪ Phiſitians hauing in vaine laboured to cure him, at length his Father named Guidalote had recourſe to the merits of S▪ 
                  Clare, affectionatly ſaying: O holy Virgin honored

of the world, to thee I addreſſe my ſelfe, beſeeching thee to obtaine of God my Sonnes health: then full of confidence he conducted him to the ſepulcher of this Saint, & laid him thereupon, and he preſently miraculouſly obtained the fauour he deſired, his Sonne being perfectly cured of all his infirmities, & was neuer troubled after.
               
                  Alexandrina a womā of the town of Frata, neere to Peruſia, was poſſeſſed and tormented with an abhominable diuell, to whoſe power ſhe was ſo left, that he made her to fly as a bird to the top of a rocke neere to the riuer of Tibur, then made her deſcend to a branch of a tree that did hang ouer the ſaid riuer, thē to hang vpon that branch, there playing her idle prankes.

This woman had halfe her body vtterly benummed, for which the Phiſitians could find no remedy: at length ſhe came with great deuotion to the ſhrine of Saint Clare, and inuocating her merits ſhe was cured of all her afflictions; hauing alſo the gout in her left hand, her body halfe paraliticall was cured, and withall ſhe was intierly freed from the oppreſſion and ſeruitude of the diuell.
               Another woman of the ſame place was cured before the ſaid ſepulcher, who was in like ſort poſſeſſed with the diuell, & had withall many other grieuous infirmityes.
            
            
               
               
                  Of many that were miraculouſly cured of diuers diſeaſes.
               
               CHAP. XXVIII.
               A French Youth, going to Rome in company of other his Countreymen, fell ſicke & lay by the way, looſing through the force of his infirmity his ſenſe and ſpeach, and his body became deformed as it were a monſter, then became he ſo furious, that he could not be held, ſo that he ſeemed ready to dye▪ which ſpectacle did not only moue his companions to compaſſion, but did alſo exceedingly terrify them: and therfore they boūd him to a beere, & carryed

him to the Church of S. Clare; where hauing placed him before her ſepulcher, they applyed themſelues all to prayer, inuocating the help of God and of the Saint, vvho made ſuch interceſſiō for the yong man, that he was in an inſtant intierly cured.
               A man of the Citty of Spoletuns called Valentine, was exceedingly afflicted with the falling ſicknes, in which he fell ſix times a day in whatſoeuer place he was, and beſides he had one foote ſo wreſted awry, that he was vtterly latned: he was brought vpon an aſſe to the ſepulcher of S. Clare, where hauing remained two dayes & three nights, the third day attempting to moue his lame foote, and none being neere him, he made ſuch a

noyſe, that being heard by ſome a farre off, they ſeemed to heare the breaking of a piece of dry wood; and the man was inſtantly cured of both the one and the other his ſaid diſeaſes.
               The Sonne of a woman of Spoletum called lames of twelue yeares old being blind, could not goe without a guide: and being once forſaken of him who conducted him, he fell into a pit, brake one of his armes, and hurt his head. The night following ſleeping by the bridge of Varue, a woman appeared vnto him, and ſayd: Iames, if thou wilt come to me to Aſſiſium I will cure thee. Ariſing early in the morning, he much admired at the viſion, which he recounted to two other blind men, who anſwered

him: Brother we haue heard of a Lady lately dead in the Citty of Aſſiſium, at whoſe ſepulcher God worketh by her merits many miracles: which the blind youth hauing heard, he left the two other blind men, and with a ſtrong confidence haſtned to Aſſiſium, and in the way he lodged at Spoletum, where in the night he had the ſame viſion, which increaſed the hope of the recouering his ſight, and made him haſten in time to arriue at the Church of S. Clare, where finding it ſo filled vvith people that he could not enter, was greatly troubled.
               But ſeing no remedy, he reſted at the dore, and there remayned till the euening, where this poore blind youth being weary with his

iorney, and afflicted that he could not enter into the Church, ſetled himſelfe the beſt he could to reſt vpon the ground, laying his head againſt a great ſtone, and ſo ſlept, and preſently the third time he heard the ſayd voice, ſpeaking: lames, God wil do thee good, if thou canſt enter, and incontinently a waking out of that ſleep, he began to cry, and begge of the people with aboundance of teares to permit him to enter, which hauing a long time continued, they gaue him place, & hauing diſcloathed himſelfe, putting his girdle about his necke, he went to the ſepulcher of the Saint, before which with great reuerence and humility her fell vpon his knees, and hauing perſiſted ſomtime in prayer, beſeeching

S. Clare to intercede for him, he fell into a gentle ſlumber, wherin S. Clare appeared vnto him, and ſayd, Ariſe lames, for thou art already cured, and being awaked, and rayſed vpon his feete, the defect of his ſight left him, & by the vertues and meritts of this Saint he clearly ſaw; for which he glorifyed God, and gaue him thankes for ſo admirable a work, exhorting all people preſent to do the like, & to praiſe our Redemer Ieſus Chriſt in this his holy ſeruant.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the lame and paralitiqes cured by Saint Clare.
                  
               
               CHAP. XXIX.
               A Cittizen of Peruſia called Iohn-Martin de Buoni, went one time with many other Cittizens out of the Citty to fight againſt their enemies of Fullinium: the ſkirmiſh being ended, Iohn found his hand exceedingly hurt with the blow of a flint ſtone▪ and the bone being broken he was therby maymed: and hauing byn at extreme coſt for the cure therof, yet without any remedy, but ſtill inforced to carry his arme in a ſkarfe, he alwayes complayned therof as of a deſperate may me, &

aſked Coūſell about cutting off his hand; but hauing one day heard ſpeach of marueylous thinges wrought by almighty God at the interceſſion of S. Clare, he with a ſtrong fayth vowed to goe to her ſepulcher, whither arriuing he very deuoutly preſented her a hand of wax, then fell vpon his knees, & made his feruent prayor to God, that it would pleaſe his diuine maieſty, by the merits & interceſſion of that moſt holy virgin to cure him; the ſucceſſe was admirable, for before this gentleman aroſe, he felt his hand intierly cured, for which he gaue thankes to God & to the Saint.
               A young man likewiſe of Castrouitoli called Petronius, was ſo cōſumed with a diſeaſe which had

for three years continually afflicted him, that he ſeemed to be already withered, & corrupted, yea he was therby brought to ſuch weaknes, that in going he ſtouped with his face as it were vpon the ground, & found great difficulty to walke, though with a ſtaffe in his hand to ſupport him.
               His Father hauing alredy bin exceedingly charged about his cure, continued yet in reſolution to imploy the reſidue of his ſubſtāce out of his vehemēt deſire to ſee his ſon cured. But the Phiſitians hauing aſſured him that there was no hope of cure by humane art, he had recourſe to the new Saint, of whoſe vertue hauing heard much report, he cauſed his ſonne to be carryed thither where the Reliques of Saint

                  Clare repoſed. And hauing made his prayers by her ſepulcher, he recouered his former health, and miraculouſly aroſe ſound & ſtreight, as if he had neuer indured infirmity, yea he ran, leapt, and prayſed God, & S. Clare, inducing all preſent to haue greater faith and deuotion towards her.
               In the towne of Saint Quirice, within the Dioceſſe of Aſſiſium, a child of ten yeares old, hauing byn borne lame, went ſo pittifully and painfully, that if he chaunced to fall to the ground, he could not riſe againe, but with extreme difficulty.
               His mother had many times recommended him to S. Francis, yet found he no redreſſe: but vnderſtanding afterwardes, that the virgin

Saint Clare was very famous for infinit miracles, which by her meritts were wrought at her ſepulcher, ſhe cauſed her Sonne to be carryed thither; & incontinently after that he had bin there, his bones were ſetled in their places, & his mēbers were cured: that which Saint Francis intreated by deuout prayers would not graunt, he referred to be obtayned & impetrated by the meritts of his diſciple S. Clare.
               
               A Cittizen of Eugubium called Iames le France, had a Sonne of fiue yeares old ſo lame, that he could not goe, which he very impatiently ſupported, ſeeming to him that the torment of his child was a reproach vnto his honour and family.
               
                  
When this child was vpon the ground, he would wallow & creep in the duſt in that ſort to goe, and if he would ſtay himſelfe againſt any thing to ariſe, he could not, for uature had giuen him only a deſire, but no force or ability therunto. But his Father and Mother conſulted to make a vow for him, and to offer him to the merits of Saint Clare, to whome they promiſed, that being cured he ſhould be called hers. The vow being made, the eſpouſe of Ieſus Chriſt cured this child, who began ſo well to go, that without any help he went to the ſepulcher of the ſayd Saint.
               A woman of Caſtell-Menarie, called Plenaria, had bin long time benummed, in ſuch ſort as ſhe could not goe without a ſtaffe, but cauſing

herſelfe to be carryed to the ſepulcher of Saint Clare, and hauing there deuoutly offered her prayers, the day following obtayned, vvhat ſhe vvith fayth demaunded, ſo that he returned home vpon her owne feete, who came thither ſupported by the feet of others.
               A woman of Peruſia had a ſwelling vpon her cheeke, which tormented her a long tyme, and beſides had all ouer her body many ring-wormes and tettars; ſhe had alſo her necke greater 
                     〈◊〉
                   her head & often thinking on S. Clare, ſhe one day went to her Church, where with great deuotion and a true fayth ſhe made her prayers: & continuing by her ſepulcher till euen within night, ſhe fell into a

great ſweet, wherby the ſwelling began to wax dry and to ſhrinke, and ſo by little and little ſhe was ſo perfectly cured, that there remayned no ſhew of any ſkarre.
            
            
               
                  How two children were by Saint Clare reſcued, and preſerued from the rage of wolues.
               
               CHAP. XXX.
               THE valley of Spoletum was accuſtomed to be much afflicted with wolues, which did often prey there vpon mans fleſh. There dwelt a woman called Bonna, vpon the mount Galion, within the dioceſſe of Aſſiſiū, who hauing two children, had ſcarſe

ended her lamētations for the one which the wolues had deuoured, but whiles ſhe was buſied in her houſe they carried away the other.
               The wolfe carryed the child to the top of a mountaine & grapled it by the throat, whileſt a labourer in the vineyardes hearing the pittifull cry of the child called the mother, and admoniſhed her to haue care of her Sonne, in regard he heard a crying voyce like to his: the woman not finding her Sonne, preſently belieued that the wolues had ſeyſed vpon him, and therfore began to raiſe her lamentations towardes heauen, deuoutly inuocating the help of Saint Clare in theſe tearmes: O bleſſed S. Clare haue compaſſion vpon me miſerable woman, and reſtore me my child.

Heare if thou pleaſe the prayers of an infortunate mother, and permit me not to continue in this rigorous deſolation. Whiles this poore woman ſo recommended her diſtreſſe to S. Clare, her neighbors furniſhed with vveapons, haſtened after the rauening wolfe, and coming to the top of the ſaid mountaine, they found that he had left the child wounded in the throate, whoſe woundes a dogge was licking, & ſo the child was ſafely recouered by the merits of S. Clare, who was inuocated by his mother, to whom he was brought, and was incontinently reſtored to perfect health.
               A little girle of the towne of Canary, being about noone abroad in the field, where ſhe did ſome ſeruice to another woman, there

came a wolfe, which being taken by the girle but for a dogge, he leapt vpon her necke, and tooke hold off her head. The other woman, and the mother of the girle there preſent ran after, and cried for help, inuocating Saint Clare: & it was admirable to heare that the child being in the teeth of the wolfe reprehended him, ſaying, Thou theefe, how canſt thou carry me further I being recommended to that holy virgin? The wolfe as daū
                  ted with thoſe words, gently ſet the girle vpō the ground, & as a theefe found & taken in the fact, he fled: & the girle returned without any hurt vnto her mother.
            
            
               
               
                  How diuers were deliuered from drowning and danger of ſea, hauing inuocated S. Clare.
                  
               
               CHAP. XXXI.
               A Shippe fraught vvith many perſons departing out of the port of Piſa, for the ile of Sardinta, the firſt night, there aroſe ſuch a terrible tempeſt, that the force therof leaked the bottome of the veſſell, which made apparent to all therein, that they were in moſt euidēt danger of ſhipwrake: wherfore they began to inuocate the Queene of heauen, and many other Saintes to aſſiſt them. At length perceiuing no appearance of

their liues ſafety, they addreſſed themſelues to S. Clare, and vowed to her, that if by her interceſſion they were deliuered, they would goe all naked to their very ſhirtes, with their girdles about their neck, to viſit her ſacred Reliques at Aſſiſium, ech of them carrying a wax light of two pound in their hands. This vow being made, they ſavv three great lights deſcend frō heauen, the one whereof ſetled vpon the forepart of the ſhip, another vpon the poupe, and the third vpon the pumpe, by the vertue whereof the leakes where the water did enter was cloſed vp, and the ſea became ſo quiet and calme, that with a gratious wind the veſſell was accompanied and ſafely conducted by the ſaid lights to the

port of Arestan, where being arriued and landed, and the marchandize all ſafely put vpon ſhore, the ſaid lights vaniſhed, and (vvhich was admirable) the ſhip preſently ſunke, and vvas caſt away: they which went out of her, acknowledging the miracle, and at their returne to Piſa deuoutly accomſhed their vow, yielding infinit ſhankes to almighty God, and to the virgin S. Clare for the great benefit receiued by her interceſſion.
            
            
               
               
                  How Saint Clare was canonized by the Pope Alexander the fourth.
               
               CHAP. XXXII.
               POPE Innocent the fourth liued ſo little time after the death of S. Clare, that he could not Canonize her. The holy Sea hauing bin two yeares vacant, Alexander the fourth was choſen Pope, who being exceedingly deuoted, & a friend to piety, protectour of Religious, hauing heard true relation both of the miracles, vvhich our Lord Ieſus Chriſt wrought for the glory of his holy ſeruant, & of the renowne of her

vertues, which daily more and more diuulged themſelues in the Church, knovving alſo that her Canonization was generally deſired, his Holines being alſo induced by the aſſurance of ſo many miracles, began therfore to treat in the Conſiſtory of her Canonization.
               Wherin to proceed more maturely, there were elected prudent and vertuous men to examine the ſaid miracles, & the irreprehenſible life of the Saint: vvhich being done, and this holy virgin being found, & proued to haue bin in her life an vnſpotted mirrour of all vertues, and to haue byn ennobled of Almighty God after her death by true and approued miracles, the day of her Canonization

was appointed, when were preſent with his Holines many Cardinalls, Archbiſhops, Biſhops, other Prelates, and a great number of Prieſts and Religious with infinit noble men, Gentlemen and others, ech in their degree & quality, before whome the Pope propoſed this ſacred affayre, demaunding the opiniō of the Prelats▪ who with one accord gaue conſent, and affectionatly beſought that the ſaid Saint might be canonized in the Church, as Ieſus Chriſt had glorifyed her in heauen. In this ſort then, three yeares after her happy deceaſe, Pope Alexander cauſed her ſolemnely to be enrolled in the Catalogue of Saintes, ordayning her feaſt to be celebrated with ſolemnity in the Church the 12. of

Auguſt. This Canonization was performed the yeare of grace 1255. and the firſt of the raigne of the Pope, to the prayſe and glory of our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt.
               Heere endeth the life, and miracles of the glorious virgin S. Clare.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE LIFE OF S. AGNES SISTER TO S. CLARE
            
            
               
                  How S. Agnes was by the holy F. S. Francis ſent to Florence, there to build a monastery.
               
               CHAP. I.
               
                  THE virgin & eſpouſe of our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt, Agnes, & true companion of Saint Clare, aſwell in

bloud, as in vertue & Religion, perſeuered & perſiſted in notable ſanctity of life in the monaſtery of S. Damian: & from the tyme of her entrance into Religion, euen to her death, ſhe alwayes wore a very rough hairecloath next her tender skin. Her ordinary refection was almoſt alwayes bread and water, being naturally very pittifull to euery one. S. Francis finding this virgin to haue obteyned of God, by meanes & aſſiſtance of her ſiſter, a worthy perfection, he ſent her to Florence, there to found a nevv Monaſtery of poore Siſters called mount Caeli, wherof Saint Francis made her Abbeſſe.
               This holy virgin induced many ſoules to abandon the world, and to ſerue Ieſus Chriſt, which ſhe

did by meanes of her pious conuerſation, & ſanctity of life, by holy diſcourſes, and wordes of God, that ſweeetly flowed out of her mouth: and as a perfect contemner of tranſitory thinges, & follower of Ieſus Chriſt, ſhe planted in this monaſtery (conformably to the deſire of the holy Father Saint Francis, & of S▪ Clare) the obſeruance, & profeſſion of Euangelicall pouerty: but being exceedingly grieued with the abſence of her ſiſter, ſhe wrote this letter following vnto her, and to all the Religious of the monaſtery of S. Damian, wherin ſhe had receiued her education, and ſpirituall nourture.
            
            
               
               
                  A copy of the Letter, which S. Agnes wrote to her ſiſter S. Clare, and to all the other ſisters of the monastery of S. Damian.
                  
               
               CHAP. II.
               TO the venerable & beloued Mother in our Lord Chriſt Ieſus, Clare, and to all her Couent, humble ſiſter Agnes, the leaſt of the diſciples of Ieſus Chriſt & of yours, commendeth herſelfe vnto you all, and proſtrate at your feete, doth yield you al ſubmiſſion and deuotion, wiſhing vnto you what is moſt pretious from the moſt high King of Kinges. To the end that all nature, which hath bin

created of God, doe acknowledge it ſelfe to be ſuch, as it cannot perſiſt of it ſelfe in it owne eſſence, the diuine prouidence moſt prudently permitteth, that when any one eſteemeth himſelfe to be in proſperity, then is he drowned & plunged in aduerſities. This I tell you my moſt deare mother, that you may know, what affliction and extreame heauines poſſeſſeth my ſpirit, being ſo tormented, that hardly can I ſpeake: and this becauſe I am corporally ſeparated from you and my holy ſiſters, with whome I hoped to haue happily liued, and dyed in this world. So far is this my griefe from ſlacking, that it cōtinually increaſeth, which as it had a beginning, ſo do I belieue it will find no end in this

world, for it is ſo continuall, and familiar vnto me, that I greatly feare it will neuer forſake me.
               I was perſwaded that life and death ſhould be a like, without power of any ſeparation vpon earth, amongſt them, who haue one ſame conuerſation and life in heauen, & muſt haue one ſame ſepulture: them I ſay, whom one ſame, equall naturall profeſſion, and one ſame loue hath made ſiſters. But ſo far as I can ſee, being abandoned and afflicted on ech ſide, I am much miſtaken. O my holy ſiſters, I beſeech you to be reciprocally grieued with me, & let vs weep togeather, being aſſured, that you ſhall neuer experience any dolour comparable to that which I now feele, in being ſeparated from them, with

whome Ieſus Chriſt had conioined me. This griefe tormenteth me inceſſantly, this fire burneth my hart continually, ſo that being on ech ſide afflicted, I know not what to thinke, neither doth any hope remaine, but to be aſſiſted by your prayers, that Almighty God eaſing this affliction, may make it tollerable vnto me.
               O my moſt gratious Mother, vvhat ſhall I doe, and vvhat ſhall I ſay, ſith I know not that euer I ſhall ſee you more, or likewiſe my ſiſters? O that it were lawfull for me to vtter vnto you the conceipts of my ſoule, as I would deſire, or that I could open my hart vnto you vpon this paper: then ſhould you ſee the liuely and continuall dolours that torment me:

my ſoule burneth interiourly, being afflicted with an inceſſant fire of loue; and my hart groaneth, ſigheth, and lamenteth with deſire of your preſence: myne eies cannot haue their fill of weeping; and albeit I ſeeke for ſome conſolation againſt this bitternes, yet can I find none▪ but euery thing turneth into griefe, & much more, when I conſider the meanes to ſee you. I am intierly ſteeped in theſe anguiſhes, hauing none that can comfort me in this life, but that I receiue a little conſolation from the liberall hand of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, which cauſeth me to beſeech you all to giue thankes vnto his diuine maieſty, for this fauour and mercy extended, towardes me, & for that through his grace, I find ſuch concord

peace, and charity in this Couent, as by wordes cannot be expreſſed; theſe ſiſters hauing receiued me with exceeding loue & deuotion, yielding me Obedience, vvith extraordinary promptitude & reuerence.
               They all with one accord recommend themſelues to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, & to you my Siſter, & to all the ſiſters of the monaſtery: & I recommend my ſelfe & them to your holy prayers, beſeeching you as a mother to be mindfull of them, & of me, as of your daughters: & know you that they & I, will all the daies of our life, obſerue & keepe your holy precepts and aduertiſements. Beſides I deſire you ſhould know, that the Pope hath accorded to whatſoeuer

I demaunded of him, conformably to your intention & myne, & particulerly in the matter you know; to wit, that we may not poſſeſſe any thing proper. I beſeech you my moſt deare mother, to procure of the Reuerent Father Generall, that he often viſit vs, to comfort vs in God, whoſe grace be with your ſpirit. Amen.
            
            
               
                  Of an extaſy of S. Agnes; and how S. Clare ſaw her thrice crowned by an Angell.
               
               CHAP. III.
               SAINT Clare in her laſt ſicknes obteyned, that her ſiſter Saint Agnes might come to ſee her

in the monaſtery of S. Damian, to keep her company during the few daies ſhe had to liue: & ſo S. Agnes bauing left her Couent, well grounded in Religion & ſanctity, ſhe came to Aſſiſium, where Saint Clare being one night in prayer apart from her ſiſter, ſhe neuertheles ſaw her, being alſo in prayer, lifted from the earth, & an Angell to crowne her thrice with ſo many ſeuerall crownes. The day following ſhe demaunded of her ſiſter, what prayer or contēplatiō ſhe had made the night paſt: but ſhe of humility vnvvilling to manifeſt her prayer, being at length inforced by Obedience, made her this relation: I conſidered the great goodnes, and patience of Almighty God, wherby he ſupporteth ſuch

enormous offēces of ſinners; which I conſidered with a deep ſorrow and compaſſion: then I thought, and yet doe thinke of the loue, which almighty God beareth to ſinners, & how he indured death to ſaue them thirdly I conſidered, & doe conſider, & am with compaſſiō exceedingly afflicted for the ſoules in purgatory, & their great torments, & becauſe they cannot help themſelues, I asked mercy for them of the moſt ſacred wounds of our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               
               
                  How S. Agnes ſent S. Clares veyle to the monastery of Florence, and of her death and tranſlation to Saint George in Aſsiſium, with all her Religious into a new Couent.
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               AFTER the death of S Clare, Saint Agnes ſent her blacke veyle, which ſhe did ordinarilv weare, to the poore Religious of Mount Cae
                        •
                     i, which ſhe had founded at Florence, which ſhe did, in regard of her great amity towardes them, and that they might inherit ſome Reliques of S. Clare for their comfort and deuotion,

That veyle is yet in the ſaid monaſtery, where it is ſo carefully preſerued, that in ſubſtance and colour it ſeemeth ſtill new. There is likewiſe to be ſeene in the ſame monaſtery a cloak of S. Francis, by which Reliques our Lord worketh many miracles. A little after the death of S. Clare, S. Agnes alſo deſired to be preſent at the marriage of the lambe, whither ſhe was inuited: but ſhe firſt receiued the conſolation, which S. Clare had promiſed her, that before ſhe departed out of this life, ſhe ſhould ſee her Spouſe Ieſus Chriſt, as a taſt of the eternall felicityes, wherto ſhe was to be eleuated, & conducted by her ſweet ſpouſe Chriſt Ieſus. She dyed the 56, yeare of her age, repleniſhed with perfect ſanctity;

and being deliuered out of this priſon, she went to poſſeſſe the Kingdome with Angels, and the holy virgins, that had bin conſecrated to Ieſus Chriſt, in which glory theſe two ſiſters, & daughters of Sion, companions in heauen by nature & grace, doe prayſe God without end.
               There aſſembled a great multitude of people vpon the death of S. Agnes, and they with great deuotion aſcended with a ladder the monaſtery of Saint Damian, hoping thereby to receiue ſome ſpirituall conſolation of ſanctity, but it hapned that the chaine which held the ladder did ſlip, ſo that all thoſe, who were vpon it, fell downe one vpon another, which made a great noyſe and clamour by thoſe who

were hurt; & hauing with a ſtrong faith inuocated S. Agnes, were all cured. The ſaid holy virgin was interred at S. Damian, but afterwardes was tranſported into the Church of S George, where ſhe ſtill remayneth togeather with her ſiſter in Aſſiſium, by the which Church the Cittizens haue builta faire monaſtery intituled Saint Clare, whither were afterward remoued the Religious ſiſters of S. Damian: which was done to preuent many inconueniences, that might arriue vnto the being without the Citty. The ſaid Religious brought from S Damian many Reliques, and perticularly the Crucifix, which ſpake to S. Francis, at the beginning of his conuerſion, which is extant in the ſaid monaſtery

of S. Clare: and the Friars Minors are at S. Damian.
               
            
            
               
                  Of many miracles wrought by Almighty God, through the merits of S. Agnes.
                  
               
               CHAP. V.
               A Girle of Peruſia had a cancred fiſtula in her throate, who hauing deuotion to S. Agnes, viſited her ſepulcher. The Religious there hauing vnbound her ſoare, at the entry of the Couent & then hauing with a ſtrong faith' offered her prayers, ſhe aroſe ſound, and returned to her houſe exceedingly comforted, yielding thankes to God, and to his ſeruant.
               
                  
There was a Religious ſiſter at our Lady of Angells of Peruſia, vvho had a mortall ſoare in her breaſt, which the Phiſitians had iudged to be incurable; in it there were three holes, ſo that the Religious womē exhorted her to beare this affliction vvith patience, as proceeding from the hand of God, and to conforme herſelfe to his diuine will. This diſeaſed ſiſter being alwaies of mind to recommend herſelfe to S. Agnes, kneeling one day before the Altar, ſhe vvith much deuotion commended herſelfe to the holy ſeruant of God, demaunding of her redreſſe of her infirmity, vvherewithall falling falling into a gentle and ſweet ſlumber, Saint Agnes appeared vnto her, and with her

hand touched her mortall wound, with which viſitatiō ſhe was ſweetly comforted, and cured; and at her awaking finding herſelfe ſoūd, ſhe gaue infinit thankes to God, & to her aduocate S. Agnes.
               
               Another Religious womā of the monaſtery of Venice, had an impoſtume in her breaſt, which was opened by the Phiſitians, & found ſo dangerous, that they allotted her a very little time to liue. This poore ſiſter therefore in this diftreſſe, recommended herſelfe to the two ſiſters, S. Clare and Saint Agnes, and about midnight theſe two Saints, as moſt ſkilfull phiſitians, brought boxes of moſt pretious oyntments, and accompanyed with many virgins entred into the Infirmary, where this ſicke ſiſter

was, who were ſeene by many Religious, & drawing neere to her bed, Saint Clare ſaid vnto her: Siſter, Be you aſſured that you ſhalbe cured by the power & goodnes of God, and by the meritts of Saint Agnes. The ſicke Religious not knovving vvho ſpake vnto her, doubted of this reuelation: & the Saintes replyed, that they were Phiſitians of Aſſiſium: then Saint Agnes annointed the ſoares with the oyntment ſhe had brought, & ſo the viſion diſappeared, & the diſeaſed ſiſter was in ſuch ſort cured of her mortall wound, that no appearance remayned therof.
               Another Religious of the monaſtery of Saint Clave in Aſſiſium, had byn for ſixteene yeare togeather afflicted with ſuch an infirmity,

that the other Religious held her for a lepar. This diſeaſed creature beſought S. Agnes to pray to the Virgin of heauen for her recouery. and this prayer being performed with a vow, the Religious was incontinently cured, & freed from all remainder of her infirmity.
               A Burgeſſe of Aſſiſium had byn long time lame by the blow of a ſtone receiued vpon his foote, and being hopeleſle of humane remedy, vpon the feaſt of S. Agnes, he went ſo well as he could to her Church, and with ſtrong fayth and deuotion fell vpon his knees before her Altar. His prayer being ended, he aroſe ſound, and luſty, which he recounted to many, and thanked almighty God for it.
               
                  
A Painter called Palmero being in a dangerous ſicknes, & by the phiſitians giuen ouer as dead, one night after his ſpeach was loſt, his brother expecting in his opinion his laſt breathing, was exceedingly diſquieted, and coming to his bed ſide, and lamenting him as already dead, he fell vpon his knees, addreſſed his prayers to S. Agnes, & vvith aboundance of teares and great confidence made a vow, that if his Brother by her meritts and interceſſion might be cured, ſo oftē as he painted her image, he would ſet a Crowne of gold vpon her head. This prayer and vow being ended, the ſicke party incontinently began to ſpeake, as if he had awakened out of a profound ſleep, and called for meate, and did hungerly

eate, then aroſe from his bed, ſaying, that two Religious women came to viſit him being in his agony, & reputed for dead, & that the ſame viſitation had ſuch force, as it left him perfectly cured, as he appeared.
               A vvoman of Aſſiſium had a ſonne of 12. yeares old that had an impoſtume in his breaſt, where the canker was ſo increaſed, that it made it in ſuch ſort venemous, as it exceeded the Phiſitians skill to cure it: this woman hauing vnderſtood, that by the meritts of Saint Agnes, Almighty God had cured ſuch diſeaſes, ſhe commaunded her ſonne often to viſit her ſepulcher, and deuoutly to recommend himſelfe vnto her: which he did in ſuch ſort, that approaching one

euening ſo neere her ſelpulcher, that his mortall ſoare touched the ſame, and there falling a ſleepe, he ſo remained till the next morning, when awaking he found himſelfe intierly cured: for which hauing thanked God & his Saint, he returned to aduertiſe his mother, affirming that S. Clare, and Saint Agnes appeared vnto him in the night, and that S. Clare brought an oyntment, where with Saint Agnes hauing annointed him, he was preſently cured.
            
            
               
               
                  Of poſſeſsed perſons deliuered by the merits of S. Agnes: and of certayne other miracles.
               
               CHAP. VI.
               THERE was a child of 12. yeares old in Aſſiſium, who playing amōg other childrē, an vnknovvne man gaue him a greene beane codde, which the boy opening, three of the beanes fell to the ground, and the fourth only he did eate, yet ſo ſoone as he came home, he vomited extremely, then beganne to tumble, and furiouſly so behaue himſelfe, turning and rouling his eyes in his head in ſuch ſort, as it well appeared, that he indured extreme torment: and his

geſture ſo terrifyed them who beheld him, that they iudged him poſſeſſed: and therfore his Father, and many other of his kindred brought him the next morning to the Church of Saint Clare, where hauing offered their prayers for him, and inuocated the interceſſion of S. Agnes, the child a little after began to cry, and barke as a dogge, then cryed out, Take heed, there are two Diuells already gone out, ſay one Aue Maria, and the third wilbe gone, which being preſently done, the Diuell withall left the child.
               A woman of Fullinium, being tormented with many wicked ſpirits, her Father and grand-mother vowed to go with her to Aſſiſium, to viſit the ſepulcher of S. Agnes,
                  
with faith and hope, that by her merits ſhe ſhould be deliuered, & ſo this poſſeſſed woman remaining before the ſepulcher of the Saint, from the ninth houre til euenſong, ſhe felt herſelfe freed from the Diuells that poſſeſſed her. This was done vpon the feaſt of S. Francis
                  ▪  the kindred of this deliuered woman offered an image of wax weighing two poundes, to the ſepulcher of the Saint, in acknowledgement of the grace and fauour receiued.
               A man of Peruſia with a continuall feuer had in his body an impoſtume, whereof the phiſitians gaue their iudgement, he would in ſhort time end his dayes; wherfore a woman called Celiola, admoniſhed him to recommend himſelfe

to Saint Agnes, and to vow the viſiting of her ſepulcher; which hauing done, and his prayers ended, his infirmity ended withall, being cured both of the one, & the other diſeaſe; for which not being vngratefull, he viſited the ſayd ſepulcher, & euery where preached the prayſes of the holy virgin, giuing thankes to Almighty God for ſuch a fauour.
               A Religious womā of the monaſtery of S. Clare in Aſſiſiū, had loſt the ſight of one eye, & was in danger to looſe the other, but finding that no humane application did auaile her, ſhe recommended herſelfe to Saint Agnes, and the other Religious of her monaſtery alſo prayed for her, who as ſhe one time prayed in the Church, ſaw a

woman, that came to her and ſaid: ſiſter open your eye, for your ſight is recouered: and ſo opening her eye ſhe clearly ſaw, but ſhe could no more ſee the woman that ſpake vnto her▪ only ſhe was aſſured that it was S. Agnes, to whome ſhe had hartily recommended herſelfe.
               
                  Vitula the wife of Matthew de Loupe at S. Francis gate in Aſſiſium, had a ſonne called Martin, that had a deep ſoare in his throat, and another in his ſhoulder, both mortall, whence iſſued ſuch an offenſiue ſauour, that it was not poſſible to come neere him. At length after many remedies had in vaine bin tryed, his mother recommended him to S. Agnes, to whome hauing with a deuout hart offered her prayers, the Saint one night

appeared vnto her richly attyred with a diademe of gold vpon her head, and a branch of Lilly in her right hand, and ſaid vnto her: My daughter diſquiet not thy ſelfe for thy ſonne, for he ſhalbe cured, and deliuered from perill; which this woman hauing heard, ſhe aroſe full of comfort, and went to the monaſtery of S. Clare, & recounted this apparition to the Abbeſſe and the Religious: then ſhe heard Maſſe, which being ended, the Religious ſhewed to the Mother and the Sonne the ſacred Reliques of the Saint, and at the inſtant her Sonne was cured of the impoſtume in his throat only. After that, Saint Agnes appeared to him in viſion, togeather with another woman, who brought a violl full of oyntment

Saint Agnes then ſayd to the child, my Sonne how do you? whereto he anſwered: I am by the meritts of Saint Agnes cured of the impoſtume in my throat, but that vvhich is vpon my ſhoulder procureth me extreme affliction. The Saint replyed, I will cure this, as I did the other in thy throat: then ſhe vnbound the ſayd 
                     ••
                  poſtume, tooke of the playſter, and caſt it vpon the ground; then applyed thereto the oyntment, vvhich her companion had brought, and inſtantly the child was perfectly cured. When his mother came to ſee him, ſhe found the playſters, vpon the ground, and her Sonne ſound and luſty, vvho particulerly recounted vnto her the ſayd

viſion, vvhich afterward vvas generally diuulged. This happened in the yeare 1350.
               The end of the life of Saint Agnes.
            
         
         
            
            THE LIFE OF ANOTHER S. AGNES, WHO WASDaughter to the King of Bohemia, and Religious of the Order of S. Clare.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  IN the beginning of this Religious Order, there was another Virgin beſides the precedent called Agnes, as illuſtrious in ſanctity,

as in bloud, for ſhe vvas daughter to the King of Bohemia, vvho promiſed her in marriage to the Emperour Frederike: and this holy virgin hauing heard the worthy reputation of S. Clara who then liued, by ſuch as came from Rome & Aſſiſium, being inſpired of God, ſhe beſought the King her Father, to giue her leaue, to ſerue rather a celeſtiall then a terreſtriall ſpouſe. But the King knowing that he could not recall his word, & that whatſoeuer excuſe he ſhold alleage to breake this marriage, the Emperour would ſiniſterly interprete, he vtterly denyed her. Now the virgin hauing found the drift & cauſe of this deniall, aſſured her Father, that if he would accord to whatſoeuer ſhe demaūded,

ſhe would vndertake, the that Emperor ſhould condeſcend therunto, preſuming confidently vpon the fauour of Ieſus Chriſt.
               She knew well to deliuer herſelfe from many other allegations with ſo good a grace, & with ſuch perſuaſiue tearmes that ſhe purchaſed her Fathers conſent to what ſhe deſired, without further ſeeking, the approbation of the Emperour; wherupon this Princeſſe preſently ſent for certaine Friars Minors of Magnes, where they had a Couent, who coming to her, did ſhortly after conſecrate vnto God this Royall plant, with many other gentlewomen of great families in Bohemia, to whome they gaue the habit of Religion, inſtructing them in the life and Rule of S. Clare. The

King deſiring to aſſigne a good penſion, & to beſtow vpon the Monaſtery vvhere his daughter was, a good rereuenew, to ſupply the neceſſities thereof, ſhe formally withſtood him, purpoſing to liue & dye poore, & to be maintayned by almes, conformably to her rule, rigorouſly obſeruing the intention of the holy Father Saint Francis, & Saint Clare, in the vow of pouerty, which is yet to this day in the ſame manner obſerued in the ſayd Monaſtery, which is in Prague, the chiefeſt Citty in the Kingdome of Bohemia: and this foundation layd by this holy Princeſſe, hath alwayes bin furniſhed with gentlewomen.
               Now the Emperour vnderſtanding that his promiſed Loue had

abandoned the world, he was at the firſt apprehenſion exceedingly troubled; but conſidering vvith more maturity, that ſhe had not forſaken him to take another man, but for Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe, he was at length ſatisfyed, contented, and comforted.
               
                  S. Clare being aduertiſed of all that this Princeſſe had done, and of her life and perfection, who alſo had written, and expreſly ſent a meſſenger, to acknowledge obedience vnto her, as to her mother & miſtreſſe, auouching herſelfe her humble diſciple; S. Clare anſwered her by a letter filled with much feruour and conſolation, & ſent her in token of amity, & good will, a girdle, a veyle, a cuppe of wood, and a diſh wherin the Saint herſelfe

accuſtomed to eate, & many like ſmall thinges, which the holy Princeſſe with great deuotion accepted. Our Lord wrought many miracles by the ſayd Reliques, which euer afterward were kept in the ſayd Monaſtery, with very great deuotion and Reuerence.
               The renowne of this Princeſſe being diuulged ouer all Germany, there were founded many monaſteries of poore Religious in her imitation, which were filled with many daughters of Princes, Duks, Earles, and other great Lords, and gentlemen of that Countrey, who in imitation of Saint Clare, & the ſayd Princeſſe Agnes abandoned the world, & the vanities thereof, and eſpouſed, for eternity, Ieſus Chriſt, ſeruing him alone in pouerty,

& in humility. This Saint Agnes of Bohemia being illuſtrated by many vertues & miracles, hauing aſſembled an infinit number of Religious in diuers Couents, & hauing perſeuered with them in all perfection of vertue, ſhe left this tranſitory world, to take eternall poſſeſſion of her glorious celeſtiall Spouſe Chriſt Ieſus, who honoured her, and made her bleſſed, as he hath manifeſted by mamany miracles, which he hath wrought by her great merits and interceſſiōs. The Emperour Charls the fourth, who was alſo King of Bohemia, was two ſeuerall tymes deliuered from death by the interceſſion of this celeſtiall Princeſſe, & therfore at his death he inioyned his Sonne VVenceſlaus, and ſucceſſour

to the Empire, to procure her Canonization, but he was hindred by important, and continuall troubles and affayres, that diſabled him to execute the pious and iuſt deſires of his Father.
            
            
               
                  Of many other Religious, that florished primitiuely in the Order of Saint Clare.
                  
               
               CHAP. II.
               THERE was another holy Religious of the royal bloud of Polonia called Salome, whoſe ſanctity was manifeſted by by diuers miracles, which God wrought after her death. She by her merits deliuered women from

perill of death in trauell of child, many lame were reſtored to the vſe of their lymmes, blynd recouered ſight, and wounded perſons were cured.
               A holy Religious of Padua, called Helena, floriſhed in great perfectiō of life in the monaſtery which was builded by the Seraphicall Father S. Francis, and in which the bleſſed Father S. Antony of Padua yielded his ſpirit vnto Almighty God. This holy Religious liuing in that place, after ſhe had there obtained of God many vertues, ſhe was tryed by Ieſus Chriſt, and refined as gold in the furnace of afflictions; for ſhe kept her bed depriued of all corporall force, yea and of her ſpeach for fifteene years, during all which time, ſhe ordinarily

demonſtrated by ſignes & geſtures an exceeding great alacrity & ioy in her hart.
               Our Lord reueiled many things to this Saint, which ſhe manifeſted to the Religious, who ſeriouſly recorded the ſame to be knowne to poſterity. The ſaid Religious being demaunded how the ſicke Religious ſiſter could make them vnderſtand thoſe wordes, ſith ſhe could not ſpeake, they anſwered that themſelues then obſerued ſo ſtrict a ſilence, that they opened their neceſſities by ſignes, vvhich vvere well vnderſtood among them, for expreſſing whatſoeuer they deſired to haue knowne. And in this had they vnderſtood the ſayd Saint, whoſe body for many yeares after, the

ſaid Religious ſiſters did ſhew to ſuch, as in deuotion repayred to ſee it, remayning entiere, and incorruptible, yea her nayles and haire did grow, as if ſhe had byn liuing.
               By her merits God wrought many miracles, and particulerly vpon the Lord Marqueſſe of Parma, who was of the family of Lupi called Boniface, who being in the anguiſh of death, his Lady making a vow to this Saint Helene for his health, it was perfectly reſtored vnto him.
               In the beginning of the Order of Saint Clare, there was alſo a daughter of the King of Hungary called Cuiga, ſiſter vnto bleſſed S. Elizabeth the widdow, who hauing taken the habit, & made profeſſion

feſſion of the rule of S. Clare, became ſo famous after the death of S. Elizabeth in ſanctity and miracles, both during her life, and at her death, that her Canonization is treated of at Rome.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   