
      
         
            
            
            A Chronological
Discourse touching,

                  1 The CHVRCH.
                  2 CHRIST.
                  3 ANTI-CHRIST.
                  4 GOG & MAGOG. &c.
               
            
            The substaunce whereof, was collected about
some 10. or 11. yeares since (as may be gathered
by an Epistle prefixed before a Tractate,
called, The visible Christian) but now digested
into better order; and
first published,
By the Author himselfe,
H. Cl.
            
            
               Horat. de art. P.
—Nouum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                prematur in annum.
            
               Ratio.
—Nescit vox missa reuerti.
            Imprinted at London by William White,
dwelling in Cow-lane ouer against
the signe of the white Lion.
1609.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE REVEREND
AND LEARNED FATHERS,
AND BREATHREN MINIsters,
in the Archdeaconrie of
Canterburie: Grace and peace
be multiplied from God
the Father. &c.
            
               THe Learned of the Gentiles (being
to that peopleTit. 1. 12. Prophets, as
S. Paul stileth them) they by
Parables (as Iotham by his
Trees holding Parlie) did vnder
some shadowing-speach, both
prayse Vertue, and pursue Vice.
And had they not been as lampes
to their Ages, for explaning the Morall dueties of the
Decalogue (steps whereof remained in mans nature, euen
after his Fall) the Gentiles had run away with smooth
excuses. By which in-written Law, as they did the things
of the Law, as the Apostle telleth the Romanes; so, they
came to haue notice of the out-written Law, giuen of
GOD to Moses in two Tables.Orpheus in hym. de deo. For so Orpheus (liuing
in the time of Israels Iudges) writeth:

                  —
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  Euen as theMeaning Moses. 
                     Water-borne described hath
                  From God to Man, two Tables of the Fayth.
               
               
Giuing therefore Fooles leaue to blatter against Knowledge,
(as if Gods reason in his Works, should be against
the reason of his Word,) let mee proceed.
            To Argus they attributed 100. eyes; as to Briaceus
100. handes: not properly, but figuratiuely (euen as Salomon
saying:Eccles. 10. 2. 
               The heart of a wise man is at his right
hand, although his proper seate be in the middest of his
Breast, depending a litle towards the left side) they thereby
implying, that the Prophane (with Argus) need many
eyes or watchmen, for securing such a skittish companion,
as was Samsons Heifer: as also, that Combaters with
Diuine powers, haue need of many hands to helpe them.
But all in vaine, seeing the eyes of the first, will be put out;
and the hands of the second, wilbe broken: much like to
the iudgement which Zechary signifieth to come vpon
the Idol-shepheard,Zech. 11. 7. namely, a Sword vpon his right Eye
and Arme; insomuch as his Arme shalbe dried vp, and
his right Eye darkned. In the assurance whereof, I continue
my opposition to fanatique, phrenetike spirits.
            The Gentile-artists, did many times vnto men, giue
the title of God, (as the Scriptures giue vnto Statesmen)
and so they did vnto Hercules, for his 12. famous exployts;
which may be reduced to two kindes: First, for
his conquering of deuowring Beastes; which indeed were
Men as sauage as Beastes, tyrannicall Vsurpers: Secondly,
for his sweeping away of much Doung with a Torrent;
which was, an expulsion of euill Manners and Customes,
by the clearenesse of good Counsaile and holsome Lawes.
Many we haue, that will say, how by their place they be
Gods: but very few that shew themselues gracious and

beneficial to Church & Common-wealth, as Gods should;
but Diuels will not: Many claime the Tearme, but few
walke worthy the tearme,Horat. ep. ad Quintium. 
               Tu rectè viues, si curas esse
quod audis. Iustly therefore shall the heathen Hercules,
rise vp against such in iudgement.
            The office of Priesthood among the Gentiles, was of
such great respect, as oftentimes the Kingdome was vnited
vnto it:Fenestella ex Virgil. 
               Rex jdem hominum, Phaebi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   sacerdos.
When Famine pinched the land of Egipt, to the forcing
of all sortes, to set sale of all for Bread-corne, there was
due prouision made for the Priestes. For these that there
doe turne Cohanim Princes, doe it (in my iudgement)
not onely against the very heart of the words proprietie,
but against the consonance of all Storie. And were the
Heathen, euen by Nature so led, to preferre their Ministrie?
The doctrine of Grace, doth teach it much more.
But a number, as if they were not onely deuoyde of Grace,
but also depriued of good Nature, do so cast their cardes,
as if any starue, the Minister shall: and if any amongest
Clunchpokes and Swaggerers, be thrust downe to the
tayle of the Table, it must be the Minister. But as the
Heathen in this point also, shall arise vp in iudgment against
such: so, I pray you, from whence ariseth this euill?
Sat scio, and let me speake plainely.
            This euill ariseth sometimes from our selues, when the
greater hath small respect of the lesser:From whence the contempt of Ministers ariseth. for that noted of
the vulgar, is as a document for hauing such in lesser estimation.
Secondly, this base estimate of Ministers, ariseth
also, from the consideration of their pouertie; and
their pouertie is the more, by reason some Nouelistes haue

taught Ciuill Gouernours, to spoyle Mother-church of her
Dowrie, saying; that the same is an Idolothyte and Antichristian.
            And hereupon it was, that the Separists did
at first in their secret Conuenticles, appoynt their Deacons
to stand at the Chamber dore, at the peoples outgate,
with their Hats in hand (much like after the fashion
of a Play-house) into the which they put their voluntary.
But comming beyonde seas, where a man might haue
seauen Doyts for a penny, it fell out, howsoeuer their voluntary
(at the casting in) did make a great clangor, the
Summa totalis ouer seene, the maisters of the Play, came
to haue but a few pence to their share. Whereupon, a broad
Dish (reasonable flat) was placed in the middest of their
conuention, that when the voluntarie was cast in, others
might obserue the quantitie. But this way serued not
the turne, for a few doyts rushing in vpon the sodaine,
could not easily be obserued, of what quantity it might be.
Vpon this, the Pastor gaue out, that if (besides giftes
from others abroad) they would not make himWho was Micahs Leuit now? 
               Tenne
pounds yearely at least, he would leaue them, as vnworthy
the Gospell. Then they stickle, for feare of a fall;
and Holder the Glouer must giue sixe Styuers a weeke
for his part: George Cl. the Bricklayer, more Styuers
for his part, by reason that he had good doinges: and so
others accordingly. The Glouer complaines of the greatnesse
of the Cesse, and therefore sayd; that hee would for
England. &c. But to leaue their giddie deuises: At
home we haue had too many, that haue been willing
(howsoeuer maintenaunce beFor this poynt, see my Manuall on Leuit. 
               Morall, and the quantity

and qualitie thereof be Iudiciall) vnder the colour of
clearing the Church of Idolothytes, to shaue the Church
as cleane, as Dionysius did Esculapius. To the Ministers
it would be vnholy, but to the Church-robbers it
would bee very holy, when they may haue it wholy.
Papè; Haue wee found out an Hypocrite, worse then a
Papist?
            A third cause of the Ministers contempt, hath
arisen from our Syncerians, who haue made it a very
small matter, to preach vpon the Scriptures: holding
euery howers talke, a Sermon: Insomuch as, a number
would not goe to meate (if a few were present of their
faction) but there must be a kind of Sermon.
            Maister Barrowe himselfe,H. 
                     •
                  ar. then in the Fleete. euen to my selfe (telling
him that Maister Pen
                     •
                  y did vse that fashion of
Preaching,) did exceedingly dislike it; saying of that,
and of some Pin-sellers and Pedlers that then were put
to preach in their Thursedayes Prophecie, that it would
bring the Scriptures into mightie contempt.
            Maister Henry Smith in his Sermon vpon Despise
not Prophecie, did taxe in his time, that addleheaded
discoursing, saying: that it was the readie way
to bring into contempt, both Prophet and Prophecie.
But Vzzah hath been smitten of God,Allusion to 2. Sam. 6. for so touching
the Lordes Arke, that whosoeuer runnes by, may read
(as in great Capitall letters) Perez Vzzah: and therefore
I leaue it.
            But what speake I of Contempt of Ministers? Actum
est de capite, the whole bodie of the Church is accused
for an Harlot; yea, for such a one, as neuer was betrothe
                  •
               
               
vnto Christ, but prostitute vnto spirituall fornication (a
cunabulis) from the very swadling cloutes. Minxerit in
patrios cineres Schismaticus ille. To whom I say with
Agur;
               Prou. 30. 
               The Eye that mocketh the Father, and despiseth
the instruction of the Mother, let the Rauens of
the valley picke it out, and the young Eagles eate it.
            
            The premisses considered, it remayneth, that with
Nehemiahs people, we doe the worke of the Church with
the one hand, and with the other we hold the Sword.
With the Cranes,Arist. de animal. 1. 9. let vs watch by turnes, & rest by turnes.
Let no man seeke his owne, but euery-one anothers good.
In being one, against such as will not be at one, we shall
(as in the Parable) compell them to come in, or force
them to silence.Isoerat. pane gyric. 
               Controuersias, aut jus aut vis, finit.
            
            And so casting my selfe into your brotherly armes,
with reference of these my labours to our Churches iudgement,
I humbly bid farewell. Norborne in East-kent
the 6. of Aprill, Anno Domini 1609.
            Your Brother in the
worke of the Gospel,
HENOCH CLAPHAM.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE ORDINARIE
READER.
            
               TO read with profit (and otherwise thou had better
neuer read) these Rules are to be followed.
            1. First, beware of a preiudicate affection;Notes for directing the Reader. an
euill, forestalling the grace of God; barring the
doores of mercie against such: For we should not
dare any thing against, but for the trueth.
            2. Secondly desire of God, that in trying of all
thinges, thou mayest keepe that is good: Otherwise, with the Spider,
thou wilt fashion Poyson▪ where the painefull Bee would cull Hony.
            3. Thirdly marke diligent
                  •
               y the Argumentes and Reasons whereby
any poynt is prooued. And consider whether they be Essentiall
and to the matter, or but Paralogifmes, or seeming fayre Colours,
which we tearme Sophistication.
            In disputation about the Beeing of a true Church, it must be well 
waighed,VVhat ìs to be obserued, touching the Being of a Church. whether speach be had of such a true Church as is Visible
and knowne plainely of man; or, of such a true Church as is Inuisible,
and so onely knowne of God: For, though we may hope well of such
as we see and know, yet God knowes who are his. And then, if the
Question be about the true visible Church, it must further be considered,
if so it be a true visible Church setled in orderly constitution, or as
yet vnestablished, or not yet constituted: for euery of these Churches
(though true Churches) be differenced one from another by some
substantiall marke or propertie, peculiar to the owne kind.
            In disputation about Ecclesiasticall policie, or Church-discipline,
it must at first be examined,VVhat, touching Church policie. whether speach be had of that, which accordes
generally with euery true Church, (and that's th'inward regiment
of the Spirit; wherevpon Christ sayth, The kingdome of God is
vvithin you; and the Psalmist, that the Kings Daughter is all glorious
vvithin; and therefore not to be poynted at with Loe heere, loe there;)
or, it must be waighed, if so the discipline be externall and outward:
And if that; then, whether of such pollicie, as tendes barely to the
Being of a true visible Church stablished, or vnestablished, in whole or

in part, &c. Otherwise, thou shalt swallow Quid for Quo; and when
the question is of Myles, the answere will be of Plummes.
            In the lacke of such a Spirit, as should discerne betweene thinges
that differ, it comes to passe, that Schismatiques exceedingly seduce
poore plaine people; describing a Visible Church, by such scriptures as
properly appertaine to the Inuisible, wherein all are really holy: and
when the question is of Discipline Essentiall, they cast in scriptures that
speake of that is onely Accidentall; as if there were no difference betweene
the Maine and the By: betweene that is naturally perpetuall;
or but temporarie, fitting some one time.
            
                Againe,VVhat, touching true Ministrie. if question be about True Ministers, the Schismatikes propound
for a marke thereof, the verie perfection of the Lords Canon;
as if he could not be a True Minister, except he were Perfect: as if
there were no difference betweene a true man, and a man that is perfect
in euery ornament of Nature. And yet, when the Perfectistes haue
done that, the very best Minister they can make, is to be conuicted of
imperfection.
            
                Besides,VVhat, touching the Gospell. ìf question be made, What is the Gospell? or, what is the contrary
thereto, namely, Ant
                     •
                  christianisme? They determine neither of
them by that which is Essentiall, but by some Accidents, which tend
not simply to the Beeing thereof, but to the Decking of that Beeing:
the most absurd kind of Sophistication that can be. In a word, they
deale as sillily as if one should define a man, not by the veritie of Body
and Soule; but by so many Haires of the head, or so many Nailes of
an hand; or by hauing more or fewer Garmentes vpon him, of this or
that fashion.
            If thou know what I haue sayd, then thou art the fitter to iudge after
reading. If not, then read, but iudge not: For he that giueth false
iudgement, doth make himselfe accursed. And so, beseeching God to
giue thee vnderstanding in all thinges, I leaue thee and my labours,
to the blessing of the Almightie.
         
         
            
            TO THE VNCONSCIONABLE
READER.
            ARt thou an Atheist, and so mockes all Religion? Then I leaue thee to
thunder and lightning, vvhereby some auncient Atheistes, haue
been forced to feare, and to acknovvledge a soueraigne diuine
povver ouer the Creature.
            Art thou of some Religion?Iustin. the Historian affirmeth, Conditores su
                     •
                  s Lupae vberib. alt
                     •
                  s: sic omne illum populum Luporum animos habere, inexplebiles sanguinis, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   imperij diuitiarum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   auidos ac leiunos. Lib 38.Lactantius vnderstandeth Lupa to haue been a vile Whore amongst Sh
                     •
                  pheards, and thereof Lupanar. De vera rel lib. 1. c. 20. VVhat, a flouting Papist? Then I
leaue thee to thy mother Rome: As the last Iericho by Hiel, so it vvas
founded in Blood, by such as had sucked the milke of a VVolfe (at least of a
vile Harlot) and it goes on in Blood, as vnable othervvise to be continued.
VVitnesse not onely many bloody massachres a broad, but many sanguiuolent
attempts (of late) heere at home. Specially, vve can not forget thy late
Gu
                  •
               pouder treason; vvherevvith thou didest couet, to mingle vvith our
blood, the blood of thy Parents; yea, of men of thine ovvne Religion. Hovv
then should any Euangelicall vvriting, content thy Idolatrous iudgment?
            Art thou a Separist? One that no sooner hath crept out of the shell, but
labours to picke out the eyes of thy Mother? Looke for the curse of Canaan,
and to be rooted out, for a defiler of the nest thou vvast bred in▪ My Mothers
sonne can doe nothing that can content thee; for thou canst doe nothing, that
vvill long content thy selfe. I novv this is the true Discipline, anone that:
I novv some translation of the Bible may be brought into the Congregation,
i novv none but the liuely voyce of Gods spirit in the Teacher; that is, the
liuely voyce of his ovvne priuate fancie. I novv, the Minister may haue no set
kind of maintenance, I novv he may. I novv, the Apostate from that Church,
may vpon his returne, not be admitted into somuch as a Collecters roome,
(vvhom they call Deacon) anone he may. One-vvhile Psalmes may not be
songe in the Congregation, another vvhile they may. One yeare, it is as lavvfull
for a man to preach in our Temples,
                  M. Greenvvod (neere his last cast, being come from the Fleet to Newgate) so affirmed, as George Knifton their Elder deliuered to me and others. as for the Prophet of Iudah to prophecie
at Bethel; but next yeare, such an act must be tearmed Idolatrie and
Antichristianisme. In a vvord (for thy fooleries are infinite) thy ovvne
Apocryphall inuentions, must be held Canonicall; and I must not seeke to
content thee. VVere not a VVhirelygig in thy braine (as may appeare by thy
trundling from Country to Country, from shop to shop, pratling, inue
                  ••
               iuing,
rayling) our vvritinges vvould be read more soberly, and iudged of more
conscionably.
            VVhatsoeuer vnconscionable Spirit thou bee, I turne my selfe from thee,
saying no more, then Michael did to Satan; The Lord reprooue thee.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            CHAP. I.
            Touching the word, CHVRCH.
            
               THe word CHVRCH, is deriued
of the word Kyrk; This latter,
beeing still retayned both of
Germaine & our North-brittaine.
That the letter K. comes so to
be written with CH. the reason
is plaine, when as it is remembred,
that the word is originally
Greeke, & their letters Kappa
and CHI, we confound, vsing the one indifferently for
the other. As for V. in the word Church, it hauing in
stead thereof, Y. in the word Kyrk, that falles out by same
reason, as some pronounce the letter, Vpsilon, others
Ypsilon.
            
            The Greeke word isSo Nannius Musculus, and Hospinian. de origine templ. 
               Kyriake (of Kyrios, Lord) for
that the place so tearmed, is the Lords-house or Temple.
A Physitian of Antwerp. 
               Goropius Becanus in his Amazonica, findes fault with
Nannius for being on this minde; and thereupon presseth
two words of their owne language, Car, signifying
Amiable; and Rac, I touch. But this is too farre fetcht,
and to no good purpose; and the rather, for that it is no
noueltie to find, both their tongue, and ours, and others,
to borrow of Iauan, I meane the Greekes. Amongest hundreds,
take one familiar example. We haue a certaine
Fruit, which we call Cherry (marke heere also, Ch. for K.)
the French call it Ceris
                     •
                  ; the Italian, Ciriegia (frutto;) the
Spaniard, Ceresa (fruto;) the Latine, Cerasum; the Germaine,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               Kirse: And all these, deriued from the Greeke
word Kerásion or Kêrasos. And if this haue falne out in
wordes of such qualitie, how much more is it like, that
the language of the New Testament (and it also, the
most vniuersall Language of 
                  
                     •
                  aphets people) should vnto
the New Testaments house of Religion (so well as to
the people) giue the name of Kyriake, by Contraction,
Kyrk? In latter sound, Church.
            
         
         
            CHAP. ij.
            Touching the vse of the word CHVRCH. &c.
            THe word Church in our language is taken, either
for the Place set apart for the Lordes publique
worship (as was the Tabernacle to Israel, & therefore
styled, Ohel mognedh, the Tabernacle of Congregation,
or conuention) or, it is taken, for the people of
God, who are by calling,1. Tim. 3▪ 15. the House of God (as the
Apostle speakes to Timothie;) or (as to the Corinthes) a
Temple to the Holy Ghost.
            As it is a materiall House; so it is necessarie, for fitnes
of conuening vnto publique exercises of Fayth & Charitie;
as was the place of the Corinthes meeting, remembred
of the Apostle, to such purpose. And so the House,
in respect of his vse,1. Cor. 16. 1. 2. is the Lords-house, & a place Ecclesiastique;
nor lesse truly then the Temple, may be called
an house of prayer.
            In the Primati
                     •
                  e times, the Christians hauing no Kings
for Patrones, it so came about, that the places of their
meeting, fell out as they might, not as they would. But
the ten Persecutions ouer (so many as the Plagues in
Egipt) it then fell out, that the meeting places were not
onely more publique, but also; some and some, became
very seemely and sumptuous.Euseb. b. 8. c. 1. & 16. Niceph. in b. 7. cha. 2. & 3. About some 300. yeares
after Christ, the Christians began to build them; but

within a few yeares after (euen in the time of Constantine
the great) they became more countenaunced, & rich.
And will any, but the Atheist; or Satan transformed into
a professor of light; will any but such, find fault with
their state and riches, they being Houses deuoted vnto
heauenly purposes? Shall it be lawfull for vs to seele
and trimme our common Houses, and to neglect the
House, deuoted to the Lords peculiar seruice?
            —Hinc, hinc procul ite Prophani.
            And heere let me remember a triuiall Obiection cast in
by the Brownist and such other. They first affirme, that
these materiall Churches (in their phraze, Synagogues)
were originally, euen from the very foundation, deuoted
to Idolatrie: and therfore, in the second place (from
their vnderstanding of Deut. 12. 1. &c.) they conclude
them to be Idolothytes; and so our duties to pull them
downe. Some others of them haue taught that they may
be conuerted for ciuill vse, to Barnes, or Stables. Nor is
this latter opinion, otherwise then (wel-ny) vniuersall
amongst them.
            I might answere them thus: First, agree flatly on the
poynt your selues, and then I will shape an answere.
Secondly, seeing the most & principall of you do hold,
that they may be conuerted to Ciuill vses (whereupon at
Campin and Narden in Netherland, you were contented
to dwell in Monasteries, and so did) I might demaunde,
how that standeth good, with Deut. 12? Yea, I could
thirdly say, they themselues are one in opinion, but another
in action; for in such Monasteries (raysed vp in far
more corrupt times, thē were the Churches) themselues
did conuene weekely, for acting their publique Deuotions.
Yet I must needes confesse, that old Abbot (who
was of opinion, that the Prelates of England could coniure,
and had by such course sent a Diuell among the

               Brownists, for stirring vp amongst them all cutthroate
contentions) he would neither enter such place for spirituall
exercise, nor any other ciuill respect.
            But alas sillie soules, the Commaundement in Deut. 12.
for Israels pulling downe all Idolatrous places, was not
meerely Morall and perpetuall; but stood in force for
the time, wherein one house (as Tabernacle or Temple)
was alotted to the Lords spirituall worship. For they
were pulled downe, for teaching and driuing all people,
to that One place, where God put his name. As God gaue
no such Commaundement to his people, before he appoynted
One such publique place to be repayred vnto;
so, neither after the Lord abolished that one place, was
the other Commaundement enforced. Nay, the Apostle
vnto Timothy (as opposing to that) sayth; that now, It
is lawfull in all places, to hold vp pure hands without wrath and
doubting. The Commaundement therefore, in respect
of the execution, was plainely Temporall: and as such an
Idolatrous House stood opposite to that one-place, so
Ceremoniall. And indeed, it well and aptly taught, that
we should dissolue all conuentions of Schismatikes and
Heretiques, for bringing them to vnitie with the one
Catholique body of Christ Iesus. Wherewith let be remembred;
first, that Euery creature (since the remouall
of the partition Wall which stood betweene the sew and
Gentile) it is made holy by the word,
               1. Tim. 4. 5. Act. 10. 15. & 11. 18. 
               and prayer. Secondly for
Vse, it is lawfull to them that be sanctified, and so hold
it lawfull. To deny this, is to Iudaize; and in effect,
not onely to say,Rom. 14. 14. Titus. 1. 15. that the CHRIST is not come; but
also, to blaspheme the libertie, whereto Christ hath
made vs free. Thus the Diuell, vnder the colour of Synceritie,
labours to annull Christianitie.
            But if a man should let the former trueth of doctrine
passe, and then should put them to prooue, that all our

materiall Churches were from the very roote Idolatrized,
should he not put them to an endlesse businesse? If
they say, that from the first Stone, they were dedicated
to some Idol-saint; it is more then they can proue, howsoeuer
since (for distinction sake, or otherwise) they
haue had some Names put vpon them. But admit it from
the begining of their very Forme, what reason can there
be of vnlawfulnes to pray in them, more then of praying
in Amsterdams Churches librarie (except they there
study without Prayer; and then it is like to be but a
prophane study:) Or their praying in S. Annes, S. Giles or
S. M
                     •
                  udlins parioche (be it at bed or at board) seing these
Parioches were dedicated to such Saints as Anne, Giles;
yea, some of them to the Paternoster, Creede, Aue, Kyri
                     •
                  ,
whereof comes the word Kyrk? If they answer, that no
doubt they may do this, so well as Iudahs Prophet Preached
before Bethels Alter, or S. Pauls vsage of any deuotion
in the Ship dedicated toAct. 28. 11. Two breathren, who (as Poets say) were begottē by Iupiter on Leah, in the forme of a Swanne. For their scouring the Seas of Pirats, they were held Gods of the Sea. 
               Cast
                     •
                  r and P
                     •
                  llux: I replie,
euen as lawfull it is for vs to pray in our Churches,
howsoeuer frō the foundation deuoted. But the ground
of such lawfull and well doing, rests neither in their or
our action; But in this, that so we do according to the
former Doctrine; it being a Doctrine according to godlynes,
directing vs to the true vse of euery creature. But
asTit. 1. 15. 
               To the Cleane all t
                     •
                  ings are cleane, so, To the vncleane and
vnbeleeuing, is nothing cleane; For, euen their 
                     ••
                  indes and conseiences
are vncleane. So much of the Materiall Church, considered
from the Greeke * word Kyriake.
            
         
         
            
            CHAP. iij.
            Touching the wordes, Synagôgé and Ecclesia. &c.
            THe Septuagint, that is, the Seauentie learned Iewes,
(or,
                  Aristeas, of the Septuagints time. as Aristeas writes to his brother Philocratos 72.
that is, of euery Tribe sixe▪) they, at the request of
Ptolemy Philadelph (one of the Kinges of the South
in Daniel) did translate the Law into Greeke. These in
Moses vse the word Sinagoge for Congregation, speaking
of Israel, not of the Tabernacle: for if they speake of the
Tabernacle, then they write Tou martyríou of Witnesse,
not (as we) of Congregation. It may be, from the martyring
of Beastes in that place, whereby their fayth was
witnessed to God-ward.
            But in Le
                     •
                  iticus 8. 3. they ioyne both Synagogé &
Ecclesia
togeather thus: And assemble, Pasan ten Synagogén ecclesias.
The whole Synagogue of the Church.1. Macc. 3. 13. The writer of
the Màchabees-storie, stiles the same, Ecclesián pistôn. The
Church of Beleeuers. In a word, these two wordes, Synagogé
and Ecclesia, be vsed each for other in diuine writing▪
whether we intend thereby, the place of sacred meetings,
or the people that so meete in these places.
            1. Synagogue for the place, as, Ioh. 16. 2. Act. 13. 14. with
other places. And Ecclesia for the place; as, 1. Cor.
11. 18. where the Apostle opposeth that place, to
their priuate Houses. Compare it with vers. 22. The
like in 1. Cor. 14. 34.
            2. Synagogue taken for a Conuention of people, as before:
and also in Reuel. 3. 9. And Ecclesia taken for
a Conuention of people, as afore; and in many
places of the New Testament: yea, for an vnciuill
hurlie-burly, as in Act. 19. 39. 41. called else-where,
the Beastes of Ephesus.
               
                  •
               
            
            
               A certaineAugust. quest. on Leuit. 57. Auncient, putteth this difference betweene
them. Ecclesia (sayth he) is a Conuocation▪ and spok
                     •
                  n
of reasonable creatures, Capable of a calling: But Synagôge
is properly Congregation, and spoken of Beastes of the flocke (for
such the Latines c
                     •
                  ll, Greges) who come togeather rather by c
                     •
                  
                  action
or driuing (for so the Greeke word signifieth) then by calling
vnto as the 
                     ••
                  rmer word importeth. It must needes be
graunted for pretty, that he hath said, but how fitting in
Diuinitie, it may be guessed, by the vse of the wordes, in
the former allegations.
            I conclude then, that the Ecclesiasticall word Kyriake,
and the two Canonicall, namely Synagoge and Ecclesia, they
all be of vs translated Church, intending thereby (as
in the former Chapter) An house of meeting, specially, for
sacred vse; or, as in this Chapter more plainely, they import,
a People so meeting. For in this Discourse, we are
not to speake as Ciuilians in their Law, but as Diuines
in our Law.
         
         
            CHAP. iiij.
            Touching Church-people.
            THe word Ecclesia or Church, doth somtimes intend,
theColoss. 1. 18. 20. whole mysticall Body of Christ Iesus,
contayning not onely such Christians as be here
Milita
                     ••
                  
                (that is fighting against the Di
                  •
               el, world,
and flesh) but also that part of the holy Armie; which
hauing in the last act of life trod Satan vnder foote, are
now in Heauen, Triumphant.
            
            In some good sense, the good Angels (Reue. 22. 9. 
               Our Fellow-seruants,
and of our Brethren the Prophets) may be put into
the Churches Albe: But seeing by Church, we properly
vnderstand Mankind (with whose nature, he hath Communicated,
Hebr. 2. 16. not with that of Angels) I therefore in this

Discourse must so be vnderstood.
            And passing by the triumphant Church, as they haue
passed from the Sanctum here, to the Sanctum sanctorum aboue;
we are to consider this Militant Church, as it is
Knowen to God, or, as it is Knowen to Vs. As it is knowen to
God, so2. Tim 2. 19. 
               The Lord (not we) doth know who are his. And in
that sense, the Church is to vs inuisible, or vnseeable. As
it is knowen to vs, so it is like vnto
                  Beda. on Rom. 8. from Aug. on S. Iohn. 6. compares it so, for the Doue and Rauen. 
               Noahs Arke, containing
not onely a reuerend Shem, but an hollow-hearted
Cham; not onely Beastes cleane, but also vncleane. Or
it is like to the Tabernacles Sanctum, where were not
only holy oblations but also some ashes and light-snufs,
which were to be cast out of the Sanctam.
            
            Againe, this Militant Church, is to be considered, not
onely in the Whole, for which it is called in our Creede,
The Catholique Church, but also in the parts, whereof euery
Society is termed a Communion of Sa
                     ••
                  tes. By which
phrase, the Brownist vnderstandeth ordinarily, a Society
of People Really Sanctified for the whole, testified in
obedience to the whole of Gods will reuealed. Such a
Communion can they finde me one? In Adams few, it
was not so. In Noahs Eight, it was not so. With Rebecca
                     •
                  s.
Twins, it was not so. With Israels Conuention it was
not so. With Iudahs assemblies, it was not so. With
Christs Twelue, it was not so. With Corinths Church it
was not so. Fiue of Asiaes seauen Churches, were not so.
And as for 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                & Philadelphia, they be praised for the
Generall of their obedience, not for euery particular: for,
Iames. 3. 2. 1. King. 8. 46. 
               In many things (as the Holy Ghost witnesseth) we sinne all.
            
            That the Catholike Wheate-field or Church (euen
Christs possession through the World; For by World
there is intended the Earths Largenes, as in Psa. 2. 8. that
in it should be Weedes, yea, inseperable Weedes, our Sauiour
teacheth in Math. 13. from which parable may be

obserued.
            1 That it is theQuid Regnū caelorū in nouo testamento, nempe, ecclesia fidelium. Zuingl. in expos. eius. artic. 34. 
               Kingdome of Heauen (neuer taken in
the ill part, as some times the word World is) which is
there compared.
            2 That the seed of the Kingdome, is sowen through
the World.
            3 That in the midst of that good seed, the Tares be
sowen; and not without the Church, as some Schismatikes
would.
            4 That such euill is sowne, when Christs seruants
are a sleepe: into the midst of Gods temple, the aduersary
so got.
            5 The Seruants awaking, see these personall Euils
keeping-vnder the personall Good. And therefore the
euill ones visible, euen as visible as the Wheate, and not
onely Hypocrites, as some badly haue taught.
            6 A purgation of all such Visible euill, cannot with
the Churches good be made, till the Lord in the worlds
end do come vnto iudgment. And therefore meane time
to be permitted, which without rending the church, cannot
be seuered. That for the estate of the Church Catholique.
            
            That a Particular Church, is no more priuiledged then
the Totall or vniuersall, must necessarily follow; for that
Sathan (as an enuious man) sowes his Tares) Ana méson
tou sitou) euen through the middest of that Wheate; his
malice being no lesse against the partes, then the whole:
as may appeare in Reuel. 12. where not preuailing against
that Woman, hee goes and warres with the remnant of
her seed. And no maruaile it be so, seeing euery particular
person still sinneth, whereupon still that petition
is in force, Forgiue vs our trespasses. In which respect also
it is,Leuit. 4. that in Leuiticus is appoynted sacrifice, both for the
whole Congregation erring, and for the partes of that
whole;Decretal. v. 5. cap. 28. as Priest, Prince, People. So Gregories Decretall
               
concludes: Iudicium D
                     ••
                  veritat
                     •
                   quae non fallit, nec fallitu
                     •
                  ,
s
                     ••
                  pe
                     •
                   i
                     •
                  nititur. Iudicium autem Ecclesiae 
                     〈◊〉
                   Opinionem
sequitur, quam & fallere saepe contingit & fallj 
                     •
                   propter quod
contingit interdum, vt qui ligatus est apud Deum, apud Ecclesiam
si
                     •
                   so
                     •
                  utus; & qui liber est apud Deum, ecclesiastica sit sententia
innodatus.
            
            Particular Congregations, are therefore called Communions
of Saints, or Holy-ones; not because they all
Really and indeed be such; but for that they be called to
be such; as also haue vndergone the outward Signes
and Meanes of sanctitie or holines: Heereupon. Israel
became anExod. 19. 6. Holy-nation, though not al of them indeed
holy. So Israel (after the Schisme from Iudah) is called
Gods sonne, and Gods people, and yet the most of them
turners aside to grosse Idolatry, which (of all sinnes) diuorceth
frō God. So the Corinths are Saints by calling, &
yet amongst thē grieuous kinds of sinners, both against
Faith and good Manners. This I speake not (as the Schismatique
raileth) for iustifiing faults, but for iustifying
the Churches true-being, notwithstanding such faults.
            Let the Schismatique looke into himselfe, let him search
into the meanders and turninges of his heart; and then
let me see, if he can say vnto God, My heart is cleane;
there is no spot in mee. If he be of the minde, whereof
one in Lyn-regis was, that Dauid did lie of himselfe, when
he sayd to the Lord, I was borne in iniquitie, &c. then I will
say to sir Schismatique as I sayd to him; I am too lowe,
to talk with one that is so hie. Or as Constantine the great,
vnto the Nouatian Bishop Acesius,Socrat. schol. l 1. ca
                        •
                     . 10. Prouide thee a Ladde
                     •
                  ,
(ô pure Puritane) and thy selfe aione climbe vp into heauen.
            
         
         
            CHAP. v.
            Touching the Churches Visibilitie in the earth.
            OVR Sauiour saying, that vpon that Rocke which

               Peter then preached (and that was1. Cor. 10. 4. Math. 7. 24. Christ himselfe)
hee would builde his Church; against which,
Hel-gates should not preuaile, cannot be vnderstood,
that hee speakes of this or that particular Church,
but of the Catholique body, whereto himselfe is the
Coloss. 1. 18. Head.
            For the Church of Rome, it was chased away from
that seat, many yeares togeather, by the Gothes and Vandales;
witnesse the Stories which cannot be gainesayd.
And no maruaile, for from that place, not onely proceeded
the power, whereby Christ was crucified; but also,
whereby the great persecutions flowed, for the extirpation
of Christianitie. Vpon which foresight, no doubt
S. Iohn hath left that Citie vnder the deepest curse, in his
Booke of Reuelation.
            For the 7. Churches of Asia-minor, which S. Iohn saw
to be as Starres in Christes right hand (a priuiledge neuer
giuen to Rome) they quickly vanished. Which (among
other reasons) doubtles was, for keeping vs, from
tying faith to any particular place or person. And if
God spared not his owne peculiar people the Iewes, but
rooted them out for their sinnes sake, what reason is
there, that he should spare any wilde branches, inserted
in the place of that naturall Oliue?
            That promise therefore in Math. 16. must (euen by euidence
of Consequent) be vnderstood of the Catholique
Church, which howsoeuer it might be beat downe in
some part, yet should continue in some other. Euen as
the Moone, whereto she is compared, might to some
part of the Earth be eclipsed, when to some other part,
she shyned brightly. This I note against the Romanist,
which would not only tye the Church to some one
place; but also conclude that the Church hath beene
to this part of the world alwayes visibly glorious.
            
               
Besides, I conclude the Euer-visibilitie of the Church,
(though in such defectiue manner) for conuincing of
some, who haue not knowne how to answere the Romanist,
otherwise then by denying all visibilitie, through
some misunderstanding of some Scriptures, in 2. Thess. 2.
as also in the Reuelation. Whereas indeed, a great departure
was to be made from the Fayth; but yet meane time,
it should not cease to be Gods Temple, though the Aduersarie
vsurped a chiefe place in it:Reuel. 7. for (as S. Iohn foresaw)
some Trees should keepe greene in the Lordes
court, hauing the sauing Seale of Gods Grace printed
vpon them. And were it not so, how should sauing
Grace be conueyed vnto vs, without new Apostles, furnished
extraordinarily from heauen? And how should
we come by Gods Booke (contayning his written will)
if the Lord reserued not a Remnant,1. Tim. 4. the Church being
onely the Piller and Ground of that trueth?
            The veritie of all which, was typed out in the Auncient
Church before Christ came in the flesh. Before the
Flood, for 1656. yeares, the Church remayned in some
few Families. After the Flood, in a few Families, till the
guift of the Law at Mount Horeb or Sinaj. Then the
Church began to be more visible, and of more glorious
constitution; first, in the Wildernesse; then after, in Canaan,
till the time of Salomons sonne Rehoboam: Then ten
Trybes schisme from the two; leauing the two in some
orderly state; but betaking themselues to grieuous Idolatrie:
Yet during the times of such Idolatrie, God did
not leaue them, but stirred vp many excellent Prophets
among them; as Elias, Elisha, Ionah, Amos, and others, togeather
with excellent Schooles of Prophets, as at Bethel
and Iericho; till such time, as Assur caried them away
captiue. In meane time, the case stood farre better
with the Church in Iudah, till the Lord for their sinnes

sake, suffred Nebuchadnezar of Babel, to carry them captiue
to Babel. There they continued 70. yeares, without
exercise of Sacrifice. At the 70. yeares end, they are permitted
by the next Monarchist to repaire home for
building the sacramentall Citie and Temple.Three Monarchies (as Chaldea, Persia, & Grecia) and a Duarchj, a parted gouernment. But some
seauen seauens of yeares (euen 49 yeares, as Gabriel foretold
Daniel) it was, ere that worke could be finished.
From that time, they continued vnder the gouernment,
first of the Medes & Persians (represented by Nebuchadnetsars
siluery Breast and Armes.) Then vnder the Brasen
Monarchy of the Greekes. Afterwardes vnder the
Duarchie of Egipt and Syria; the first, South from Iudeà;
the second, North; as Daniel plainely foretold them.
And so they reach to Christ, that Stone cut from the
Mountaine, who dashed that Image of Nebuchaanetsars
to powder. When Christ came, we finde the Church (as
for some 600. yeares it had been) quite out of order, and
very few of them, that could brooke the Lord of life, or
his sauing Gospell. Principall Starres for this Storie, S.
Luke layeth downe, when as he giues vs the most glorious
persons in succession of pedigree, from the first
Ad
                     •
                  m to the second; that is, vnto Christ Iesus, who is
bl
                  •
               ssed for euer.
            From which holy typicall Storie, I conclude; first, an
Euer visibilitie of the Church. Secondly, but such a visibilitie,
as inow was more, inow lesse: inow glorious,
inow the glory eclipsed: inow in constitution, inow
shaken asunder. Nor can it be thought strange, that the
Daughter (I meane the Christian Church, brought
foorth of mother Zion, should be subiect to such mutabilitie
and change, when as she hath not been inferiour
to her Mother for sinne; and therefore as capable of
iudgement. To flesh and blood, it is indeed somewhat
harsh, that Christes Diademe in the earth should be at

any time deiected (as may appeare by Ethan in Psal.
               The Monke Folengi
                     •
                  s vpon that Psal. vers. 40. Christianorum tempora, forsan
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   presentia, aptarì possunt. 89.)
but such deiection is the Churches lot, before the second
comming of Christ, as it was before his first comming.
And that it should so fall out, himselfe foretels in Math.
24. the mysterie whereof begun to worke, in the Apopostles
times, as the Apostle tels the Thessalonians. This
poynt I conclude with that of Bullinger:Bulling. in Epi
                        •
                     ome temp. part. 2. in Annotat. Omnibus temporibus
retinet sibi Dominus ecclesiam, etiam in medio corruptissimi
mundi et in medio haeresum, schismatum at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   corruptionum.
Tempora illa, (speaking of mother Zion) 
                     •
                  ypum praetulere,
vltimis nostris temporibus, in quibus ho die viuimus.
            
         
         
            CHAP. vj.
            Touching a visible Christian; a visible Christian society;
and a visible Christian society established.
            AFter the deuision of Israels ten Tribes from Iudah
(for Benjamin being mixt with Iudah was so couched
vnder that tearme, togither with some of
Leuj) the people of the world was distinguished
(Israel being dispearsed, as afore) into Iew and Gentile:
So that, who was not of the Iewes; were called Gentiles.
The difference betweene which two sortes of people,
stood thus.
            ¶The Iew, was a people, possessed of theAct. 3. 25. Galath. 3. 26. Rom. 9. 4. Couenant
made to Abraham, namely; That in his Seed, all
the kindreds of the earth should be blessed. He sayth
not, to thy Seeds, as speaking of many; but, and to thy
Seed, as of one; which is CHRIST. Besides, of them
were the Prophets; and to them was the adoption and
the glory, and couenants; and the gift of the Law, and
the seruice of God, and the promises. Of whom were
the Fathers, and of whom (concerning the flesh) Christ
came, who is God ouer all, blessed for euer, Amen. So

that the Iewes were as Salomons seruantes, standing before
him, as in his chamber of presence, hauing all means
to make them truely blessed. An easie matter therefore
for them (had not wilfull pieuishnesse hindred them) to
haue become true visible Christians.
            For the Gentiles, they were (as the Apostle tels theEphes. 2. 12. 
               Ephesians)
without Christ, and were Aliants from the common
wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the couenants
of promise, and had no hope, and were Atheoi,
without God in the world. Yea, they were not onely
destitute of all sauing Good, but possessed with all euill.
By theRom. 1. 19. 20 worke of Creation they were necessarily drawen
to acknowledge an inuisible Power for the Creator,
which they called God (as the world is of Mercury
Trismegistos,
               Trismeg. in Pimand. c. 9. called Gods sonne) and that this God was
(Heis d' est' antogenes) One and of hi
                  ••
               selfe, as a most ancient
Poet,Orpheus in 1. Sect. de de
                     •
                  . 
               Orpheus teacheth in his Hymne of God, together
with other excellent respects of God: but whē they
should come to worship him, they went a whoring after
their owne inuentions; comming to that one God,
by a thousand-thousand Idoles; seeking God downe in
the Creature, whereas by the Creature (as by Iaacobs
Ladder) they should haue clymed vpwards to the Creator.
An hard matter thus it was, for a Gentile to become
a true Christian. But as things impossible with man,
are possible with God: so, after the Lord had taken a
first-fruites of the Iewes (as Apostles, and others) he takes
this wild Oliue of the Gentiles, and plants it in the stocke
of the Iewes; that thencefoorth, they might become children
of Abraham, by liuing in the fayth of Abraham.
            
            1 Who then is to vs a true visible Christian? Euen Hee
(be hee Iew or Gentile) that holds the fayth of Abraham.
And what was the fayth of Abrahā? This, he beleeued,
that God would raise vp a Seed (euen Christ) out of his

seed, in whom alone, himselfe and others, should receiue
the eternall blessing: for earthly blessinges he saw to be
flitting, and therefore looked after a better, as the Apostle
enformeth the Hebrewes.
               Heb. 11. How was this blessing to
be effected? That he was taught from the Analogie of
Sacrifice; namely, that the Messiah should feele the fierie
indignation of God; and by his death, make satisfaction
for Sinne. Adam lyued by the same Fayth, expecting
the promised Seed of the Woman, which should breake
the head of the Serpent. And that Fayth Habel testified
in sacrificing his Lambe. Sheth, Enosh, and the rest, knew
no other Fayth. And Noahs Sacrifice (comming from
the Arke) could neuer haue smelled sweete in the Lords
nosethrils, otherwise then he had that Fayth which respected
Christ; whom the Apostle stileth,Eph. 5. 2. 
               Osmen euodias)
the sweete o
                  ••
               ur. Abraham, Isaac, Iaacoh, had eye to
no other meanes of saluation. Israel before the Law, some
and some in Egipt, came (as Ezekiel. 20. 5. &c.) to fashion
themselues to the Idols there: but Moses and Aaron were
stirred vp to fetch them away; to whom the Lord at
Mount Horeb, recommended the true forme of Sacrifice,
with rites peculiar to the land of Canaan. And in Iudi
                     •
                  
               
(a part of Canaan) they were continued, till their deportation
to Babel. But then the outward Ceremonie ceasing
for 70. yeares, they notwithstanding looked to the
promised Seed (of the Prophets tearmed Messiah;) and
Dan
                     •
                  l in that place, was foretold by the Angell of Messiahs
comming to suffer for Sinne, Seauentie-seauens of
yeares before. When he was come, Iôhn Baptist poynted
him out, saying; This is the Lambe that takes away the
sinnes of the world; for that it was Christ that was shadowed
out vnder the Law, by the Lambe offred morning
and euening All which the Apostle teacheth the Hebrewes,
when he sayth;Heb. 10. 1. that The Law was a shadow of good

thinges; (signifying that these good thinges were in
Christ.) Yea,Coloss. 2. 17. to the Collossians, he sayth; that The body (of
such shadowes) was Christ. I conclude then, thus; that
that which is Essentiall, or tendeth to the very B
                     •
                  ing of
A true Christian, is not euery good thing, but this one
good thing, Fayth in Christ Iesus for perfect Redemption.
Martha may combere her selfe about many things, (and
in themselues otherwise prayse-worthy) but this one
thing is necessarie; & who with Mary hath chosē it, hath
elected the better part. Iob in the land of Vz, the▪ 
               Eunuch
in Aethiopia, Certaine in the Court of bloody Nero, had
their Iustification with God, onely by this Fayth in
Christ; there being no other name vnder Heauen,
whereby (as S. Peter teacheth) man is to be saued. As
for Good-workes (which necessarily doe follow true
Fayth) they belong not to the very-being of a true Christian
(seeing some one may be saued by the Fayth, before
he can come to do an externall good worke) but
such workes tend to the true Being of a Visible Christian.
For, as Fayth internall iustifies towardes God (for Abraham
beleeued, and that was counted to him for Righteousnesse;)
so, Workes externall do iusti
                  •
               ie towards man;
according to that of S. Iames, Shew mee thy Fayth, by thy
Workes. Sutable to which, is that of Origen.
               Origen. on Rom. 3. 27. 
               The Apostle
(sayth he) saith, that Iustification by Fayth ALONE, is sufficient:
so that the belieuer whosoeuer he be, is ONLY so iustisfied,
Whereto he addeth (speaking of the Theefe on the
Crosse) The Lord requireth not of him, what before he had
wrought, nor did expect what worke he should fulfill, after he beleiued;
but being justified by so
                     •
                  e confession (name
                     •
                  y, of Fayth) he
joyned him companion vnto him, being ready to enter into Paradise.
Afterwardes againe, Abraham might haue glory for
his Workes, with holy and just-men that saw them; but this
glory with God, was Only by Fayth-secret. And his Maister

               Clemens before him, writ thus: By Fayth alone, the beleeuer
is perfected. For a Corollarie, let Scholers take what
followes.
            Ignatius in Ep. ad Ephesios.]Ignatius. Iustin. Principiū vita Fides, finis eiusdem Charitas.
Iustin. dial. cum Tryph▪] Purificamur fide—Fides quae ē ad Deum,
iustificat hominem.
            Clem. in Strom. 7.]Clem. Alex. Augustin. Per fidem, efficitur Fidelis perfectus.]
            Aug. ad Bonifac. l. 3. c. 5. Nostra fides (hoc est, catholica fides) iustos
ab iniustis (non operum, sed ipsa fidei lege) discernit; quia Iustus ex fide
viuit. Then he numbers vp all kindes of workes, but barres them
out from iustification.
            
            Chrys.Chrys. in Gen▪ hom. 26. Causa bonorum omnium (speaking of Noah)
fuit sua in Deum fides. And the same Chrys. against the Iewes (if that
against the Iewes be his) in orat. 4. he hath this: Christus, non ex benefactis,
nec laborib. nec pensatione, sed ex sola gratia iustificauit genus nostrū.
            Ambros. in Rom. 3.Ambros. Iustificati sunt Gratis; quia nihil operantes, ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
vicem reddentes, Sola fide Iustificati sunt dono Dei.
            Basil.Basil. mag. de humilit, Ea demum per
                  •
               ecta & Omnimoda gloriatio est in
Deo, quando ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                propter suam ipsius quis iustitiam extollitur, sed agnoscit se
quidem vera destitui iustitia; verum Sola in Christum fide iustificatum esse.
Et gloriatur in eo Paulus, vt suam ipsius iustitiam contemnat.
            Victor Antiochenus in Marc. 5.Victor. Haec disertè indicant, vestimenta contacta
eam non sanasse, sed fidem. Igitur ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                locus, ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                verba, ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                aliud
quippiam eiusmodi externum, hominem saluat, sed vnūquem
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                sua fides
seruat.
            Rabanus. l. 7.Rabanus. in ecclūm. c. 2. Per solam Christigratiam, ab omnis candalo
liberantur Electi.
            Remigius in Psa. 29.Remigius. vita aeterna non est ex Merito, quia cadere per nos
potuimus, sed per nos surgere non potuimus; sed ex voluntate eius. 1. sola
misericordia.
            Idiota,Idiota. cap. 6. de conflict. carn. & animae. Melius est iustificare quam
creare; cum creando detur Natura: Iustificando vero, et auferatur culpa,
& conferatur Gratia.
            Giselbert.Giselbert. in Alterc. c. 8. Iustitiam dei dico, non qua deus iustus est, sed
qua induit hominem, cum Gratis iustificat impium.
            Theophilact.Theoph. in Rom. 10. Dei iustitia est, quae ex Fide est. Haec non indiget
laboribus, operibusue nostris, verum tota ad gratiam dei pertinet.
            Barnard. ser. 3.Barnard. de aduent. domi. Iustificabit nos Gratis, vt Gratia commendetur,
And in Annunc. Mar. ser. 1. Hoc est testimonium quod perhibet
Sp. SS. dicens, Dimissa sunt tibi peccata tua. Sic N. arbitratur Apostolus,
Gratis iustificari hominem per Fidem.
            
               
Rupertus in l. 7.Rupert. in Iob. c. 7. In Iesu Christo, nec circumcisio, nec preputium,
nec Gentilis, nec Iudaeus, sed 
                  •
               ola Fides requiritu
                  •
               .
            Io. Bapt. Foleng.Folengius. in Psa. 2. Quae maioriam potesteē cùm Iustitiae qua
nos ex peccatorib iustos efficit, non imputans peccata: tum bonitatis demonstratio,
per quam aeternorum bonorum ad hereditatem Gratis inuitantur, &
quodammodo vel inuiti trahimur. And on Pl. 45. Video amarem (namely,
of Christ) video pacem, video iustitiam, qua ego Gratis iustificor per fidem.
            Fulgent. ad Monim. l. 1.Fulgent. In sanctis igitur coronat deus iustitiam quam
eis gratis ipse tribuit, gratis seruabit, gratis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   perfecit.
            
            Honorius in spec.Honorius. ecclus. de nat. dōi. Fides debet eē fundamentum, & postquam

                  •
               am posueritis, debetis ponere dilectionem dei & proximi.
            D. Io. Ferus in 1. part.Ferus. pass dom. Fides facit discipulum Christi, Charitas
autem ostendit & probat discipulum.
            
               Tho. Aquinas in Lect.Aquin. 4. super Galat. 3. (see him also on Rom. 3.) his
tongue turned to English, runnes thus: No Workes, either Ceremoniall
or Morall, are the cause why any man is iust before God: For
Workes are not the cause, that man is iust, but the execution and manifestation
of his iustice; because no man is iustified with God by his
Worke, but by the habite of Fayth infused.
            Let the Romanist wrangle (in the abuse of Distinction)
so long as they shall, euen through their Church (as they
will haue it) it hath through all ages passed for vndoubted
trueth, that vnto Iustification with God, no one externall
Worke whatsoeuer (no not of Baptisme or Circumcision)
hath once been required, for essentiall to the
sauing-being of a Christian, but Sola fides▪
                Fayth onely;
which is internall, and the guift of God also. But to become
a Christian visible vnto others, there is required
such outward Workes (as fruites) whereby we may be
well perswaded of the Fayth that is inward, as the inward
life of the tree; which is vnseeable otherwise then
in the fruites flowing from it. The first fruite of which
Fayth to vs-ward, is, a free Confession, that the heart so beleeueth:Rom. 10. 10.
               For (sayth the Apostle) with the heart man beleeueth
vnto righteousnesse, and with the mouth man confesseth vnto
saluation. The second speciall Worke is, subiection to
Baptisme (the seale of their iustification, annexed to the

word of beleefe) and therefore the Apostles commission
ran thus; First Preach, and then Baptize. Nor would
the Eunuch so instantly haue craued Baptisme, had not
Philip taught the necessitie thereof. True it is, that it is
not necessarie to saluation simply, but conditionally, as it
may be conueniently had. But Contempt, or wilfull Omission,
is as damnable, as Esaus base thought of Canaan;
               Gen. 25, 32. Isa▪ 7. 11 12. and
king Ahaz his hypocriticall shew, in seeming not to
stand in need of a Signe. For how can a soule haue true
respect to Gods Word, when it shall thinke lightly or
vilely of that Seale which is suffixed to that Word? A
third Worke flowing from true Fayth, is a Desire of being
further informed in the mysterie of the Gospell,
which the Angels themselues desire to peire into,1. Pet. 1. 12. whom
(notwithstanding) it so much concernes not. And who
will not desire to know the full of their Fathers Will?
The fourth fruite issuing from true Fayth, is, to Loue God
aboue all, and our Neighbour as our selfe; and to testifie the
trueth of such loue, in all duties of Pietie and Iustice, as
from Gods word shalbe manifest. Such a soule, so beleeuing
& working, is to vs-ward, a true visible Christian.
            2 A companie of such gathered togeather, are a true
Christian assemblie; or (as the Apostle sometimes calles
them, finding them in someSo Origen on Rom. 16. So Theophilact thereon, & on 1. Cor. 16. So Haymo on Ep. to Philemō: Ambrose, and others. house) a Church of God
Which causedTertull exh. ad castitatem. 
               Tertullian to conclude thus; Vbi tres,
Ecclesia est, licet Laicj; Where be but three, although Laymen,
there is a Church.
            3 A company of such, not only gathered togeather,
but also, possessed of spiritual Ouerseers and Seruitours,
for the regiment of the whole, by Doctrine and Discipline;
such a people, be a true visible constituted Church. For as
the common sort of them, be but as an Eare for hearing;
so, their Ouerseers be as an Eye for seeing; and the Seruitours
as necessarie Hands to their Ouerseers. As the

Apostle then can say;1. Cor. 12▪ 17. 
               If all the Body were an Eye, where
were the hearing? So I by like proportion; If all were Eye
and Eare, where were the power of conuayance betweene
them?
         
         
            CHAP. vij.
            Touching the Ministers of an established Church.
            THE auncient Church of Israel, had constituted
vnto it, two sortes of Ministers, Priestes & Leuites.
The Priestes againe were deuided into 2. sortes;
first, in that one was to be Hy-priest (not onely for
a yeare, as was the corruption at last, but for the whole
tearme of life) and he onely might enter into the Sanctum
sanctorum, and in other businesses was principall. In the
second place, were many other Priestes, attending the
dayly Sacrifice; which after by Dauid, were for better
order, distributed into1. Chro. 24. 7. &c. 24. Classios. Of the Leuites (simplie
so called, for otherwise the Priestes were of Leuj)
they were deuided into two rankes, each knowing what
partes of the Tabernacle he was to wind vp and carry:
the one sort of them called Gershomites, the other Merarites,
as all the Priestes were called Kohathites, according
to the Heads of the Families they came of. But when
Dauid prepared for a Standing house vnto the Lord, he
distributed them into other Orders, for other purposes;
as in 1. Chro. 25. and this by no particular precept from
the Lord, otherwise then from the generall rule (whereto
Naturall reason leadeth) namely, That all in the Church
should be done with comlynesse and order.
            
            Another sort of Ministers God prouided for that
Church, and these were the Prophets and Prophetisses,
stirred vp out of what tribe soeuer. These were not constituted

to the Tabernacle or Temples businesses, but
raysed vp of God (besides any ordinarie forme of calling)
specially, for calling Priest and people into order,
when they erred from the commandement. And as their
calling (for forme sake) was extraordinarie; so, they
were furnished with guifes extraordinarie; both for
knowledge and strange workes working. The Ordinarie
ministrie therfore, constituted to the Church, were
Priestes & Leui
                     •
                  es; the extraordinarie ministrie (tyed not
directly to any one place or people) they were such
Prophets, tearmed of elder times, Seers. This, for that
Churches ministrie.
            ¶The New-testaments Church, hath her ministerie
proportionable to her Mother. Some, for calling and
qualification Ordinarie: some againe, Extraordinarie.
Extraordinarie were these,Ephes. 4 11. Non mihi Apostolorum gloriam vindico. Quis in hoc, nisi quos ipse filius elegit Dei? Amb. offic. l. 1. c. 1. 
               Apostles, Prophets, Euangelist
                     •
                  ;
all whose Outward forme of calling, so well as qualification,
was besides the generall rule Apostles and Prophets
hauing their calling immediatly from God, howsoeuer
the Church might adde (sometimes) their seale vnto it;
as in the sending out of Paul and Barnabas. The Euangelistes
had their calling immediatly from the Apostles, and
sometimes (I doubt not) from the Prophets; being indeed
to these that called them but as godly, trustie seruantes,
as Elisha was to Elias, & Ge
                     •
                  èzi should haue been
to E
                     •
                  isha.
            
            The ordinarie ministerie, were Bishops & Deacons; the
first being as the Eye of the Church, & therfore in English
called, Ouer-seers: the other, as the Churches hands,
for better dispatch of some dueties; & therefore in English
called Ministers and Seruitours. And into these two
sortes (as Maister and Man) the Apostle distributes
them in 1. Tim. 3. But then these Bishops (called also
Cyprian de jeiunio. Non conuenit annis impubibus sedere in cathedra, & in Primogenitis 
                     •
                  oum, lege aratio est interdicta. 
               Elders for that ordinarily they were such for their

yeares) they be of two sortes; one of them hauing preheminence
for place and voyce, as the Hy-priest ouer
his brethren, and for that in R
                     •
                  uel. 2. & 3. hee is styled,
The Angel of the congregation: and very fitly for his place,
may be tearmed Arch-bishop, which is in plaine English,
but, chiefe Bishop, or, chiefe Ouerseer. Obiection: Christ is
the onely Arch-bishop of our soules. Answere: So in
Math. 23. himselfe sayth, One is your Doctor, one is your
Father; and that Doctor himselfe sayth, is Christ; and
that one Father, is in heauen; and therefore no one in the
earth, (teacheth Christ) is to be called Father & Doctor.
When the Doctor of schisme hath opened Christs meaning,
let him but put the same key vnto his owne Obiection,
and the spring flies so open, that bad eyed Leah
running by, will easily discouer his follie.
            ¶The other Presbyter or Elder (for the Greeke word
Presbiter is, Elder in English) he is as the Ordinarie Priest
vnto the Hy-priest, imployed in the Word and Sacraments
also. And therefore in Act. 20. 17. 18 &c. one and
the same persons be indifferently called Elders & Ouerseers:
or as the Greeke words sound, Presbiters and Bishops.
For that in 1. Tim. 5. 17. it is to be read thus: The
Elders that gouerne well, are worthy double honour, specially they
which
               Copiôntes & Copos, is a wearisomenesse with much labour, as befell the Apostles often. &c. Zuingl. vpon his 62. article. 
               wearie themselues in the word and doctrine: where
the comparison is not betweene Elders, some Gouerning,
some teaching; but betweene Elders labouring
more or lesse: which caused Zuinghus (at the first starting
vp of such Lay-eldership) in his expounding of the
former verse, to oppose vnto all Eldership, sauing the
Teaching. Nor could Gualter see any vse of such sole
Gouernours, where the ciuill Magistrate hath his place.
Before God added the Ciuill Gouernour to the Church,
there might happily haue been some vse of such Lay-elders
(yet I see no Scripture for proofe of it) but God

giuing once Kinges and Princes to be of the Church,
the weaker gouernment might giue place. And indeed,
the peruerse holding of a Lay-eldership, as a setled
function of Christes, it hath ministred occasion to the
Anabaptistes, of thrusting the Magistrate out of the
Church, as hauing no vse of his sword within.
            The Deacons are called to assist the Presbiters, as
Euangelistes did the Apostles: and as in the Temple of
Salomon, the Common Leuites attended the Priestes:
Seauen such were ordained to the Church in Ierushalem;
but vpon the persecution of Stephen (one of the seauen)
the Church being scattered,Act. 8. 12 & 15. 39. 40. 
               Philip one of the Deacons,
comes to Samaria, and there not onely preacheth, but
also baptiseth. Vnto whom, some of the Apostles repayred,
conferring vpon the Christians, the guiftes of
the Holy Ghost. After that time, Philip might well become
an Euangelist, and so be assistant vnto the Apostles,
(as Iohn Marke▪
                was to Barnabas, and Silas to Paul;) but
before that, he was but a plaine Deacon, and as a Christian
Deacon, he so preached and baptised; euen else
where, then in Ierushalems Church, whereto he was at
first ordayned.
            Now, leauing to contend about wordes (which the
Apostle forbids to Timothj) what difference of ministerie
is there betweene Apostles, Prophets, Euangelistes,
(the extraordinarie sort) and these of Pastors, (for so the
new Testament Ministers be also called) and put thereto
also the Deacons, which in Ephe. 4. may be very well
meant in the tearmeDoctor in Ephes. 4. 11. is but the Deacon. Vnto this sense, Ambrose commeth very neere, when he sayth: They may be such as by Lectures accustomed to instruct youth, according to the manner of the sewes (Super Ephes. 4.) according to the manner of the Synagogue. Super 1. Cor. 12. And such in the Synagogue, no doubt, were Leuites. In Ambrose his sense, were Pantaenus, then his scholer Clemens, then this mans scholer Origen, of the Christian schole in Alexandria. Euseb. l. 5. c. 9. & 6. 6. & 6. 8. 
               Doctors, seeing Bishops and Deacons
be the whole Ministerie in 1. Tim. 4. where the

Apostle precisely describes the callinges; as also in Philip.
1. 1. where the salutations from the Apostle, runnes
thus; To the Saintes of Philippj (meaning the body of the
people) with the Bishops and Deacons, intending the whole
Ministerie in them two words: What difference (I say)
is there, in the matter of their ministerie? Apostle, is in
English, One that is sent: Whereto? to minister the word
and both Sacraments; and so doth the Bishop, Presbiter
or Pastor. All the rest minister the same word; and
preaching must also of necessitie minister Baptisme.
For the Deacon doing that (as before,) and he being the
least, it followes that the greater had no lesse power to
doe that: specially, seeing not onely in the Commission
(Math. 28. 19.) Preaching and Baptisme be conioyned:
but also, for that the Apostle euidently maketh Preaching
the greater, 1. Cor. 1. 17. and necessarily it must be so,
seeing the Word is greater then the Seale, for that by the
word of Fayth, some soule can be saued without the
Seale, as afore; but none by the Seale, without the Word.
As for the Sacrament of Communion, it can onely be ministred
to a Communion of people; and therefore cannot
be fitly administred, but by him that is Superintendent
to such a Communion of people. And that is by
the Apostle that ruleth ouer the Whole, or the Pastor that
ruleth ouer a Part. Yet seeing Prophets and Euangelistes
were to assist the Apostle, and Deacons to assist
the Pastor, it cannot follow otherwise, but the Maisters
of the worke calling for the helpe of their Ministers,
they might also follow in the administration of the other
Sacrament, though not goe before as Presidentes.
And as the Scriptures intend all this, so God hath preserued
the true footesteps of it, through all ages in the
Churches, which none but fantasticke Nouelistes, can
but admit with Reuerence. And the not admittance

hereof, what hath it bgeot in the Factions? Euen so
many crosse opinions and vnresolued positions, touching
Callinges, and duetie of Called, as themselues begin
to stinke in the nosethrilles of their owne Disciples.
Which sadly also obserued, will cause the Ingenuous
minded hereafter, not so easily to blot and blurre the
lines of Antiquitie.
            As for the Widowes mentioned in 1. Tim. 5. they are
not to be counted with Church-officers. Once, for that
neither they, nor any other Woman, was to speake in
the Congregation. Besides, for that the greatnes of their
yeares, being threescore, before they might be receiued;
as also their impotencie of outward meanes considered,
ere they might be admitted; do argue that they were taken
in, not so much to minister, as to be ministred vnto.
Touching whom,Ignatius ad Polyca
                     •
                  pum. a most auncient Father thus writes:
Let not the Widowes be neglect
                     ••
                  , but next to the Lord, see that
thou doe care for them. Such a Widow was Phaebe of Cenchrea;
and such a one vnder the Law, Anna the Prophetesse
(some 84. yeares Widow) who continued in the
Temple night and day, with fastinges and prayers. An
Apish imitation whereof, the order of
                  Nunnes quasi Nons; as not being, these they seeme to be. 
               Nunns is in the
Church of Rome.
            
            As for Philips Daughters, Propetisses, that was a fulfilling
of the Prophecie in Ioel. 2. 28. and a thing not
common to the Church in their kind. Vnto old mother
Zion, such was Deborah in the time of the Iudges, and
Huldah vnder the raigne of Iosiah. Such a sweete harmonie
is betweene the Mother-church and her Daughter,
whether we respect that is Substantiall, or otherwise Accidentall.
Are they not then well helped vp, that leaue
the Analogicall frame of both Testaments, for digging
to themselues Cesternes, that will neuer hold Water?Ier. 6. 16.
They should (as Ieremy aduiseth) haue stood in the

wayes, and so haue inquired of the good and old way.
But leauing these wayes of sacred tradition, they neuer
haue been able, to find out the Good and old way deliuered
in the Scriptures. For,Pro. 30. 17. as Agur teacheth; The eye
that mocketh the Father, and despiseth the instruction of his Mother,
the Rauens of the Valley picke it out, and the young Eagles
eate it. Haue we seene the eye of iudgement put out of
so many Schismatikes, and will we not reuerence before
Gods iudgement, and take heed of Going out, as our Sauiour
premonished?
         
         
            CHAP. viij.
            Further Considerations touching Bishops and Deacons.
            SAint Paul, being to instruct Timothj (an2. Tim. 4. 5. with Act. 16. 
               Euangelist,
and yet for a time after, the1. Tim. 1. 3. &c. Tit. 1. 5. 
               Arch or Chiefe-Bishop
of the Church at Ephesus, as Titus was in
Creete,) hee in the third Chapter layeth out the
Qualification which is requirable in a true Christian
Minister. And this he doth; first, in a description of the
Bishop; secondly, of a Deacon.
            
            For a Bishop (in English, Super-intendent, Superuisor,
or Ouer-seer; vnder which tearme is contayned
also the tearme Elder: the first, arguing the Dutie of his
place; the other, the Grauitie of his yeares, beseeming such
a place; for in the auncient Church our Mother, none
serued at the Alter, till he were agedNumb. 4. 3. &c. with Cha. 8. 24. 25. 26. for at 25. they entred, but for being schooled in that worke. 30. yeares, as our
Sauiour would not enter vpon the publique exercise of
Preaching, till he began to be about 30. And then at 50.
they were discharged the business of the Alter, but meane
time liued honourably of the Alter) for this Bishop, he
sayth thus generally in the first verse; That is a faythfull
saying; If any man (orégetaj) do appe
                     •
                  ite (Episcopés) a Bishopricke

(Epethumej) he mindeth (
                     •
                  alou ergou) a good (or faire
or commendable) Worke. Intimating thus much, that
as it is lawfull to appetite an Episcopall place; so the
place is not more honourable,Honos, Onus. then the execution of duties,
onerable; that is, burdensome.
            In the second place, he comes to his qualification;
touching which he propounds many particulars; some
Affirmatiue, telling what he must be: some Negatiue, saying
what he must not bee. In the dispatch whereof, he
propoundes vnto vs a more perfect Bishop, then euer
Cicero did his Orator. For his Minde, hee must be apt to
teach, and no Neophyt▪
                &c. For his Body, he must be Kosmion,
composite, ornate, neat, not slouingly; and therein
a true Micro-cosmos. The translation (Modest) doth not
fully expresse it. And in this word, there may be reference
to the description of Leui
                     •
                  s ministrie, who were
not to be mutilate, bursten, &c. For Oiconomie, he must
be abled to gouerne in his owne house. &c. In a word,
he must be vnreprooueable, vncheckable; not onely
of these that be within (that is of the Church) but also,
of these that be without.
            Mee thinkes, now I heare the Schismatique euomating
this Obiection. True, he must be such a one; but
no Minister in England is such a one, therefore no Mister
of England, a true minister.
            I answere, first by Retortion; but no minister of Anabaptisme,
Brownisme, Smithisme, &c. is such a Minister:
therefore no true Minister of them. Secondly, I
answere by Explication, thus: In English wee vse the
words Must and Ought, indifferently for the same; yet,
somtimes, we (by the word Must) do inioyne a thing of
absolute necessitie; when as againe, by the word Ought,
wee intend a duetie owing, but not of absolute necessity
to be done. The Greeke word Dêj, (a word of one

Syllable) hath as large vse, wherevpon some haue answered,
that the Apostle setteth out, what a man the Minister
ought to bee; not what he needes must bee. But
this answere seemes vnto mee, ouer-weake to vnderprop
a crazie-conscience. The impersonall Dêj, as it
comes of Dêo to bind; so in this place▪ it importeth that
whereto the Minister is bound and tyed, by the very
law of God himselfe. For as our Sauiour enioyneth
(in Math. 5.) euery Christian to be perfect, as the heauenly
Father is perfect: (and yet so perfect, none in the
militant Church can be; no, not in that one particular
of louing an enemie, which there is pressed) so here the
like for a Christian Minister. The consideration wherof,
caused the Apostle Paul to cry out, and say: Who is
sufficient for these thinges? Christian, and Christian Minister,
therefore in this case, are continually to runne vnto
Christ;Hieromy. ad Ocean. cals it, Speculum sacerdotij. and in him, to seeke vp their perfection. Ierome
therefore (very iudiciously and truely) calleth it: The
Priestes Looking-glasse; which beholding, thereby shalbe
occasioned (Dolere ad deformitatem, gaudere ad pulchritudinem)
to sorrow for wantes, as also to reioyce in graces
proportionable.
            Hereupon it necessarily followeth, that as in a true visible
Christian, we considerd what was Essentially required
to the true being thereof; so must we as necessarily
consider, what tendeth to the Very being, of a true Chrstian
Minister. That is done in a very few wordes. For as
there must first be in him that, which makes him a true
Christian; so secondly, there must be in him somewhat
besides, whereby hee becommeth also, a true Minister:
And that is, these two thinges; Calling, and Aptnesse to
teach. For the Calling, (seeing he is but an ordinarie Minister)
an ordinarie forme of Calling sufficeth: and that
can onely be had of the Church. To such a calling appertayneth;

                  
                  1. Nomination of the partie.
                  2. Election.
                  3. Approbation of the partie.
                  4. Ordination.
               
            
            ¶To Nominate and Elect if the Lesser may do it, then
the Greater much more may doe it. In the Church of
Ierushalem, was generally so learned a people (most being
Iewes, euer trayned vp of Children in the Scriptures,
as was Timothj the sonne of a Iewesse) as no maruaile
though the Election of Matthias and the
                  Dorotheus sayth, that the Deacons, Act. 6. were of the 70. Disciples. 7. Deacons
were committed vnto them; specially hauing so many
faire markes to shoote at, as were the 70. Disciples; and
themselues also ready to further such Election.
            ¶For Approbation and Ordination, that remayneth in
other persons, greater then the former. And thereupon
it was, that not onely these of Ierushalems Church so
elected, were brought to the Apostles for Approbation of
their choyse, and Ordination to the worke: but also S.
Paul left Timothj in Ephesus, and Titus in Creet, for looking
to the same thinges, with speciall charge to Lay
handes on no man suddainely.
               Heb. 6. 2. Which imposition of hands,
the Apostle to the Hebrewes, numbers for a principle of
the Christian Fayth. Which cannot be otherwise then
by that signe, some grace was intended; as that the hand
of God should be with the partie so lawfully called. In
which respect, not onely
                  Aug. contra Parmen. b. 2. c. 12. Caluin. Institut. b. 4. ch. 19. section 28. so in b. 3. c. 3. Sect. 16. & ch. 14. 
                     •
                  ect. 20. Bucer. de vi, & vsu. min. Melanct. in com
                  
                     •
                  un. loc
                     •
                  s St. Szegedin. in com. loc. 
               Augustine, but also Caluin, Buc
                     •
                  r,
Melancthon, and others, are bold to pronounce it a
Sacrament. And what doth Dudley Fenner (in his sacra
Theologia) lesse when as he writes thus? And by this ceremony,
the chosen are confirmed, as being by the hand of God
seperate to the function, and to be ordained with guistes; which if
they shall fulfill, He is continually in all temptations to be present
with them: But otherwise, to be by all meanes a sharpe reuenger.

The Choosers also are (thereby) informed, that they receiue
the man by the hand of God, & that to him they must be subiect.
Nor must it be slipped ouer, that this of M. Fenners, was
M. Cartwrights also: which well may bee pressed, for
curbing some their followers, that now are come to
make Pastors and Doctors, without any Imposition of
hands: for so was Fr. Iohnson, and M. Greenwood made of
some in London. True it is, that about some fiue or sixe
yeares after, Fr. Iohnson comming to Amsterdame, had
handes there imposed by the lay people, his owne children
(they know who then writ against it) contrarie to
the Apostles Canon;Heb. 7. 7. which runnes thus: Without all
contradiction, the Lesser is blessed of the Greater. And so without
all contradiction, the Father asked the Children
blessing; and so his (or any the like ordination) more
Antichristian, and more crosse to the Canon, then any
Ordination issuing from the Pope euer hath been.
            I know, they will for them selues plead thus. In the
beginning of a Church, the case is changed: For seeing
there is no other Minister to ordaine, the people may
doe it, as in Numb. 8. The Israelites lay hands vpon the
Leuites. I answere.
            1. First, it can neuer be prooued by Scripture, that of
Christians there ought to be such a Replantation, though
a Reformation.
            
            2. Second, hee after so many yeares comming by
his Ordination, it must follow, that before, hee was no
Pastor, but a priuate man; and so a prophaner of Gods
ordinaunce.
            3. The Israelites did that they did, vpon a direct precept
from God; so did not the Lay people in this: For
as the Ministerie of the New Testament, begun without
all Lay-ordination, (Christ himselfe installing the first,
and they installing others) so, neither to the Lay people

was left any such necessitie, seeing there should alwayes
be a stretcht out line of Imposition, so well as of Baptisme.
            
            4. Fourthly, the Israelites doe not there Ordaine the
Leuites: for neither any Leuite might, nor yet durst he
come vnto the Alter, vpon that laying on of handes.
Their laying on handes, was but their Approbation (as
sometimes holding vp of hands, and scrutinie of voyces
be) for the Ordination came after that (as Peter Martyr
well obserueth) when as Aaron (the Hy-priest) takes
them at the handes of the people▪
               Pet. Mart. on 1. Sam. 7. & in his common places, Class. 4. sect. 19. of Plaic. 1. and then with his
handes, shaketh them before the Lord, and to the Lord
giues them. And thus the Separist is to seeke for a Minister,
notwithstanding whatsoeuer is sayd of H. l. for
the lacke of that Ceremonie.
            Vnto the sayd Laying on of handes, it is not of absolute
necessitie, to haue moe or fewer handes. And therefore
it is, that sometimes all the Apostles doe it; as in Act. 7.
(for in Act. 1. we read not of the Ceremonie, and yet well
may be, it was vsed, so well as in Act. 13. 3.) & so sundry
of them, tearmed a Presbyterie in 1. Tim. 4. 14. Sometimes
againe, it is performed by two; as in Act. 14. by Paul and
Barnabas. Sometimes by one (there being no other to
assist;) as by Timothy or Titus in their places. The equitie
whereof was deliuered by Moses, when as Aaron
alone Ordained the Leuites;
               Leuit. 8. as Aaron himselfe was before
ordayned of Moses.
               Oporte
                     •
                   & Diacon
                     •
                  s mysteriorum Christi Ministros, per omnia placere: nec enim ciborum & potuum Ministri sunt, sed Ecclesiae dei administratores. Ignatius ad 
                     •
                  rallianos. And so, betweene the Mother and
Daughter Churches, the Harmonie still holdeth.
            For Deacons, there is required in Act. 6. that 1. they be
men of honest report, 2. full of the Holy Ghost, and of
Wisedome. And in 1. Tim. 3. hee presseth them two,
in moe particulars. The very proportion of qualities
considered, it can neuer reasonably be thought, that
such diuine guifted persons, should onely attende on
Tables, or in taking and giuing a litle Money or Meate

to the poore. There need no such wisedome and learning
for that. And when it is further remembred (as
afore) that some of the 70. Disciples were chosen to this
Deaconship, and they being all of them Preachers, it
can neuer enter into the heart of a reasonable man, to
thinke that they should be pulled downe from an higher
Chaire to a lower. Nam qui prouehitur, prouehitur a Mi
                     •
                  o
                  
                     •
                  j
ad Majus. Doubtlesse then, they (as their name signifieth)
did seruice, not onely to the people in case of
Meate and Money; but also, to the Bishops in the case
of Doctrine and Sacrament. And hereof we are further
assured, in that all Antiquitie puts no other kind of
Deacons into our hands, and for such respect doth diuers
times call them Leuites. And thus the old and new
Testament, is still more harmonious.
            If since the Ten grieuous Persecutions, the Ministers
of the one and other Order, haue come in the world to
greater estate in outward thinges (a grieuous thing to
soare eyes) what wonder is it, when for 300. yeares after
Christ, the Church was vnder the gouernment of
Heathen Tyrants, enemies to Christianitie? Soone after
300. yeares, Constantine the Great, became Christian;
by whose example and motiue, many inferiour Kinges
became Christians also. Whereupon followed, freedome
of the Fayth, and peace and plentie in all Churches.
Then our Fathers counted it an holy duetie, to builde
materiall Churches, and to endowe the Spirituall with
euery good thing wanting. True it is, that such temporarie
blessinges haue since that time, been foulely prophaned.
What then? So hath Heauen and Earth, and
all their continentes; shall we therefore spurne at the
creature? Indeed, while some so spurne, others sacrilegiously
snatch to themselues all. To the Minister it should
be but an Idolathite; but to my Church-robber, it is a

very good commoditie. The Fathers giuing (they say)
did sinne, and the Sonnes snatching all away (it may be,
to maintaine a Hound & an Whore) they must be sayd,
to commit a vertue. But while I liue, let me imitate that
supposed vice of my Father, rather then this vncouth vertue
of my Brother.
         
         
            CHAP. ix.
            Touching Word and Sacraments.
            THE Word whereabout the Minister is to be imployed,
is that Booke called Bible (of the Greeke
word Biblos, a Booke) as being the peculiar Booke,
aduanced aboue all; as Israel aboue the Nations.
This Booke is distinguished into two partes, Old and
New. The Old part contayneth (not all the wordes that
God spoke to the Fathers and Prophets) but, the substaunce
of all which he spake vnto them, till the promised
Messiah came. The New part (commonly called the
New Testament) it contayneth likewise, a substaunce
of all Gods Will, deliuered thencefoorth by Christ and
his Apostles or neare followers. The Old part, was
written in Adams tongue, the language of succeeding
Israel. The New part, was written in the tongue of Iauan,
the fourth Sonne of Iaphet; it beeing in Christes
time, a tongue very vniuersall.
            This Booke being a Creature,Euseb. ex Philo. Mirabile mihi videtur, duob▪ annorū millib. imo maiore tempore iam ferè transacto; non exquisitissime annorum possum dicere numerum; nec verbum vnum in lege illius esse immutatum, sed c
                     ••
                  ties vnusquis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Iude
                     •
                  rum morictur, quam legi Mosaic
                     •
                  e derogabit. and in the handes of
sinful Creatures, it necessarily followeth, that sometimes
it is likely to vndergoe some iniurie. Yet such is the

watchfull prouidence of God ouer this his Booke, as
stil it hath been preserued to the Churches assured comfort,
magre euery Epimanique Tyrant and Heretique.
            The Minister out of this Booke, is to take knowledge
of Gods Will for workes of holynesse and righteousnesse;
and afterwardes deliuer the same vnto the people,
specially euery such day, as Saint Iohn calleth the
Lordes day. But because no Minister (since the Canonicall
writers, that is, since the Prophets and Apostles)
hath attayned to perfect knowledge in the former sayd
two Tongues; as also, for that in euery Minister is some
remnant of naturall dulnesse of heart (as was in the
Luke. 24. 25. 
               Emauites for vnderstanding all that is written) it so
comes to passe (for we but see in part, and prophecie in
part) that many times (and in many thinges, we sinne
all) the Minister aberreth from theOf the word Canon, the Scriptures be called Canonicall, that is. Regular. Canon; that is,
from the Word, which is the rule of Fayth. And as one
Minister, so euery Minister, whereby it comes to passe,
that no one vniuersall consent, could euer be had, for
so much as the Translation thereof. The Septuagint, went
farre from the Hebrew; as it seemeth of purpose, to collogue
with the Grecian-heathen in somethings; specially
in computation of Ages. The Greeke and Latine Christians
(as may appeare by the Fathers) sent about multitudes
of Translations, to the offence of many. Of late
time, the Popes of Rome haue set foote into the worke.
Sixtus the Fift, he mendes and marres as he could. Clemens
the eight, he doth more. Yet when all comes to all,
the Councell of Trident concludes,Aug. de doctr. Chr. & in Ep. 19. ad Hieromy. Hieromy. ad Sun. &c that the corrupt
vulgar shall onely bide authentike in Schooles and
Pulpits. Notwithstanding their great Arias Montanus
prouoketh to the Hebrew and Greeke (alleadging
Ierome & Augustine for like minded) saying of the Latine;
that it is filthily corrupted (Latina sacrorum Bibliorum

Interpretatio faedè corrumpitur) and so he boldly testifieth
in an Epistle to the I
                     •
                  terlinear Bible, printed at the charges
of the K. of Spaine: the very best worke that euer he
atchiued, with gold of the Indies.
            
            If any one denie Subscription, because in his iudgement,
it is not all one with the Originall (for our Church
presseth no Subscription absolute, as to euery particular;
for she beleeueth and teacheth, that the best Church
that euer was, is, or shalbe; hath, doth, and shall erre;)
then hearken what absurdities follow.
            1. Such a one, so intendeth a perfection and absolute
puritie in mans labours heere; and so becommeth
plainely, an hereticall Puritan
                  •
               .
            2. Then such a one condemnes, or at least calleth
into question the credite of Christ and his Apostles, in
the vse of the Septuagint; who otherwise (specially to
the Iewes) could haue followed the Hebrew straightly, &
not any Translation.Melanct. in his preface to the 70 printed at Basill. Anno. 1545. 
               Melanchton in his Preface to the
Septuagint; commendes it to the Church, by reason the
Apostle Paul quotes diuers Scriptures directly from it.
And vpon this ground (among others)Present Pastor of the Seperation, whose Vicaris Henry Ainsworth. 
               Franc. Iohnson
(being aduised by one that talked with him thereabouts
in the Clincke at London) did presse the vse of our singing
Psalmes (neglected before of his people for Apocrypha;)
wherevpon his Congregation publikely in
their meetinges vsed them, till they could haue them
translated into verse, by some of their Teachers: Which
of some of them after was attempted; but with what
barbarous successe, I am not ignoraunt. M. Tho. Settle
in Norffolke, can with me witnesse this, so well as some
resident now in London.
            
            3. Then also followeth, that no Subscription at all
is to be made, to any thing which the wisest and godlyest
can doe in that kinde; seeing a plea may be had aagainst

all, as sauouring of mans weakenesse, in this
life vnseperable. And then the next turne will be, to
turne (not so good as Turke, but) plaine Atheist.
            4. Then will follow, that neither such an excepter
against such Subscription, can presse his people to receaue
for trueth, any his Prayers, sermons, or prescription
of Orders; seeing he also is a man, and subiect to
errour so well as others.
            5. Then will follow, that neuer we can haue assuraunce
of Fayth: till either God speake thereof vnto vs
audibly from Heauen; or stirre vp some miraculous
Ministers, that may draw vs a new Bible in our owne
Language. For if they should draw it into another language,
then we are as farre off as we were. All these be
ineuitable Consequentes, and fruites good inough beseeming
rending Wolues, clad in Sheepes skinnes: vnder
a pretext of synceritie, labouring to bring in a farre
more palpable darknesse, then euer the Romanist did, in
his intricate Latine seruice.
            ¶For the Sacramentes peculiar vnto the New testament
(as forHeb. 6. 2. 
               Imposition of handes, it hath in common with
the Old. And let it be thought off as it shall, sure I am,
that the base esteeme of it, doth cause the Ministers to
be the more basely esteemed) the sayd Sacraments be
two; Baptisme, and the Lordes Supper. Baptisme commeth
in place of Circumcision; and both of them the Seale of that
Righteousnesse which is by Fayth; and therefore the second
as communicable to Infants, as the first: and through
the mercie of our Lord, to old & young, farre more easie.
The Lordes Supper commeth in roome of the Pas-ouer,
and exhibiteth accordingly, Christ Iesus crucified, for
feeding of our soules. As the Fathers vnder the Law
were made partakers of him, by Fayth; so are wee. As
herein they were led thereto by Externall signes; so are

we. And as we read not of any one amongst them (no
not in the Idolatrous times) that euer dreamed of eating
the Promised seed corporally; so, it should be a Christians
shame, to seeke vnion with Christ in such a Caniball
manner, farre dissenting from the nature of Fayth. Such
a fleshly eating, if euer it had been fitting, had rather
been adapted to their times, wherein (as Children) they
were informed by most palpaple rudiments; we being
called much rather, to worship God in Spirit and
spiritually. And so the Old and New Testament doe (as
Mother and Daughter) kisse each other. Let Schismatikes
be ashamed, to put them asunder.
            
               ¶Touching the Number, let the Learned
take these testimonies.
               August.Augustin. Ep. 108.] Sacramentis numero paucissimis, obseruatione facillimis
significatione prestantiss. societatem noui populi (Christus) colligauit.
               
               
                  Rupert.
                  Rupert. l. 3. de Sapientia, c 1.] Sunt duo Sacramenta maxima, Baptisma
scilicet & viuifica corporis & sanguinis eius Mensa.
               
                  Beda in c.Beda. 19. Iohn. & ex Augustino] Aperuit latus, vt illic quod ammodo
ostium vitae panderetur, vnde sacramenta ecclesiae manaucrunt.
               
                  Cardinal.Bessarion. Al. ab Ales. Bess. de sac. cucharis.] Haec duo Sacramenta in Euangelio manifeste
tradita legimus. The like hath Alexander ab Ales, part. 4. quest. 8.
artic. 2. and he auerres it, Ex fluxione sanguinis & aquae. And from 1.
Ioh. 5. Tres perhibent▪ &c.
            
            
               ¶Touching Baptisme, we haue litle controuersie, therefore this.
               Naz.Nazianzen. Chry. conj. orat. 3. in sanctum lauacrum.] Omni aetati Baptisma conuenit.
               
               Chrysostomo. coniunct. in Math. 4. hom. 5.] Constat in nobis quin
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
baptismata esse; vnum in verbo—Secundum 
                        •
                     n Aqua—Tertium autem
in spiritu—Quartum in igne—Quintum in Morte—Dominus,
postquam 
                        •
                     aptizatus est in verbo, factus est sub lege. A Iohanne autem
in Aqua a Patre vero in Spiritu: 
                        •
                     unc a spiritu ducitur in desertum, vt baptizetur
in igne tentationis. postmodum baptizandus in Morte. A certaine
Rom
                     •
                  sh-priest in the Gatehouse, wagering some Gold with mee, that
moe Baptismes then three, would not be found in any Father or auncient
Writer; I did shew him these Fiue, out of the sayd Booke, being
lent vnto vs of the Keeper M. Okey. But Gold or Siluer I could get

none of the Priest.
               Cyp.Cyprian. l. 4. Ep. 7. disputat. Baptismum valere, siue Aqua perfundantur,
siue toti immergantur qui baptizantur.
               
               
                  Idem de ablutione ped.] Baptismum repeti, Ecclesiasticae prohibent
regulae.
               Chrys.Chrysostom. in heb. 6.] Qui secundò seipsum baptizat, secundò Christum
crucifigit.
               
               
                  Gesilb.Giselbert. altercat. cap. 1.] Quid de salute eorum coniectare possumus, qui
vel ante octauum diem mortui sunt, vel in deserto intra 40. annos nati, mortui
sunt? Credendum est quod sola fide saluati sunt; siue propria, qui credere
potuere; siue aliena, qui credere non potuerunt.
            
            
               ¶Touching the Lords Supper.
               
                  August.
                  Augustin. 
                  in Ioh. tract. 59] Cum caeteri Apostoli manducarent panem Dominum,
Iudas panem domini, non panem dominum come deb
                     •
                  t.
               
                  Nyst.
                  Nyssen. 
                  de perf. Christianj forma.] Escam autem & spiritualem potum
Dominum appellans Diu
                     •
                  s Apostolus nos commonefacit, vt naturam humanam
non simplicem, sed ex m
                     •
                  nte sensu
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   compositam, cogitemus; cuius quidem
vtri
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   parti sit proprius cibus; solida n. esca corpus nutritur, spirituali
aliménto valetudo animi conseruatur.
               
                  Cyr.
                  Cyrill. 
                  in Ioh. l. 6. c. 14.] Hinc animaduertendum, quod etsi corporis sui
praesentiam hinc subduxerit, Maiestate tamen Diuinitatis adest.
               
                  Gelas.
                  Gelasius. 
                  contra Eut. de duab. naturis.] Certè, Sacramenta quae sumimus,
corporis & sanguinis Christi, diuina res est: propter quod & per
eadem diuinae effici
                     •
                  ur consortès naturae. Et tamen non desinit substantia
vel natura panis & vini. Et certè, image & similitudo corporis & sanguinis
Christi, in actione mysteriorum celebrantur.
               
                  Rup.
                  Rupert. 
                  in Ioh. l. 7. c. 7.) Panis iste visibilis cum inuisibili filio Dei vnum
factus est, Nam filius dej (Deus & Homo) habet in se virtutem effectiuam,
qua sibi vniat panem istum visibilem.
               
                  Barnard.
                  Barnard. 
                  ser. de caenado.) Speciem panis aliquando rodit Sorer paruissimus,
Christianus recipit pessimus: virtutem Gratiae spiritua
                     •
                  is, non nisi praedestinatus
recipit.
               
                  Giselb. altercat.
                  Geselbert. 
                  c. 1.) Sacramentum est exterius elementum, Res vero
Sacramenti, Gratia interior, quae inuisibiliter percipitur, & inuisibiliter
operatur.
               
                  Haymo in Apoc.
                  Haymo. l 1. c 1.) Sacramentum mysterium est, vbi aliud videtur
& aliud intelligitur. Sicut (verbi gratia) in Christi corp
                     •
                  re, vbi cum
videatur panis vera est caro. Vnde ipsi sacerdotes dicunt: Sacramenta quae
sumpsimus, Domine proficiant nobis ad salutem corpor
                     •
                  is & Animae.
               
                  Martialis Cephas (sayd to be an Apostle,Martial. and of Benjamin) in Ep ad

Burdegalenses, cap. 3.] Sacerdotes vitam vobis tribuunt, in Calice & viuo
pane—Cap. 4.] Nolite autem vnum & idem putare istam humanam &
diuinam escam quae nobis visibilis est, sed tamen in fide perfecta, tota caelestis.
Per vnam, enim corpus, per alteram Anima viuit.
               
                  Scot.
                  Scotus. 
                  in 4. sent. D. 11 qu. 3.] Veritas Eucharistiae saluari potest, sine ista
transubstantiatione—Substantia panis cum suis Accidentib, ae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   potest ee
                     •
                  
signun, sicut sola accidentia: Imo, Magis, quia substantia panis sub specib.
Magis est nutrimentum, quam Accidentia: Ergo magis representat corpus
Christi in ratione nutrimenti spiritualis. So that, if the Church of Rome
had not concluded Transubstantiation, this Schooleman would not
haue had one word for it.
               
               Durand.Durand▪
                   in 4. sent. d. 11. artic 14. Patet ergo, quod ē temerarium dicere,
quod corpus Christi diuina virtute non possit esse in sacramento, nisi per conuersionem
panis in ipsum. But because the Councell ofHeld about An. Dom▪ 1215 
                  Lateran (Vel
potius Concilium Latrans) did determine otherwise, therefore (as he
confesseth in the end of the 15, Article) he must be otherwise minded.
               Magist.Lombard. sent. l. 3. dist. 22.] Totus Christus, non totum Christi, est vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                  
And this maister of Sentences, disputing,An formalis, an substantialis vel alterius generis, definire non sufficio. 
                  Qualis erat conuersio panis
& sang. hee concludes thus: Definire non sufficio: l. 4. dist. 11. a. But
had not the maister of Sentences lyued and writ before that Councell,
he must haue defined on it (and that as should please Pope Innocent
the third) or his Schoole would haue been set on flame with a Fagot.
               Picos Mirand.P. Mirandula. Apolog. quest. 6. from Damascens wordes, alluding
to the Coale in Isa. 6.] Carbo autem, lignum simplex non est, sed vnitum
igni: ita & panis communionis non panis simplex est, sed vnitus Deitate.
It was well the Pie had not his tongue pulled out.
               
                  Wicl.
                  Io▪ Wicliffe▪
                   
                  vt sc
                        •
                     bit Widefordus in lib. dedicat. Tho. Cant. Archiep.]
Sicut Iohannes fuit figuratiue Helias, & non personaliter: sic panis est
figuraliter corpus Christi, & non naturaliter corpus Christi. Et abs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   omni
ambiguitate, figuratiua est locutio (hoc est corpus meum) sicut illa in verbis
Christi, Iohannes ipse est Helias.
            
         
         
            
            CHAP. ix.
            Touching thinges of an indifferent Nature. &c.
            SVch thinges we say to be of an Indifferent nature,
(speaking ecclesiastically, and to the present purpose)
as for the doing, or not doing whereof, we
haue no expresse word of God in particular; onely,
by some generall rule, we are led to vse our Christian
Reason, for examining whether the doing or vsing such
a thing, may stand with Gods glory, & our neighbours
good. The Rule was giuen by the Apostle in 1. Cor. 14.
40. when hauing spoken of Schooles of Christian learning,
and hauing set downe some particular Rules of
Order, he leaueth the rest vnto Christian discretion, vnder
this generall rule; Let all thinges be done (Euschemónôs,
kaj cata taxin) decently, and according to order.
            
            The Generall rule so commaunding Decorum & Order,
and the particulars thereunto belonging, being not of
God in his written-word expressed; it so necessarily
followeth, that our owne Christian reason herein must
be the Determiner. And the same particulars so concluded
we are to say of them (as the Apostle doth) herein;
1. Cor. 7. 12. 25. 
               I speake, and not the Lord: expounded afterwards thus:
I haue no commaundement of the Lord; but I giue mine aduice.
And vpon this rule it was, that the Apostle became all
vnto all, (Iew and Gentile) for winning some: that is, in
thinges of an indifferent nature (neither simply commaunded
nor simply forbidden of the Lord) he applied
himselfe; vsing, or not vsing; doing, or not doing the
thing, as thereby he might be of the winning hand, in
furtheraunce of some good.
            And of such nature, be Orders in the Church: As,

Standing, Kneeling, Lying prostrate, at the time of
Prayer: Standing, S
                  •
               tting, or Kneeling on the receipt of
the Lords Supper: Sitting or Standing, Preaching: Leauened
or Vnleauened bread in the Communion: This or
that houre for Meeting: Formes of Garment at the
Church or abroad, &c. touching all which, the Apostle
sheweth, that Decency and Order must be obserued;
but for the particulars, he hath no particular iniunction
from the Lord. But when the Church hath concluded
of the particulars, then it shalbe a mighty sinne to oppose
(as for the Child to oppose to the Mothers honest
aduice, or the Subiect to his Princes lawfull determination)
and this falles out, rather in respect of the thinges
Vse, then Nature. Dauid had no particular preceptes
from Moses or the Lord, for such and suchwhich ordinances are called properly in Ezra 3. 10. the Handy worke of Dauid, (Gnal jedei Dauid) translated of the 70. Epiche
                        •
                     ras. Of like nature is the Feastiuall day Purim. in Hester, 9. inioyned by Mardecaj. Such also the Feast of Dedication kept of our Sauiour in S. Iohn. 10. 22. &c. though instituted 1. Maccab. 4. 59.) by Iudas Maccabeus, a Leuite, and an vsurper of Iudahs sword. The Brownist calleth shutting vp of shop on such a day, A marke of the Beast in England: and yet himselfe on such a day, doth in the Low-countries shut vp shoppe. Who is the Beast the
                     •
                  ? Caelum, non actum mutant qui trans mare currunt.
                
               Musicall Instruments,
or such & such distributiue classes of Priestes,
Singers, &c. Nor had Salomon any expresse commaund
for making the two Pillers, Iachin Boaz, so many Caldrons
vnited with the molten Sea, such Knops and Flowers
as beautified the Pillers, &c. And yet, hee that
should haue been an opposer to these particulars,
should haue sinned mightily against the King, and so
consequently against God: for the breach of the fift
Commandement, is a violation to the whole Decalogue.
            Obiection. If the King or Church should inioyne the
Minister to weare such Garments as a Diuell weares in
a Play, can it lawfully be vndergone, &c? I answere:
First, it hath been sayd, that it is no Play, that hath not a
Diuell and a Foole. The Schismatique found out the Diuel:
and knew we the Obiectors name, we could as easily

finde out the Foole. Secondly, what proportion is
there betweene Decencie, and Vndecencie? Or thinke
they it to be a true Church? yea, thinke they that in the
Churches Synode (or in the body of the Parliament)
that there is a reasonable spirit, that put a case of such
absurditie, as no reasonable spirit (though vnchristian)
euer yet committed? Had this fellow had no more witte
to hide his name, then to couer his shame, ten to one,
they of S. Dunstanes would hire him to be the Foole to
S. Dunstanes Diuel in the Pageant. If I haue answered a
Foole according to his foolishnesse, I haue but followed the
precept of Salomon in Prou. 26.
            
               For a Corallarie, obserue these Writers.
               August.Augustin. in l. 2. de serm. in monte (collected by Beda on Rom. 14.) Sunt
quaedam facta Media quae ignoramus quo animo fiant (quia, & bono & malo
fieri possunt) de quib. temerarium est iudicare, maxime vt condemnemus.
—And in Ep. 118. c. 2. ad Ianuar. Quod ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   contra fidem, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   contra
bonos mores iniungitur, Indifferenter est habendum, & pro eorum (inter
quos viuitur) societate, seruandum est.
               Mart.Mar. Bucer, Bucer. l. 1. de regno Christi, cap. 13. Ecclesijs Christì sua est permittenda
libertas, quò vnaquae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   cum prefiniat modum & rationem sacrarum
lectionùm, interprelationem scripturarum, Catechisini, administrationis
sacramentorum, praecum, & psalmorum: item publicè peccantium reprehensionis,
&c. Quam posset quaelibet ecclesia confidere suis populis maximè
conducturam. &c. Exhorting afterwardes, Vt quantum possi
                     •
                  , in his reb.
obserues Conformit
                     •
                  tem. And in script. Angl. pag. 454.) Has etsi (supple
ceremonias) etsi seruare & omittere, etiam extra
                     •
                   candalum licet, tamen,
si ex proteruia aut petulantia, quis ordinem publica authoritate Constitutum
contemnat, & turbet, non leuiter peccat.
               Caluin.Caluin. in 1. Cor. 11. 2. Scimus vn
                     •
                  cui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ecclesiae liberum esse politiae formā
instituere sibi aptam & vtilem, quia Dominus Nihil Certj prescripserit.
               Melan.Ph. Melan. in Commun. locis.) Cum Ministerium diuinitus ordinatum,
debeat esse publicum & externum, opus est aliquib. humanis ordinationibu
                     •
                  .
               Bezae Ep.Beza. 24. &c. Res alioqui per se Medi
                     •
                  , mutant quodāmodo naturam,
cum aliquo legitimo mandato, vel precipiantur, vel prohibentur: quia
ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   contra iustum preceptum omitti possunt si precipiantur; ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   contra
interdictum fieri, si prehibeantur—Nam etsi conscientias propriè solus
Deus ligat, tamen quatenus Ecclesia Ordinis & Decori, adeo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   aedificationis

rationem habens, leges aliquas de rebus Medijs rite condit, eiusmodi leges
pijs omnibus sunt obseruandae & eatenus Conscientias ligant, vt nemo sciens
& 
                     •
                  rudens rebe
                     •
                  landi animo, possit abs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   peccato, vel facere quae ita prohibentur:
vel omittere quae sic praecipiuntur.
               And Vpon this ground, M.Burges. 
                  Iohn Burgesse went (in his answere to
our King) when as he sayth: I doe thinke and beleeue, touching
the gouernment by Byshops, as with vs in England; or by ruling Elders,
as in other Churches of God: that neither of them was prescribed
by the Apostles of Christ, neither of them is repugnaunt to the word
of God, but may well and profitably be vsed, if more fault be not in
the persons, then in the callinges themselues. Secondly, I doe hold and
am perswaded of the Crosse and Surplice, that as our Church vseth
them, they be not vnlawfull. &c. And this man standing as he doth,
his testimonie (not medling with the application) is auaileable against
the factions.Sir Fran. Bacon, in Adu. of lear. b. 2. Of Fundamentall poyntes, the league runneth thus:
Hee that is not vvith vs, it against vs: But of poyntes not fundamentall,
thus: Hee that is not against vs, is vvith vs. And so, that Rite, Fashion,
and Forme that is not fundamentall in Fayth, is not against the
Church, but with it.
            
         
         
            CHAP. x.
            Touching the Churches Keyes.
            THE Churches Keyes, is a certaine power of shutting
the dore of mercie to the impenitent, and of
opening the dore of mercie to the soule that is
penitent. This power our Sauiour promiseth to
S. Peter in Math. 16. 19. And is giuen to that Apostle and
the whole Church in S. Iohn 20. 21. when as the Lord
breatheth vpon them, saying; Receiue the Holy Ghost,
whose sinnes soeuer you remit, they are remitted vnto them; and
whose sinnes ye retaine, they are retayned. Whereby appeareth,
that this power is stinted; that is, is not giuen to
the Church to be exercised, otherwise then she shall
therein be led by theQuum ipsi remi
                     •
                  tūt, aut detinent, Spiritus qui habi
                  
                     •
                  at in eis, per 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                   remitter & de
                     •
                  inet. Cyril. in Ioh. 20. Isa. 22. Holy Ghost. The Phrase seemeth
to allude vnto Eliakim and Shebnah, Stewards to Iudahs
               
king, vpon whose shoulders, the Key of Dauid was layd,
for opening and shutting the treasurie, at and for the
Kinges pleasure. All which is expounded in Reuel. 3. 7.
to appertaine in the first place, to Christ our Lord; who
is the true Eliakim (which soundeth in English) My God
standing vp; or, My strong God of Resurrection.
            
            The Rule of proceeding in this businesse, is layde
downe in Mat. 18. where for finding vp the lost Sheepe,
(or sinner) the Lord enioyneth, first, priuate brotherly
admonishment (specially in a case priuate;) And not
so preuayling, then by communicating the case to one
or two moe; which neither preuayling, then to bring it
to the Church. And if the Church cannot preuaile for
bringing the sinner to repentance, he is thencefoorth
while he so continues impenitent, to be held as an heathen
person, and as a Puplicane. As a meere heathen
man might not enter into the Temple, there to communicate
with Israel; so neither must this impenitent soule
be admitted to the Churches communion in prayer and
Sacraments. But as an heathen might for his cōuersion
heare the Prophets preach; so these may pertake in a
Sermon seuered from the ordinarie Communion. As a
Publicane likewise he is to be held, that is; not easily to
be admitted to our fellowship for eating and drinking,
as the Iewish Church walked towardes the Publicane;
who, in all probabilitie was a1. The distinction of Publicanes & sinners, argueth he was not an ordinarie kind of sinner. 2. Zacheus is an Hebrew name, which Gentiles would not beare. 3. The Publicane might enter into the Temple, so not the Heathen. 4. The tearme Publicane in Math. 18. 17. seemeth to be opposite to the Heahen. 
               Iew, ready (for pleasuring
the vncircumcised Romaines) to make a diuorce
from his breathren, and their lawfull discipline.
            By all which it is euident, that vpon an humble confession
of his fault, with promise to forsake it, mercy and
forgiuenesse was preached vnto him. But contemning
finally the Churches motherly admonishment, he was
to haue the dore of Mercie shut against him. Which
latter censure, the Apostle in 1. Cor. 5. calleth, A giuing

vp to Satan, and we commonly tearme it, Excommunication.
If the sinner should not onely, not repent, but
proceed to a Not louing Christ Iesus, (which I take to be
Hebr. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. compared with ch. 10. 25. 26. &c. the sinne of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; consisting,
first, of a willing desertion from the Groundes
of Christian Fayth: Secondly, from fellowship with
the Church in that Fayth,) there then remayneth to him
the Maranatha (1. Cor. 16. 22.) which is, an absolute declaration
of the Lord, comming to quit him with vengeaunce,
as a soule despayred of. But as this is a sinner
(happily extraordinary) and the rule in Math. 18. is
giuen for ordinarie vse: so I will adde the iudgements
of some Aun
                  •
               ients for the Ordinarie.
            
               Origen in Math.
               Origen. 16. Petra est omnis, qui imitat
                  •
               r est Christi—
—Si autem s
                  •
               per vnum illum Petrum arbitraris vniuersam Ecclesiam
edificari a Deo, quid dicas de Iacobo & Iohanne filijs tonitrui, vel de
singulis Apostolis?—Apud Iohanne
                  •
                enim dans SS. Iesus discipulis
suis per insufflationem, sic dicit, Accipite SS. &c. quasi omnibus talibus
constitutis qualis erat et Petrus.
            
               Ambrose in 1.Ambrose. 
               Cor. 5. Perfides, Episcopus non potést iudicare▪ Cum
fratre autem in quo vitia haec reperiuntur, non solum sacramenta non
edenda, sed ne communem escam docet, vt erubescat Cum vitatur & se
corrigat.
            
               Theodoret.
               Theodoret. 
               in 1 Cor. 5. Si non oportet eos communis esse cibi part
                  •
               cipes,
nec mystici quidem & Diuini.
            Chrysostome in English,
               Chrys. vpon Psal. 50. Non oportebat ergo clanculum. &c. 
               may helpe to stay some in their precipitate
zeale against their infirme Brother: His speach runneth thus. It behooueth
not a man priuily to calumniate his Brother, but as Christ commaunded,
to take him apart and correct him. The reprehensions
that are giuen publiquely, doe oftentimes make men impudent.
And very many sinners, while they perceiue that their sinne may
be concealed, haue their mindes easily resolued to returne into the
way. But if once they perceiue their credite to be lost with many,
not a few, such doe thence-foorth fall into desperation, and tumble
downe into shamelesnesse. So farre hee. And indeed,Vpon Leuit. 6. 3. 
               Origen calleth
such preposterous dealing with a Brother, the action of an Infamer,
not of a Corrector.
            
               
Aquinas vpon 1.Aquinas. Cor. 5. giues this Verse for a rule towardes him
that is excommunicate: Os, orare, vale, communio, mensa negatur.
            
            For Mother Zion, shee for certaine pollutions did
suspend the partie a while (till they were cleansed) and
for Leaprosie did put them out of the hoste for euer, except
they were cured. The first signified smaller euils,
for which the Pastor in holy discretion is to barre them
some thinges for a season. The other signified deeper
sinne, as Contumacie; for which the sinner was further
to be secluded.Nyss. in Orat. de ijs qui 
                     •
                  olint reprehendi. Hereupon it is, that Nyss
                     •
                  nus hath this,
Vetus est haec Eccl
                     •
                  siae regula, quae cepit a lege & fuit confirmata
in Gratia.
            
            And so the Auncient and new Church, still are at
vnitie in the substaunce of their Ordinaunces. If inferiour
Presbyters doe not of themselues exercise this
power for Casting out; but haue ioyned with them, the
chiefest Super-intendentes: this is a good way to preuent
such, in playing Popes ouer Gods heritage; and
the likelyer course also of bringing the sinner to repentaunce.
Maliciously foolish therefore must they bee,
that call such ioynt exercise of that heauie censure, by
the name of Antichristian. Virtus vnita, fortior; sed quis
Schismatico stolidior?
            
         
         
            
            CHAP. xj.
            Touching Church-leitourgie.
            THE Greeke word Leîtourgia (signifying generally,
any publique ministerie or seruice; and so
the Angels are called Leitourgizing spirits) it in
Ecclesiastique vse,Heb. 1. vlt. is taken for some Forme of diuine
Seruice, prescribed for the Churches publique vse. And
this forme contayneth Prayers, Lections of Scripture and
Psalme-singing, framed vnto seuerall occasions. The
Auncient mother Zion, ouer and besides the Priestes
preaching, and the Prophets prophecying, had a set
forme for all their Seruice (as appeareth through Leuiticus
& a peculiar forme of blessing the people, Nomb. 6.
23. &
                     •
                  . Euen as Moses had his prescribed forme of Prayer,
when the sacramentall Arke remooued or rested,
Nomb. 10. 3
                  •
               . 36. And in after times, their Leitourgie was
much enlarged by King Da
                     •
                  id, framing thereto right
many Psalmes; some Psalmes of Prayer, some of Dedication,
some of Instruction some of Remembrance, some of Degrees,
some of Halleluja
                     •
                  , &c. And all that was done in
the time of their non-age. To the Church of Christ,
there is giuen a larger Body of Scripture; out of the
which, and sutable to which, the Church is to draw her
forme of Leitourgie; collecting such Scriptures for
common Lections, as may be held most fitting such a
purpose. And for the sanctification of all, intermixing
such kinds of Prayers, as also may be fitted to ordinarie
and extraordinarie occasions. If any one man thinke he
can doe this well of him selfe, I thinke it can be better
done of many, conuening and concluding vpon such a
forme of Prayer.
            
               
And as for our publique Forme of Seruice (reiected
of some in part, for that some part of it hath before been
in vse among Papistes; as if God or the Ghospell, or
good wordes were therefore to be reiected) it was of the
holy Martyr, Martin Bucer, of loue he bore vnto it, after
due ouersight, turned into Latine, for vse of all that
should vnderstand Latine.
            Against this Leitourgie, two sortes of Aduersaries insurge.
One of them (as the Brownist, and the like) doth
condemne all set forme of Prayer, saying; that nothing
is to be brought into the Church, sauing the Canonicall
Scriptures, and the Liuely voyce of Gods graces. Now,
by Liuely voyce, they meane Conceiued preaching, and
present Conceiued prayer. And herevpon it is, that they
hold the Lordes Prayer in Math. 6. Not to be Prayer, but
Doctrine of Prayer. I answere, it is both Prayer, and
Doctrine of Prayer. Doctrine it is, for that thereby we
are Taught how to pray: For Doctrine is Teaching.
And Prayer it is, when a faythfull soule, breathes it vp
vnto God, Mentally or Vocally also. That Repetition of
wordes vsed before (euen the selfe same wordes) continueth
still Prayer, consider it not onely, in the Apostles
Prayer inculcate in seuerall Epistles (namely,Rom. 1. 7. 1. Cor. 1. 3. 2. Cor. 1. 2. 
               Grace be
with you and peace from God our father, &c.) but also, in our
Sauiours practise; who in the time of his agonie, when
most effectuall Prayer was to be vsed, is sayd of S. Mathew
(in chap. 26. 44.) to haue Praied the third time, saying
the same wordes; euen the selfe-same wordes which he
had vsed twise before. And the reason lieth in this, that
Prayer receaueth not his Forme from wordes, old or
new (for one may Pray without any wordes at all,) but
from the Spirit of Christ, aduancing our Spirit to God
in Fayth, whether with words, or without. Which caused
the Apostle to say in Rom. 8. We know not what to pray

as we ought, but the Spirit it selfe maketh request for vs, with
sighes vnexpressable. And yet I could round some Separist
in the eare, and tell him true of Teacher, and Teached,
that haue ordinarily vsed a set forme of Prayer: that I
speake nothing of him, who in his Prayer concluded
(till by mee he was better informed) thus; To whom, togeather
with thee and the sanctified Spirit, be all glory, &c. But
let that frantique Ieronymo goe by.
            The other Aduersarie is at home: who graunting
the lawfull & necessarie vse of a Leitourgie, doth insurge
against some what in Ours, as not well fitting his fancie.
His obiection ariseth, first, against Methode: secondly,
against Matter. For Methode, take this his maine Obiection.
In the beginning of our Seruice, a Confession
of sinne is vsed by the Minister, in the name of the Congregation,
and that before the Congregatiō be present.
I answere; first, it may be a ranke lye that the Obiector
propoundeth: for, some Congregation may be present
Before, though not euery member of the Congregation;
no more then some-times at their Conuenticles. Whereat,
though their Tom and Sib be present, yet happily
lynkin and Sicily may be absent. Secondly, our Minister
taking his fittest time, doth desire such as be present,
(not absent) to ioyne in that Confession with him.
Thirdly, if any be absent, that should and might be present,
it is their sinne, not the Ministers; much lesse the
Bookes: seeing Confession of sinne, is exceeding necessarie
in the Exordium of our deuotions. And that Nehemiah
and Daniel had well learned,Nehe. 1. 5. &c. Dan. 9. when they begun
their Deuotions, with the Confession of their sinnes and
the sinnes of the people.
            For exception against Matter, it is fourefold. First,
for Omission: Secondly, for Addition: Thirdly, for Translation:
Fourthly, for certaine Capital-letters.
            
            
               
1. For Omission; as in passing by the Psalmes Titles.
I answere; first, it is not repugnant vnto Gods word,
that some Scripture be read, and othersome omitted in
the Common seruice; seeing neither all Scripture is Then
to be read (witnesse the seuerall Leitourgies of their owne
drawing) nor is our Minister debarred to handle any
Scripture. Secondly, the Lections in a Leitourgie, require
the playnest scriptures; because (generally) for the vse of
the common people. But that the Psalmes-titles be not a
plaine Scripture, will appeare thus: The Hebrew word
Lame natséach, is turned, To him that excelleth. Yet according
to the Septuagint, who should best vnderstand it, it
is turned by that, which (as in auncient Latine translations)
valueth Vnto, or, Vpon the end. By Targum, and some
other Latines otherwise.Frater Faelix in sua trans. Psa. ex haebreo in Psal. 4. Hereupon Frier Faelix vnto
Pope Leo the tenth, is bold to say; Anullo Aucthore hactenus
recte expositam inuenj; nam haec dictio manasséach, participium
est verbj nizeach (I change not his forme of spelling)
quod quidem verbum, cum a nomine nessach descendat, velè conuerso,
diuersas habet significationes. The Rabbines of the Iewes,
who should best vnderstand it, being at no vnitie in this
poynt amongst themselues (nor Greeke Church, nor Latine
Church, nor others, daring to determine of it peremptorily,
as beseemeth in cases of Fayth) what saucinesse
is it not, in this poynt to taxe our Church, when
the Taxers themselues can (at best) but guesse how
the Title may be translated? Againe, we haue in some
Translation, to him that excelleth on Negínóth, or on
Nechílóth. Who can assuredly determine, whether these
were Instruments, or Tunes, or what? If the Minister
will preach vpon it, he may: But to be ioyned with ordinarie
Lections, I see no necessitie, howsoeuer it may
be lawfull.
            
               
2. For Addition, there be in the 14. Psalme, three Verses
moe in our Common-seruice Booke, then be in the
Hebrew; namely, the 5. 6. and 7. verses, the whole so, being
deuided into eleauen verses. I ingeniously confesse,
that once I conceiued, how that Exception of Addition,
had risen against the three last Verses, as it lieth in our
ordinarie Bibles, where the whole (besides the Title) be
but seauen. But now it is cleare, that they meane the
three Verses inserted into the Psalme, immediatly vpon
the fourth, beginning thus: Their throate is an open sepulchre.
&c. Hereto I answere: It is not repugnant to Gods
word, that these Verses be there read in our Common
seruice; once, for that the same Verses are Scripture, &
so alleadged by S. Paul in Rom. 3. Secondly, for that they
be inserted, where for the argument, they be as fitting, as
they were in the other place for the Apostles purpose.
            3. As for Traslation,
               Vbi autem addita est Negatiua particula, vix duos codices potuimus reperire. Aug. in huuc locum. they excerpe sundry places.
Two principall be fetcht from the 105. & 106. Psalmes.
From the 105. 18. this, Vèlô marû aeth debárau, word for
word thus; And they bittered not his word; or They bittered
not at his word. Now, as it is questionable, who be
They there spoken of (whether the Commissioners or
the People;) so the phrase, bittering not his word (as not
prouoking the word) or, bittering not at his word (as being
not prouoked by his word) is so doubtfull a phrase,
as no temporate spirit (specially, of no greater guiftes
then the Obiectors) will easily dare to oppose in this
poynt (or the like) to the body of an whole Church.
In Psal. 106. 30. we read, Phyneas stood vp & prayed. They
say, it should be turned, Hee executed judgement. I answere,
the originall word is, Palal, which the Iewes Targum
(as Pagn
                     ••
                  
                noteth) doth turne, Hee prayed. And, Hithpallel,
in 2. Chro. 30. 18. is properly turned, Hezekiah
prayed. In Psal. 5. 2. Vnto thee (aeth-pallal) I will pray.

So Psal. 32. 6. and Substantiuely, it is very often vsed in
the Psalmes, forTephillah. tephilloth. 
               Prayer. The Septuagin
                     •
                  , whom the
common Latine (in Austens times) did follow, is Exilasato,
whereof commeth Hilasterion, turned Propitiatory.
Now, seeing Placation and Propitiation is properly by
Oblation and Prayer, the Septuagin
                     •
                  
                must needes also,
so well as the old Latine, intend with vs Prayer; rather
then, Execution of Iudgement. Nor could his executing,
iudgement, haue found rest with the Lord, otherwise
then the same were sanctified with Prayer; specially,
he being a Priest vnto God, and deuoted to Prayer.
By this little taste, iudge of our Aduersaries learning
and discretion, though I (of many) be most vnfitted to
propound it.
            4. Touching their exception at Capitall letters (an
exception now very vulgare) the case standes thus:
There be in the Common-seruice Booke, certaine great
Letters, within whose Circumference, the Grauer of
these Letters, hath sometimes put certaine Pictures, resembling
Triton, Hercules, &c. For which, diuers doe
charge the Booke, for an vpholder of Idolatrie. I answere,
it is nothing to the Matter; because not of the
Bookes matter: Nor is the Matter a pinne the worse,
though the Manner of conuaying it, be not so sutable as
may be. If there be a fault in the Fashion, blame the
Taylor, not the Wearer. These Spirites by like proportion,
may rayle vpon euery Bible, as an vpholder of
Corruption: Why? for that euery Printer wilbe found
to haue fayled in something; as in mistaking a Letter,
displacing a Poynt &c.
            Secondly, if they so stumble at the Pictures of persons
that haue been idolatrized, why not also at the
Picture of a Rose,Gerard
                     •
                   hetb. in cap. Ros. which some Mahumetistes venerate,
as sproung of the blood of the most lasciuious Goddesse

that the Gentles ouer had) namely, Venus: others of them,
for that it had (as they say) the originall from the sweat
(sweete sweat) of their Prophet Mahomet (a sweete
sweatie Prophet) vpon which superstitious conceites,
the Rose may not (forsooth) fall to the ground. And
why with as good reason doe they not reiect the two
Capitall letters T and X: the first, hauing been idolatrized
as the Crosse of Christ: & the other, as the Crosse of S.
Andrew? Or, why contend they not about the Capitall
I, which being the fashion of a Piller; vnder which
forme,Clem. in l. 1. strom. it is sayd (of Clemens Alexandrine) the Gentiles did
worship God? they might also entitle it, a Monument
of Idolatrie. The Apostle forbids men to contend about
Wordes; and these hold it a vertue, to make warre
about Letters: yea, about the very Ornament of Letters▪
I perceiue that they will play small play, ere they
sit out for wranglers.
            Though it be not alwayes of Absolute necessitie, that
there be a Leitourgie, yet respectiuely, times may bring
with them a deepe necessitie thereof. And if any times,
then these times: for if no forme be concluded of, but
euery one left to his owne discretion herein (as the
Apostles iustly were, they being filled with spirit of
Discretion) not one Congregation wil be like another.
But as among the Romanistes, the multiplicitie of Monckerie
begot multiplicitie of Differences; euery one affecting
so his owne Order, as therewithall grew a contempt
of the other: so, this Church would so affect this
Forme, and that Church that Forme; and a third, a third
forme, &c. as therewithall would arise such praysinges,
dispray singes, likinges, dislikinges, as no one Parioch
would be at quiet with another; nor any possible vnitie
among the Teachers. Let it remaine then for Orthodoxall,
not onely, that such a Leitourgie is lawfull, but

also for begetting and continuing vnitie, that such an
vniforme Leitourgie is very expedient and needfull.
With the Apostle to the Corinths (he there handling also
matters of Order in the Church) I thus conclude:1. Cor. 11. 16.
If any
man lust to be contentious, we haue no such custome,
nor the Churches of God.
         
         
            CHAP. xij.
            Touching the Beginning of the Christian
Chruch. &c.
            VVHen the fulnesse of time was come, God sent
his Sonne made of a Woman; who being
aged about 30. yeares (the age whereat the
Ko
                     •
                  athite began to waite at the Altar) did
then publiquely fall a preaching and of gathering Disciples
vnto him.Act. 1. & 2. About three yeares & a halfe after, he
suffered, and was buried. The third day after, he arose,
and for fourtie dayes after he appeared to his Disciples,
specially to eleuen of them, who are called Apostles.
Then he ascended vp into Heauen; and ten dayes after
(the Apostles then being conuened in an house in Ierushalem)
he raines downe Guiftes vpon his Disciples, by
the which they were not onely fitted to Teach and Gouerne
the Church, but also, furnished with all Language
and power of Myracles.
               Act. 1. 8. Peter preached in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithinia. Andrevv to Scythians, Sogdians, Sacians, &c. Iames in Ierushalem Iohn (brother of Iames) in Asia, Philip in Phrygia. Bat
                        •
                     emevv to the Indians, Thomas to Parthians, Medes, Persians, &c. Mathevv to the Iewes Simon Zelotes to Mauritonia & Aphrick the lesse. Iudas Thaddeus to Edessians, and Mesopotamians. Matthias to Ethiopians, Paul to Illiricum, Italy, and Spaine. Marke in Alexandria. Luke to Antioch. As for the 70. Disciples, they preached to many other places in the world. All this is affirmed of Dorotheus.
            
            They so furnished, doe take to themselues Assistants,
called Euangelistes or Prophets: and the Church of
Ierushalem being shaken asunder, they to Samaria, and so
to the vttermost partes of the earth, as they were of Christ

foretold and commaunded, immediatly before his Ascension.
And as they were before commaunded, to cry
that (as vpon the house-top) which he had told them
as in the eare; so, they repaire vnto the most publique
and populous Cities, which were Head-townes to the
Countrie adiacent. So they preached in Ephesus, Corinth,
Colossus, Philippi, Thessal
                     •
                  nia, Rome, &c. that so the Christian
fayth, might not onely beat the Diuel at first hand,
out of his principall fortes, but also, from these Head-townes
the Law might goe out to their Pagies or Villagies:
which Pagies receiued the Gospell at second
hand, and so subiected themselues to the Church in
their Citie. And because many Pagies were long ere
they came to the Fayth, being much remote from the
holy meanes in the Citie, they came to be called Paganes
in an ill sense (as Infidels) whereas before, it was but
the tearme that belonged to the inhabitants of these Pagies,
or Country places.
            Heere I could note (and it is worthy the noting) that
the Countrie Christians, howsoeuer meeting in some
Countrie house, might be tearmed a Church, as before;
yet they made not an established Church. The
Church, for plenarie power of doctrine and gouernement,
was stablished in the Citie; that City-church exercising
her iurisdiction ouer Country assemblies, came
to be called the Metropolitane Church, and the like.
Ecclesiastique Histories make this poynt plaine: and
easily from the Apostles Actes and Epistles, the thing
may be collected. The Bishop of Brownis
                     ••
                  
                must needes
in this, ioyne with mee, seeing his Established Church at
Amsterdam in Netherland, exerciseth authoritie ouer
some assemblies in England and elswhere; which is a
Bishoppricke of more length, by many hundred myles,
then any Bishop in England hath: besides that, betweene

him and some of his Sheepes dwelling plots, there is a
large Sea, if not Seas, by the which he is not like to ride,
somuch as once in a yeare through the Suburbes of his
Church, for keeping Visitations. But what doe I following
that squeaking Lapwinge?
            As the Apostles were appoynted to take possession
for Christ, from one corner of the earth to another (and
to the Romaines he testifieth,Rom. 10. 10. Psal. 19. 1. &c. that their sound then, was
gone through the earth; as Dauid also foretold in the 19
Psalme, though in am
                  •
               sterie,) so, that blessed glad
                  •
               tidinges
was brought into Britaine; and our predecessors
(then barbarous, rude, naked andSo Caesar in his Coment, and Martial. in epigr. painted with Woad)
were, amongst others of Iaphets seede, allured by the
sweetnesse of the Gospell, to come into Shems Tent, and
to worship one and the same true God, the Father of
Christ Iesus.
            That some of the Apostles,
                  Origen contra Cels] Mortaliū vniuersam naturam verbum peruicit, &c. nec humanum Genus aliquod licet spectari, quod non huius suscep rit disciplinam. or their Euangelistes, or
both, came hither, it must necessarily follow: first, for
that their commission stretched so farre, & they were set
on worke him, that would carry them to the end of
their Commissiō. Secondly, the worke wrought, proues
it; for otherwise, Barbarians could not be Christians.
Thirdly, Ecclesiastique Histories do record, that we (of
any Iland) were in theChemnitius (in Exam. Con-Trid.) ex Sabellico.
                
               first place, for receiuing the
Fayth. Whether Ioseph of A
                     •
                  mathe
                     •
                  , or some other came
with the Colonie, it is euident that they came hither: at
the place then called
                  Polyd. Vergil. l. 2. hist. Angl. As 
                     •
                  or Theodoret (de curand. Graec. 
                        •
                     ffect▪
                   he affirmeth that Paul came into Brittaine; vpon his comming out of his first captiuitie in Rome.
                
               Welles, they are said to settle: from
whence by degrees, the Christian fayth flowed through
the Land. And this (by writing) should begin about the
yeare of our Lord
                  Centuar, l. 2. c. 2. alleadging our Gildas & Bale I
                     •
                   
                  Paul came, it must be about that time: for he was deliuerd out of the Lyons mouth (2. Tim. 4. 17.) Anno. 60. being the 27. yeare after Christes death. And Pauls death at Rome is cast to the yeare of our Lord 69. 63. Afterwardes, by grieuous persecutions,
the Church heere, sowell as in other places, began

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
to be darkned: For, 300. yeares after Christes Ascention,
the infidelious Kinges of the earth did warre
against him that ridde vpon the White Horse (as S. Iohn
foresaw in Reuel.) which brought vpon the wicked
world fearefull iudgementes; as were foretold in the sixt
of the Reuelation.
            
            In the necke of these grieuous Persecutions, the Lord
called Constantine the Great vnto the fayth; wherevpon
the Christians had a long time of Iubile and blessed reioycing.
But marke what accompanieth Peace & Prosperitie.
People grew by little and litte to sleepe in securitie.
The Diuell (neuer idle, though neuer well occupied)
sowes Tares and all manner of Corruption
throughout the Lordes possession; that such spirituall
Physitions as should after be raysed vp, should sooner
purge out the heart and intrailes of the Church, then
cleare her body of all the euill. S. Paul saw this my sterie
of iniquitie a working in his time, and Plainely foretold
that the last times should be Kairoj chalepoi,
               
                  
                     •
                  . Thess. 2. 
                     •
                  . Tim. 3. 1. mysticall
Dogdayes, iniurious seasons. Nor can any great amendement
be obserued in S. Iohns Reuelation, but by the
Rider on the White horse, who in the last times makes
his returne, fighting with the beastly Aduersarie (Reuel.
19.) conquering, and so triumphing. Wherevpon followeth,
the Iobilique halleluiah. The poynt is plaine,
but the particulars belonging thereto, are beyond my
reach. All that I can doe in this, is, to fall downe before
his footestoole, and reuerence.
         
         
            
            CHAP. xiij.
            Touching CHRIST IESVS, the
Churches diuine head.
            
               
                  CHRISTIESVS (vnder that tearme,
The seed of the Woman, Gen, 3. 15. and so
expounded of S. Paul. Gal. 4. 4.) being
promised to Adam for the recouery of
his fall, before any other man was; is
therfore of the Apostle called Ho Eschatos
Adam, the latter Adam; that is, the Second Adam;
as Eschatos is opposed to Protos, latter, or last to first.
And because it should be knowne that the Second
Adam (howsoeuer from heauen, in respect of his diuine
Nature, or rather Diuinitie) should be true man, as the
first man was (euen in our ioynt Natures of body and
soule) the Euangelist Luke draweth downe his Petigree
from the first Adam,
               Luke. 3. Math. 1. by Sheth, Aenosh, &c. to the very
Virgin, on whom he was conceiued by the Holy
Ghostes ouershadowing, and of whom (she being of
the seed of Abraham and Dauid, as S. Mathew teacheth,)
he was brone according to the flesh. In which respect
also (against the heart of Anabaptists) the Author to the
Hebrewes sayth;Heb. 7. 14. 
               It is euident, that our Lord sprong out of
Iudah.
            
            But that he was not onely man (as the Iewes thought,
and our homebred Arrians haue taught) but that he
was as verily God in the first place, as very Man in the
second place (not onely for Office, but for the very truth
of Nature) than in Philip. 2. 5. &c. plainely euinceth: Let
(sayth the Apostle) the same minde be in you, that was euen
in Christ Iesus: whoHupárchôn. existing in the firme of God, held it no

robberie to be equall with God; but
               Ekénose. 
               voyded himselfe (as laying
aside the glorious appearance of the Godhead) assuming
the forme of a seruant, made in the likenes of men, and was feund
in shape as a man. In respect of his Humanitie, he is the
Melchitse
                     ••
                  k, that is without Father: and in respect of
this his Godhead, he is that Hy-priest that is without
Mother. And in regard of his communicating so with
God and man, he is a fitted Mediator betweene God
and man, reconciling so in himselfe God with man;
comming downe by our Humanitie (as by Iaakobs Ladder)
vnto vs; and by the same steppes returning backe
vnto the Eternall; who in this assuming nature, had his
Beeing from euerlasting;
               Mich. 5. 2. Iohn. 1. 1. 2. and not onely from the Beginning,
as in the beginning all thinges were made by
him, and without him nothing mae, that was made.
And were it not, that his humiliation was as low, as
mans pride ascended hie, his embasement could be no
sufficient plaister for our soare: but our pride was such,
as of meere men (in our fore-parents) we would become
Gods: therefore, one that was verily God, must stoope
downe to become verily Man. And whereas the body
of our sinne, was (as it may be spoken of a creature) infinite,
and therefore should (vnpayd for) haue been subiect
to an endlesse curse, euen to the tormentes of Hell
for euer; hee being God, infinite and eternall, induring
the curse of the Crosse, did so by plaine merite, in a trice
swallow vp the torment that otherwise was due vnto
vs. Nor could any but he that is very God, make our
Nature sufficient to such an vnder-bearing; nor any
one, but he that should also with vs be very man, giue in
a proportionable sacrifice, for the sinne of man▪ to the
answering of Gods iustice. This to the Iew▪
                was a
stumbling blocke, & to the Gentiles foolishnes; but to the
true Christian, it is the power of God vnto saluation.
            
               
His names teach all this. In respect of his Humanitie,
(for with that is visible I begin) he is vnto Adam called
(in valuation) The Womans seed. To Abram His seed,
restrayning the Virgin that should bring foorth this
Seed, to his line. And because that Abrahams seed in his
graund-child Iaakob, was deuided into twelue Tribes,
or chief-families, Iudah is plainly told that the promised
Seed should arise frō his line (and this, vnder the tearme
Shiloh) which afterwardes was renewed vnto Dauid; on
whose line he should precisely be. But not so promised
to Salomon, because he was not to come of him, but of his
brother Nathan; Salomons seed ending inler. 22. 30. Haggai. 2. 24. 
               Iechoniah that
went to Babel, and there died seedlesse. Whereupon
the Lord taketh the Signet from him, and puts it vpon
the finger of Zerubbabel (of Nathans line) who finned Babel,
               Zerubbabel sigifieth, The fanner of Babel. Of Zarah & Babel; and Babel of Balal.
and brought out from thence to Ierushalem, the Churches
first returne of people, who had there for 70. yeares
been captiued. To the Prophets, the same Promise was
renewed, in all the formes aforesayd, euen till such time
as he was made of a Woman, that blessed Virgin Mary,
betrothed vnto Ioseph; but not carnally knowen vnto
Ioseph.
            
            In respect of his Diuinitie, he is of Moses not onely
called Aelohim (a Nowne plurall, giuen to Father,
Sonne, and Holy Ghost) but also Ieh
                     •
                  uah Ae
                     •••
                  im (turned
Lord-god) because euery of them is Iehouah, that is,
The Being of Beinges. And as euery thing hath the being
from him, he is called of 
                  
                     •
                  satah,
               Isa. 9. 6. 
               Euerlasting father.
            
            And in respect of God-head and Man-hood, vnited in
one for effecting our Saluation, he is of Isaiah called
Gnim-man-ael, that is, With-vs-the strong-God; or, The
mighty God in our Nature: for that the God-head (as
the Apostle speaketh) did dwell in him somaticôs▪
                bodily,
essentially. Vnder Isaac the onely sonne of his Father,

that died not,Clem. Alexan. pedago. l. 1. c. 5. Beda in Genes. 22. Aquinas in Heb. 11. lect. 4. 
               typed foorth the God-head: and vnder
the Ramme that died, the humaine Nature, that was to
the Altar of the Crosse affixed. And this the Author to
the Hebrewes intimateth, when (hauing spoken of this
Storie) he sayth of his Father, From which death he receiued
him (kaj en parabolé) euen in a parable; that is, in such a
sort, as a parable intendeth. These two Natures also,
were vnder the Law figured by the twoTheodoret. in qu. Leuit. & smil. dialogo. 3. Isychius in lib. 5. sup. Leuit. 16. Goates presented
onely in the Sabbaticall moneth, what time the
Hy-priest might onely and alone enter into the Sanctum
Sanctorum: the Scape-goate poynting foorth his God-head,
impassible; and the Lot-goat (with Ionah) the
Humaine nature, which was to die for Our sinnes,Dan. a. 26. 
               Veé
                     •
                  
ló not for him selfe. So he was the Messiah that is, the
Christ; that is, the Annoynted-one of God; and Iesus the
Sauiour, being annoynted of the Father, for our saluation.
Yet must be obserued, that something may be sayd
of the Godhead, that otherwise is proper to the Manhood;
as that in Act.
               
                  Beda. in Act. 20. Non dubitat sanguinem Dei dicere propter vnionem personae in duabus naturis eiusdem Iesu Christi. 20. (Feed the Church of God, which
he hath purchased with his owne blood) not that God simply
considered, hath any blood, or can suffer; but that God
the Sonne shedde blood, in respect of the Manhood assumed,
and with the Godhead vnited. And hereof it is,
that the Syriake in that place, doth read, The Church of
Christ, not of God. So, that may be spoken of the Manhood,
that is proper to the Godhead: euen as sometimes
we attribute that to our body, which is proper to
the soule (e
                     •
                   è contra) which falleth out to be true in the
Concreat (that is, the two Natures considered togeather,
to the constituting of one person) which otherwise
could not be true in the Abstract; that is, in the Nature
abstracted from his fellow.
                  Sybilla in aetat. 6. Vomen Iesous hibet
                     •
                  . vocales, & duas non. This is the Christ, yesterday to
day, and the same for euer. Of Whom Sybilla, long before
thus prophecied in her sixt age: Tunc ad Mortales vemet

mortalibus ipsis—in terris similis, Natus patris omniepotentis.—
Corpore vestitus, votales quatur autem—fert, non votales
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
duas binum Geniorum. The time of his comming she thus
telles; Sed postquam Roma Aegiptum reget, imperio
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  —frenabit,
tum vemet. &c.
            
         
         
            CHAP. xiiij.
            Touching the Ghospel of Christ.
            THE word (Ghospell the contract of Godspell) is a
Saxon word, valuing in our language (the same
which the Greeke word Euangell doth, namely)
Glad-tydinges. In large sense, wee call all the
Doctrine (contayned in the Booke of the New Testament)
by the name of Ghospell; because the mayne and
substaunce of that Booke, is doctrine of Gladtidinges:
otherwise, who is ignoraunt, that the Law is mingled
with the discourse of the Ghospell; not for perfecting
the Ghospell (for it is not of that nature) but for leading
people to Christ, as Moses led the people to Ioshua, who
onely could bring them to the Land of Rest, a type of
heauens Eternall rest.
            Againe, the Ghospell is sometimes taken for the Storie
of Christ, penned by S. Mathew, S. Marke, S. Luke, S.
Iohn; whereupon they be called, The foure Euangelistes, as
hauing in a speciall sort dilated vpon Christ, the subiect
of the Glad-tydinges.
            But in this dispute, I take it in that strict essentiall
sense that S. Paul doth, when he sayth to the Galatians;
                  Gal. 3. 8. Giselbert. in Alt. Syn. & Eccl. c. 1. Fides Abrahae circūcisionem praeueniens, gentium credentium typicè dona praeten. debat, quae Iud
                     ••
                  s dignitate datae celitus Gratiae, non tempore praeuenerant.
               The Scripture foreseeing that God would iustifie the Gentiles
through Fayth, preached before, the Ghospell vnto Abraham,
               
(saying) In thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed: afterwardes
declaring by what meanes, namely by a Seede (not seeds)
which is Christ. This Ghospell is the same to Adam before,
and to vs after; neither is there any other name
(then the name Iesus) by which we are to be saued; nor
any other meanes, whereby to be vnited with Iesus, then
by Fayth. For as S. Peter could say, touching the Cripple
healed at the gate of the Temple, that Iesus (whom ye
haue crucified (His name hath made this man sound:
               Act. 3. 16. euen
so, I may as truly say, that by Fayth onely in Christ, we
are to be saued. Externall discipline may alter with
time and place, as all externall workes may, but the
Euangell, Ghospell, Gladtydings is still one & the same;
that is, Beleeue, and liue: whereas the Law sayth; Doe, and
liue. And in not doing all the things of the Law, a soule
becomes subiect to all the Curses in the Law. By Doing
then, no flesh can be iustified: but by Beleefe in Christ
Iesus, any soule may be iustified. The Law therfore
but sendes to Christ; and Christ castes none away that
comes so vnto him.
            The Law indeed, was written in Adams heart, teaching
him to Doe,Quod Lex operum minando imperat, hoc Lex Fidei credendo impetrat Anshelm. in 4. cap. Rom. and liue: and he might haue done his
workes and liued: but conspiring with the Diuell, against
the holy rule of the Law; the Law is so against
Man, execrating and cursing him; whereby man is enforced
to fly from himselfe, to another; and that is
to Christ, who (with his armes readie to imbrace vs) cryeth
out, Come vnto mee all you that be weary and laden, and I
will ease you.
            
            Nor doth our wilfull Banckrupt estate, lessen the
debt owing to God: for though we be vnable to satisfie
the Law, it is iust with him to call for satisfying the
Law, and to clap vs vp in Hell, for Non-satisfaction.
Able we were set out of his handes; the fault therefore

in our selues; and therewith let euery mouth be stopped.
            But, ô the free-mercie of God! that when we are become
wilfully banckrupt, he should prouide a meanes;
first, for satisfying our debt: secondly, for raising vs vp
to greater Glory. The Satisfaction, is the Death of Christ:
and our Exaltation, is his Humiliation: for, hee became
poore, to make many rich. Thus, not our worke, but his
worke: not our satisfaction, but his satisfaction: not
our merit, but his merit, is cause and sole cause of our
true happinesse.
            Which is cause,Aug. in Enchirid. c. 99. Gratia vero nisi gratis sit, gratia non est. not onely that Augustine speaking of
Grace (as opposite to morall workes) doth say, Grace is
no Grace, except it be gratis: which speach excludeth all
merit of our part, be our workes otherwise neuer so
glorious;Bellar. de iustif. l. 5. c. 7. propos. 3.] Tulissimum t
                     •
                  menest, propter incertitudinem propriae iustitia & periculum inanis gloriae, totam fiduciam, non in operib. nostris, sed sola dei misericordia & benignitate reponere. but also enforceth Bellarmine (after all his windinges
and turninges) to conclude the case of Iustification,
thus; Notwithstanding (namely, all he had opposed
before) by reason of the vncertainty of our owne Righteousnesse,
and the danger of vaine glory (meaning in a mans owne
workes) the safest of all is, to repose our whole trust, not in our
owne workes, but in the onely mercy and goodnesse of God. So
great is this trueth, and therefore must preuaile, notwithstanding
their distinction (some workes be Legall,
some Euangelicall) seeing the Free fauour of God excludeth
all our workes (howsoeuer tearmed) for iustifiyng
onely Christes merit-worke, for our iustification.
Obiection: Fayth is a worke, & being iustified by Fayth,
we are so iustified by a worke. Answere: It is a worke in
vs, but not of vs; for Fayth (as the Holy Ghost witnesseth)
is thePhilp. 1. 29. Guift of God, and so our iustification to
saluation, the free guift of God, and not of our selues
onely, nor also: For if we will plant our thresholds by his
thresholds, Ezekiel will proclaime it an abhomination.

And because Christ doth not onely begin the worke,
but also perfect it, the Author to the Hebrewes calles him,
Heb. 12. 2. 
               The Author and finisher of our Fayth. The premisses considered
(and sound in the iudgment of a Romanist, were
he to die the death for his Fayth against the Turke, and
not to maintaine a sworne opposition against vs) let me
put downe the following Positions.
            1. First, these Schismatikes be most hereticall, that
by reason our outward forme of Discipline likes them
not, do affirme (as some chiefe of them haue in my hearing)
that the Church of England, neither holdeth nor
teacheth, the Ghospell of Christ. And yet the same people
holdeth no other Ghospel, then heere they receiued:
except they make their Lay-eldership their Ghospell,
or some of their outward workes, to giue beeing to the
Ghospell. And then they fall vpon the Rocke of Poperie,
which they would seeme to sayle so farre from:
establishing not onely a Iustification with God by
Fayth onely at first; but after that, a second iustification
with God by works also. Nor indeed is it better with
them, if themselues will vnderstand themselues: Which
easily cannot be done, God hauing put vpon them, the
spirit of slumber.
            2. Secondly, I doe faythfully belieue, that in the
Romish-church (since the first plantation of it) there
hath been, and still is, a true Christian people, holding
the maineC
                     •
                  luin vpon 1. Cor. 3. 15. from hence hath an hope of the saluatiō of Gregorie the great, Barnard, & others such, holding this foundation. Chrys. in Hebr. c. 6. hom. 9.] Quod n. Fides fundamentum 
                     •
                  it, catera verò superaedificationes; a duerte ipsum dicentem, 1. Cor. 3. Ego fundam. posui. 
               Foundation layd in Christes blood;
howsoeuer (sometimes) they build vpon it Hay, Stubble,
and the like; euen as in the thronge of the Tares,
the Lord had his Wheate, and Children of the Kingdome.
And in Babel (euen after the Returnes to Iudah,
by Zerubbabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah) God there had his
Daniel, and others also with him. God forbid, that their
malice against vs reforming the Church, should beget

in vs a deniall of any Grace, which God continues amonst
them, notwithstanding their abode in lamentable
Confusion. Nor is this trueth of Christianitie, which I
beleeue to be amongst them, onely an inuisible Grace,
(according to secret election) as some Scismatikes make
it, but in the profession visible, witnesse not onely many
theirSee Trigs true Catholique in the chap. of Iustifi. Writings, but also many their Sermons there at
home, as these can witnesse, that haue trauailed amongst
them: not to speake any thing of such, as dayly do offer
vp their blood amongst them, in testimony against their
false Ghospell.
            3. Thirdly, I do verily belieue, that a maine cause,
why the Apostle handleth so largely Iustification by
Fayth onely, in that Epistle to the Romaines, was this; for
that he foresaw, how that Church would quickly be
drawing away from that Pillar, for establishing a iustification
of their owne in the roome thereof. That they
haue made a foule departure from that Fayth of the
Ghospell, and that we in that poynt, haue recouered our
standing, let themselues iudge (being vnpossessed of Sophistrie)
reading but the first eight Chapters soberly
ouer (or but the first foure) accordingly as they be translated
in their Rhemish Testament. And will they be so
bewitched, as to giue more credēce to the writing of any
one among them, then to the Apostle Paul, enforming
their first Christian people? Let them labour to bring
their opinion to the Epistle, and not wrest the Epistle to
their opinion: holding it true Antiquitie, to be one with
the Apostle and that golden Epistle; and not to reiect
them, for entertayning a Nouelty, couered with colour
of Antiquity. He that teacheth any other Ghospell,
then that which S. Paul taught, we are (though he were
an Angell from heauen) to hold him accursed, yea, twise
accursed; as the same Apostle teacheth. Galath. 1. 8. 9.
            
               So much of the Ghospell preached to the Fathers,
and exhibited to vs; the manner of Dispensation being
diuerse, but the Thing one and the same.Victor Antiochen. in Marc. 4 
               In noua Lege
vetus inclusa tenetur. And,Greg. in Ezek. l. 2. hom. 16. 
               Vna est veterum ac nouorum patrum
fides. AndClem. Alex. Strom. l. 6. one within 200. yeares after Christ,
writes thus; Vnum quidem revera salutare testamentum,
quod a Constitutione mundj ad nos peruenit, per generationes diuersas
& tempora, etiamsi Datione existimatum fuerit esse Diuersum.
Consequens
                     •
                  n▪ est, esse vnam jmmutabilem Salutis dationem,
ab vno Deo, per vnum deum quae multis modis prodest.
Propter quam causam, tollitur Maceria, quae diuidebat Graecu
                     ••
                  
a Iudae
                     •
                  , ad hoc, vt esset populus peculiaris; & sic ambo perueniunt
ad vnam fidej vnitatem; & ex ambobus vnae est Electio.
            
         
         
            CHAP. XV.
            Touching Antichrist, and his Opp
                  •
               sition.
            
               THAT the Greeke word Antichristes,
doth signifie one Opposite to Christ, it is
out of all question. But wherein he is
to be opposite (in Fayth, or Manners;
wholly, or in part: and if in part, then
in what part) is a mightie Question.
Besides, that there should be such an Aduersarie, is out
of all question: but who that Aduersarie (or whether
One, or Many) and from whence he should arise, is
much in question.
            The Fathers take the word, sometimes very largely,
(as they thinke S. Iohn doth in his 1. Epistle) sometimes
strictly, as of one and the same person, as they thinke S.
Paul doth in 2. Thess. 2. vnder the tearmes, Man of Sinne,
Sonne of Perdition. Sometimes they vnderstand S. Iohn
to call all these Antichristes, that beIerom on Math. 24.] Ego reor omnes Haeresiarchas Antichristos esse. &c. Heades of Heresie,

               vnder the name of Christ, teaching thinges that be contrarie to
Christ. And such be the violaters of Fayth. Sometimes,
they vnderstand these Antichristes,
                  Honor. in dial. de lib arb. & prodest. Intuere principes & Iudices, 
                     •
                  cce posita est in eis Bestia sedes—verte ad clerum, & vid
                     •
                  bis in eis Bestiae Tentorium—Contemplare & Monarchorum conciliabula, & videbis in eis Bestiae Tabernacula—Aspice etiam habitacula Monialium, & cernis in eis preparat. Thalamum bestiae—verte te ad plebem reli
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & inuenies in ea Bestiae effigiem. &c. of such as ouerturne
all good manners and order. And so their Pope Honorius
to that purpose, writ thus: Cast eye vpon the Princes
and Iudges, & behold in them is plaeced the Beastes seat (then he
numbers vp their wickednesses:) Turne to the Cleargie,
and thou shalt see in them, the Beastes Pauilion (then he numbreth
vp their worldlinesse:) Contemplate a
                     •
                  so the Conuent
                     ••
                  les
of Moncks, and thou shalt see in them, the Beastes Tabernacles
(then he fileth vp their Hypocrisies:) Behold also
the habitations of the Nunnes, and in them, thou shalt see prepared
the Beastes Bed-chamber (then goe vp the Nuns abhominations:)
Turne thy selfe to the rest of the people, and
thou shalt find in them, the very Image of the Beast. Thus the
Maister, in that Dialogue (and that's Hono
                     ••
                  us) doth
teach his Scholler; affirming further, that the former
Many, is Babilon, and at warre with Ierushalem, whose inhabitants
be not so Many. Thus vnderstood hee of that
Second Beast in Reuelat
                     ••
                  
                13. 
                  〈◊〉
               . for that the First Beast
there (compacted of Daniels Lyon, Beare, & Leopard) is
the Body of the Romaine Empire, & the last Monarchie
of the foure, it is graunted of al sides. Now heare the Abbot
Barn. ad Ganfr
                     •
                  d. Lorator. ep. 125. 
               Barnard, how he writ about 500. yeares since, of
both the Beastes: That Beast in the Apocal. to whō a mouth
is giuen, speaking blasphemies, and warring with the Saints (Petri
cathedr
                     •
                  m occupat, ta
                     •
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Leo paratus ad praedam) doth occupy
Peters Chaire, as a Lyon prepared to his prey. The other Beast
also (subsibilat) whish
                     •
                  ly hisseth towards you, as whelpe lurking
in the secret places. Th' other Beast is more cruell, and this
more subtile: But in one they agree, against the Lord, & against
his Christ Let Barnard apply his speach to what persons
he shall, sure such be the Beastes, and such their conditions:
and so farre he helps vs on in our way.
            
               
As the Fathers vnderstand Antichrist largely, so they
likewise speake of one Speciall one; who comming at
last, should be the Head vnto all that went before: euen
as Iesus Christ was the Head of all such Christed or Annoynted-ones,
as Typically went before him, were they
Kinges,
                  Zanch. sec. Thesis of 14.—Non pugnat cum sacris literis, saith he.
                Priestes, or Prophets. And this (as Zanchius
somewhat graunteth) may be; but Euidence I see none
as yet. Then againe, some of them thought, that he
should come of the Tribe of Dan: but the Reasons for
that, were farre fetched. Againe, that he should rise in the
Romaine Empire:Tertull. de resurrect. c. 24. So Tertullian; Iam enim Arcanum Iniquitatis
agitatur; tantum qui nunc tenet teneat, donec de medio
fiat. Quis? nisi Romanus status, cujus abscessio in decam Reges
dispersa, Antichristum superinducet, & tunc reuelabitur
Iniq
                     •
                  us.Iren. l. 5. c. 25. Ireneus before him, and a Greeke, speakes thus:
The Nowne Lateinos hath the number 666.—they be Latines
that now raigne; but we will not glory in that. The word
Lateinos, being in Greeke, the same as is Latinus in Latine,
it is to be cyphered as the Greekes doe; whose Alpha-bet
letters, serue to them for Figures. And thus.
            
               L—30,
               A—1.
               T—300.
               E—standeth for—5.
               I—10.
               N—50.
               O—70.
               S—200▪
               
            
            Take the same number also in Ecclesia Italica, thus:
E 5. C 20. C 20. L 30. E (being the Greeke Eta, not
Epsilon) is 8. S 200. I 10. A 1. Take the same number
also in the Hebrew word Romijth (of Rome) thus: R 200.
O 6. M 40. I 10. I 10. TH 400. The same number,
as ifAntich
                     •
                  istum autem intelligo, Mahemodem, Papatum & omnes qui cultui Christi aduersantur. Pet. Mart. in 2. Reg. 4. 
               Mahomet were one of this Beastes hornes, obserue
in the Greeke Maometis, thus: M 40. A 1. O 70.

M 40. E 5. T 300. I 10. S 200. And if the yeares be
cast, we shall find, that about An. D
                     ••
                  . 666. The Pope for
vniuersall Supreame in the West; and Maomet for
Chiefe Prophet, was stablished in the East: ouer which
East and West, the Romaine Emperour had before gouerned.
            But passing by these more curious Diuinations (as
whom time yet hath not sufficiently matured) it is
graunted of all, that He which vnder the name of Christ
shall oppose to Christ, is for that, an Antichrist And because
his opposition must be against Christ, rather then
against God (though Christ be also God) he is called
Anti-christos, not Anti-theos. If he should be Anti-pater,
then we should consider some speciall thing in God
the Father: if Anti-pneuma, then some speciall thing in
the Holy Ghost; but by the word Antichrist, we must
consider something in the Sonne, to whom this Sonne
of perditiō is secretly to oppose: And that resteth in his
suborning a False Ghospell for the true. In which respect
he beares in his Armes a Lambe, but (as S. Iohn paintes
him) a Lamberising from the Earth, not from Heauen:
in appearance a Lambe, but in working a Wolfe.
            And because he was to be opposite to the very foundation
of the Ghospell (and what that is, was in the former
Chapter considered) S. Paul doth stile him Antikesmenos,
               2. Thess. 2. 4.
the layer of an opposite foundation.1. Cor. 16. 9. And when
he is to speake of such as would shut the Dore against1. Iohn. 2. 18.
that Grace offered in the Ghospell,Que Aristot. Opposita idem, Antikeimena vocat, ea Tullius Contraria. Seuerin. Boetius in Topica Cicer.
                he calles them Antikeimenoi
polloj, Many Antikeimenists; as S. Iohn calles
them Antichristoi polloj, Many Antichristes. Antichrists
be so Antikeimenists; and Antikeimenists be such as
lay an opposite foundation to Fayth; and that is, in stead
of iustification by Fayth in Christ, to stablish a Iustification
by humaine workes and ordinaunces; but yet

not apertly nor plainely, but by faire painted iuglinges,
able to beguile (as our Sauiour sayth) the very chosen,
if it were possible.
            And what (I pray you) can seeme sounder then this,
to say Christ Iesus hath made Fayth in him alone sufficient
for Saluation, insomuch as he that dieth vpon that
Apprehensió at first, is vndoubtedly saued? But, (marke
this But) such a soule liuing longer, he hath in him from
Christ, such a power to worke well, as by his workes
he is to be saued. And these workes must not be called
workes of the Law, but workes of Fayth, although but
such workes as man deuiseth. Yea, the Romanist goeth
further, and sayth: that a man may doe more good
workes then he is necessarily tyed vnto; and so by them
doth supererogate, and may giue of these his workes to
his Brother that needeth, for helping out his saluation.
Not to graunt this, say they, is to make Christ idle in vs.
To such effect speake many; and flesh and blood holds
it very reasonable.
            
               Mahomet speaketh excellently of Christ, not onely
as being a great Prophet, but also aD. Philip. Lonicerj Chro. Tur
                     •
                  . tom. 1. chap. 21. 
               Sauiour of his people:
But when all that is done, Mahomet comes to inioyne
Azoara. 37. And yet, if one die ere he can doe his good works, he may be saued by the Saracens faith (Mahomet in Colloquio cum Iudaeis) All one with the Romanist. 
               Externall workes (of his owne collection) by the which
a soule must be saued. And both he and the Apostaticall
Popes, haue agreed further in this, to hold the Bibles
scripture vnsufficient to saluation; whereupon they
haue deuised, either side of them, such Canons and Rules
of obedience, as the doing of them haue more attributed
vnto them, then the obedience of Fayth: When as in
very deed, all such their inuentions may be sayd, as in
Reuel. 9. but to come out of a bottomlesse Pit, hauing a
reasonable face (as from man) but in the tayle and conclusion,
they sting like a Scorpion; for neuer can soule
finde true rest, in flying any part from Christ, vnto their

owne worke. The sense whereof vpon the death-bed,
hath forced many a Romanist then to fly altogeather
from his owne Workes, to Christs Merit-worke only:
dying so no true Papist, howsoeuer in other thinges
popish. And here let me repeat a pretty Story, acted in
the Clink-prison in Southwarke at London, before the
stayall of the last great Plague.
            A certaine Romish-priest being there to Prison newly
committed, and not accustomed to bonds, became
exceeding pensiue, he was aduised to take a pipe of
Tobacco, and to let the world slide a. He doth so: but
whether for that the Tobaccoes smoake encreased Melancholy,
or guilt of conscience in respect of some treason,
or whatsoeuer the cause might be, downe he falles;
and the Keeper Dauison, and some others about him,
thought verily he would haue died. They will him to
call vpon God. He doth so, desiring him for Christes
sake, to pardon al his sinnes. After diuers times he had so
prayed, he comes to be reasonably well: whereupon the
Keeper puts vpon him this speach: I pray you sir, how
comes it about, that your breathren haue still suggested
vnto me, that I should goe to God by Saints; and not
directly by Christ; whereas I perceiue, that you in this
agonie, neuer prayed to Saint, but went to God directly
by Christ? To whom the Priest returned such answere.
I pray you be content, I had no leasure to pray vnto
Saints, for I looked but presently to die. So farre the story.
Now I pray you, had it not been better for him to haue
died in the former case, then to haue returned to health,
and so to his vomite againe? But say they what they
shall, for maintayning Antichristes opposition against
vs, many of them in their agonies, are glad to turne
Protestant; and for quiet of soule, to betake themselues
to the Fayth of the Ghospell.
            
               
The Ghospell so essentially considered, and the Antichristian
opposition so remembred, let me put downe
the insuing conclusions.
            1. No euill, seuered from such an opposite foundation
(as is iustification with God by Workes) can properly
be tearmed Antichristianit
                     •
                  e; no more then euery euill,
against Gods good spirit, can properly be tearmed, The
sinne against the Holy Ghost. And therefore our Schismatikes
calling euery thing they like not, Antichristianitie,
shew themselues vntollerably ignorant. For if euery euil
be Antichristianity, then (which is most absurde) euery
soule liuing is Antichristian. And if they will not say
the last, then let them be ashamed of the first.
            2. Then also followeth vngaine sayably, that no
outward forme of discipline is properly Antichristian,
howsoeuer it may be tainted with euill: seeing no such
Discipline can be called an opposite or false Ghospell.
            3. A Church setled vpon a false Ghospel, is (notwithstanding
all the best Discipline can he had) a false
Church and Antichristian. The reason is, Discipline is
not an essentiall marke of a true Church: For one and
the same Discipline or outward forme of Gouernment,
can be applyed to Christ or Antichrist. And so on the
other side, a people setled in the true Fayth of the Ghospell,
is alwayes in such estate, a true Church of God,
notwithstanding a thousand imperfections in Discipline.
For as Iob is a true man (and so Lazarus) notwithstanding
much vnsoundnesse in their members: so, a
people may be a true Church, though much vnsound.
The reason is, because the spirit of life still moueth in
their members. And as we know that the spirit of life is

                  〈◊〉
                sicke body, by his breathing; so, we know that the

                  〈◊〉
                of Christ is in a Church, by her euident Confes
               
                  •••
               
               
                  〈…〉
               , Charitie will thinke so, for that she beleeues

the best,1. Cor. 13. Rom. 10. 10. and hopes the best. For with the mouth
(sayth S. Paul) man confesseth to saluation.
            
            4. Then also followeth, that our Nouelistes haue
spunne a faire threed (a plaine Cobweb, for snaring
weake simple Flyes) who haue all this while striuen, not
about the Babe Iesus himselfe, but about his Swathingband,
and after what manner he is to be swathed, whether
by bringing the Band crosse ouer him, or of some other
fashion. Or, to vse another Simile; they haue neglected
the Garden, and all this while foughten about the
fashion of the Hedge; and where the Stile should stand,
on their side or ours. They that haue so bad eyes, to
iudge of the Garden, are in no wise fit, to be trusted with
the Fence.
            Let me draw to an ende with the wordes of Ferus,
               Ferus on Math. 24. here is Christ, there is Christ.
(whose speach might awake his Papistes) Doe the false
Prophets teach Christ? yea verily: for to preach Christ, is to
preach righteousnesse, sanctification, forgiuenesse of sinnes, and
redemption. For Christ is become all these thinges vnto vs. And
these thinges the false Prophets preach, how we may obtaine
righteousness and redemption. But they teach not, that we must
looke for, and seeke these thinges Onely from Christ, and onely
by Christ: Yea, they neglecting Christ, doe teach to seeke for
Righteousnesse and forgiuenesse of sinnes in other thinges. Behold,
say they, here or there is Christ; which is indeed to seduce and
to lead out of the way. For these thinges are found no where else,
but in Christ.Act. 4. 12. There is no other name vnder heauen, by which
we must be saued. Hath not Ferus in this, as in a thousand
thinges, spoken as a Protestant? When the Church of
Rome hath in her, such Maisters of fence to maintaine
our quarrell, let vs not despise them: but desire of God,
that such honest Spirits, may further come out of Babilonish
bondage. For these that be with vs, be not against vs.
If S. Peter in Math. 16. had any promise for the Sea of

               Rome, let them note the performance of it, in such as
Ferus, and others now in Venice and Piemont, with other
places. And in so doing, we will not easily be found to
contend with them.
         
         
            CHAP. xvj.
            Touching BABEL, the rising and
fall thereof.
            BABEL is two fold; Literall or Spirituall: The Literall,
is a name giuen; first to a Tower, then afterwardes
to some Citie. As first, to a Citie whereof
the sayd Tower was the principall Monument;
and that is Babel in Chaldea: Secondly it was giuen to a
Citie in Aegipt (now called Cair) from whence S. Peter
is thought to direct his first Epistle, as appeareth in the
Conclusion: For this second, I finde it not Typicall;
but for the first I doe. First (for that the first) was a
worke begun by 70. Families, that schismed from Shem,
               Gen. 11.
and that God that was in Shems Tentes. Secondly, for
that Nimrod (in English, Apostate or Rebel) who was the
impudent Hunter before the Lord, became the head
thereof:Micah. 5. 6. compared with Gen. 10. 10. whereupon the Prophet calleth that soyle, The
land of Nimrod. Thirdly, for that it was the Citie, wherein
the Church of the Iewes was captiued for 70. yeares.
            The Spirituall Babel, hath respect to this of Chaldea,
for that it was still an instrument of opposition to the
Church. And this spirituall Babel, hath a twofold vnderstanding
among Diuines: for either it is taken for
Rome, or for the whole politicall body of false Christians
wheresoeuer. For Rome it is taken of Tertullian in these
words;Tertull. adu. Iudaeos cap. 9. 
               Sic et Babylon apud libannem nostrum, Romanae vrbis
figuram portat, proinde et magnae & regno superba & sanctorum

debellatricis: So it is in Rhenanus his auncient Copie. The
Romanist Pamelius (out of the Margin) blots Babilon
Roma, least the Reader should marke it, thinking it too
much, that Beatus Rhenonus or any other should put an
Asterisk ouer against that text. So Tertullian against
Martion, lib. 3, hath the like; and ouer-against the same,
is the former marginall note. And Ierom is of like minde;
                  Hierony. Fabiole de veste sacerdatali.
who writing vnto Fabiola, lately come from Bethleem to
Rome, hath this; Et tu quidem optato fueris ocio, & juxta Babylonem
Bethlehemetica forsuan Rura suspas. Nor can he
in this speach be thought, to take Rome for Babylon (in
respect of time passed alone, but) that it was such for the
time present; else why should Fabiola sigh after Bethleems
fieldes againe?
                  Andreas in Apocal. c. 53. 
               Andreas Archbishop of Cesarea in Cappadoce
sayth the same, thus: Vetus Roma in Canonica B. Petri,
                     Ansbert. in Reuel. 13. & alibi.
Babylonis vocabuso designatur. And Ansbertus hath this,
S. Iohn vocat Romam Babylonem illam secundam. And so
minded be diuers others.
            Some take the mysticall Babylon (opposite to Ierushalem)
onely for such an vniuersall corporation of Christians,
as liue not according to the Ghospell; or more
plainely, for the
                  Haymo in Apoc. 17. Prosperi sent. 221. Duas in toto m
                     ••
                  do ciuitates, faciunt du
                     •
                   amores: Ierushalem, 
                     ••
                  cit amor Dei. Babyloniam facit amor saculi. &c. 
               Multitude of Reprobates. So doth
Haymo and others. And indeed I vnderstand a trueth to
be in both: For as S. Iohn in Reuelation 17. doth depaint
out Rome,
                     •
                  
                first by the
                  Victorius Pitabionens. Episc.] Septem montes in quibus mulier sedel, est Romana ciuitas. Com. in Apoc. 7 Hilles according to no other
Citie: and secondly by this, that it then raigned ouer
the Kinges of the Earth (which then Rome did, it being
the Monarchicall Citie) so likewise, that City-fornicatrix
he sayth sitteth vpon the Waters; which he expoundeth
to be people, multitudes, and nations and
tongues; that is, Nations not of one language, but of
many. So that howsoeuer that Citie be the principall
Seate or Sea, yet true it is also, that Multitudes of people
abroad (euen of sundry languages) are of the the same

body and corporation. And seeing that body is called
an Harlot (which tearme properly is giuen to such a
one, as hath defiled the Mariage bed, by ioyning her
selfe to a Strange flesh, and such a one no Christian can
be that shakes not of Fayth in Christ, for betrothing it
selfe to some humaine inuention) it necessarily followeth,
that all such people doe make vp that fornicating
Body, as seeke their iustification with God, by any other
meanes, then by Fayth in Christ onely. Nor can it
intende the spirituall fornication which Heathen haue
with their Idols, seeing that is no Mystery or Secret, but
this is,2. Thess 2. 7. as S. Paul and S. Iohn call it. And a Mystery must
this needes be,Reuel. 17. 5. to hold Christ Iesus the Sauiour; and yet
vnderhand to seeke saluation by their owne worke:Mystery in Greeke, Secret in English.
much like to some Harlot, that will fight and contende
for her Husband, and yet sometimes steale aside, and say
with her in the Prouerbes: Stole Bread is sweete. Such
is my iudgment of this mysticall Babylon, called also an
Harlot.
            ¶For the Beginning and continuance of this Babel,
the cause standeth thus. Satan that taught Adam to
neglect the Tree of life (and so consequently, the Sonne
of God, in whom our life is hid) taught him also, to seeke
a life God-like, in his owne worke, opposite to Gods
appoyntment: Heere was the beginning of Babel; that
is in English, of Corfusi
                     •
                  : for herewith not onely all
thinges in Man, but also Earth and all things in it, became
Confused and out of Order. Cain his eldest Sonne
continued this worke (opposite to our great Shem, by
seeking happinesse in the outward worke of Sacrifice,
without Fayth in Christ Iesus; howsoeuer he would be
thought to haue Fayth in the blessed Seed promised to
his Father in Paradise. To Cain succeded others in
the same euill, going an whoring after their owne inuentions,

till the Flood tooke them away. After the
Flood, Cham and C
                     •
                  naan reare vp this mysticall Babel
againe, whom Shems people after subdued, as Noah foreprophecied.
But the Duell hauing broched this Wine
once, he leaues not off, till he made many in the Iewish
Church (euen the strict Pharises, that ages Puritanes) to
seeke iustification with God, by the workes of the Law
Our Sauiour comming in our Nature, taught the people
to seeke life in himselfe: and the Apostles afterwards
inculcate the same Ghospell, but the Diuell still raysed
some vp in the Christian Church, that reuiued the Pharises
doctrine; as specially may appeare by the Apostles
Epistle to the Ga
                     •
                  athians.
               
                  Ambros. in Gal. 3.] Hi non putabant plenam salutem esse in Christo, quia Legem illi aequabant. In fine, the Church of Rome
deuiseth a number of workes (as Oblations, Pilgrimages,
Censinges, Deuotions to Images, with a thousand
the like) in doing whereof, the doers should be iustified,
euen (ex opere 
                     ••
                  orato) by vertue of the outward worke
wrought. And to merit at Gods hands by such sleighty
workes doing, it was so toothsome to flesh and blood,
as the Kinges of the Nations did readily receiue it: and
they drinking of that cup, their people followed, till the
Harlots cup of Abhominations made them generally
drunken. So this opposite Ghospell begun; so it encreased,
and so Babylon was erected.
            ¶Now for the fall of it; S. Iohn in Reuel. 17. foretelleth,
that the former Kinges shall in time, arise against the
Harlot (or Malignant Church) wherevpon in chap. 18.
he seeth Babeis fall. How this is effected, he telles in the
19 chapter, when he attributes it there to him that rideth
on the White horse, whose names or titles be these;
The Word of God; the King of Kinges, and the Lord of Lordes.
And S. Paul to the Thessalonians, calling the former Corporation,
a Man of Sinne, a Sonne of Perdition, a wicked
Man (because they be all one in an opposition to

Christ and his free-grace) he declares, that the Lord
shall consume him with the spirit of his mouth; that is,
by the power of his Ghospell. For as the rising was, by
propounding humaine Fables, and leaden Legendes;
the Ghospell meane time wrapped vp in an vnknowen
Tongue: so, the fall of it wilbe, by preaching Christes
Ghospell in euery Tongue; as vnto such purpose, to
the Apostles were giuen, all sortes of Tongues.
            And that the walles of Babel, haue been a falling in
these partes of the World, euer since the time of our
Wickliff, vntill this hower; and that by no sword of
man, but by the two edged Sword of Gods Word, experience
and the worke already wrought (to Gods
prayse) will witnesse.
            Tut, say the Romanistes, the Opposers haue been (till
now of very late yeares) very few, weake, and simple. I
answere, al the liker to be of God, & the work wrought,
to proceed from the power of God: for so Christ did
conquer the World;1. Cor. 1. 26. 27, 28. 29. the Foolish confounding the Wise,
and the Weake ouerturning the Strong. Had our
Churches been Reformed by the number and might of
man, we should not so easily haue seene the power of the
Ghospell. That therefore which they call our Shame,
we hold our Glory. Decus, non dedecus.
            
            And that the walles of this Babylon will quickly fall
flatte on the ground, whereby the very Tower of their
strength may be easily surprised, these Reasons perswade
mee.
            1. First, diuers of the Kinges (which were as their
Bulwarkes) are fallen vnto our side: and S. Iohn sayth,
that the rest will follow.
            2. Secondly, as their Tongues at the literall Babel,
were slit, wherevpon that worke declyned: so, it is well
knowne to them that haue conuersed inwardly with

them, they grow more & more deuided in the language
of Diuinitie. So that Ferus, Granatensis, Pin
                     •
                  us, and many
able amongst them, haue much vnuayled the Harlot,
and cast the filth of her fornications in her face: not to
say any thing of the many thousands of plaine Protestantes,
in the skirtes of Italy, at the foote of the Alpes,
(as in
                  M. More in his Tables puts their beginning in Anno domi. 1167. 
               Piemont, and also in Prouinces in Fraunce; who
are in Tolosa called Albingenses; in Boheme, Tabarites)
who haue long time been one with vs, against Rome,
holding it Babylon.
            
            Their Tongues (I speake of the Romish Synagogue) be
wonderfully deuided, not onely in Doctrine, but also in
Discipline and Gouernment; witnesse not onely the
late controuersie betweene Secular-priestes & Iesuites;
ouer the which soare, a skinne may be drawen, but impossible
to be healed at the botthom, for that a greater
right (in conscience) ought to be graunted to the Priests
(being their mayne ministerie) them to the Iesuites, being
a regular irregular order of Friers, but hatched the other
day: but also, witnesse the controuersie of the Citie of
Venice (instincted by Father Paulus) not to speake of
any other places. For the Opposition in all probabilitie,
must be larger, then we can vpon the sodaine take
knowledge of; at least, for pressing the poynt, with euident
demonstration.
            3. Thirdly, the honest spirited among them, begin
much to abash, not onely at the grosse abhominations
in the court of Rome, and the religious irreligious houses;
but also, at their strange proiectes of Treason
(as the late Gunpouder villany against our whole
body of Parliament, and others (set a foote by their Iesuites,
or rather Iebushites, and that dayly, and in euery
Nation. And hereupon it is, that many returne to our
Church, many be dayly conuerted in Fraunce▪
                and many

indure tormentes abroad, at the handes of their bloody
inquisition. As the Iewes going to Babel, were caryed at
three seuerall times; and againe from Babel, had their
seuerall Returnes (by Zerubbabel, Ezr
                     •
                  , Nehemiah) so,
the Church that Christ hath had in this mysticall Babel,
hath her seuerall Returnes and Exodes; some at the sixt
houre, some at the ninth, and others at the eleuenth.
Say we therefore with the Psalmist,Psal. 126. 4. 
               O Lord returns our
Captiuitie, as Riuers in the South.
            
            4. Fourthly, as from the Apostles wordes (Rom. 11.
12.) If the fall of the Iewes, be the riches of the world (that is,
of the Gentiles) how much more shall their aboundance be?
And againe, verse 15. If the casting away of them, be the reconciling
of the world, what shall the Pros
                     ••
                  psis (or the very
assuming of them) be (et 
                     •
                   è zôe ek necrôn) if not life from
dead-ones? As I say, from these wordes I vnderstand, that
the vniuersall conuersion of the Iewes, shall bring with
it a mightie aduantage to the Church: and such conuersion
improbable, otherwise then by much vse of the
Hebrew tongue (as also, by the ministrie of some in the
Romish Church, within whose Territories, that people
haue their resiance) and the Hebrew tongue being now
much studied and profited in by Romanistes: so, it must
necessarily follow, that many learned Romanistes must
before that time turne themselues from Babel to the
Ghospell, and so bring with them a mighty people, as
Martin Luther hath done before them. As the meanes
of the Iewes vniuersall calling groweth, so, the strength
and glory of the Romish Babel declineth. Meanetime,
the Iewes are much scandalized at Christianitie, for that
the Christians where they liue, doe fall downe and adore
Images, or at best, adore men and women departed.
Touching which kind of scandale,
                  Paulus Ricius de Mosaicae l
                     •
                  g. mandatis. arising from such
Adoration, Paulus Ricius (a Cabalisticall Iew, and a

Christian of the Romish fashion) he writes thus; Verum
hoc vnum (salua tamen Reuer
                     •
                  mia occultorum) censere & probare
non formido, orthodora jam Christi fide ad plemtudinem
redacta, & Idolum cultu p
                     •••
                  tus dol
                     •
                  to, non solum non impium,
sed etiam condecens & laudabile esse (nis
                     •
                   & in hoc quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   consuetudinis
corruptela reniteretur) Templa & sacras ae
                     •
                  tes a
                     •
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
imaginibus construere, idsiquidem ad empyreo
                     •
                   & super
                     •
                  aetes
Sanctorum spt
                     •••
                  us, hominū mentes extollerent, & non ad corporeas
manufactas jmaginies: sic
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   omnem infirmorū offendicul
                     •
                  m
& nophandiss
                     •
                  mi erroris periculum aueretur. Obtrect
                     •
                  ntum
insuper Iudaeorum plures, qui prae caeteris Imagin
                     •
                  m 
                     •
                  ult
                     •
                  m
abhominantur, ad piam Christi religionem a r
                     •
                  plectendam,
induci & persuaderi possent.
            
            The whole date of this spirituall Babel (wherein the
Sonne of perdition hath his being, first and last) is of S.
Iohn sayd to be 42 moneths,Reu. 11. 2. 3. & 12. 6. more plainely after, 1260.
dayes; which by the rule of diuine prophecie, is so many
yeares, as in Leuit. 25. 8. Ezek. 4. 5. &c. Dan. 9. 24. &c. and
so they be vnderstood of
                  Iac. Brocard contra Iudeos, li. 2. Fr. du Ion on Apocal, VVolphiu
                     •
                   Ibid. many. Now whē these yeares
should begin, is a question: But such as vnderstand
Daniels Prophecie to outreach the date of mother Zion,
(which howsoeuer properly, may well fall out typically)
doth begin that date, vpon the finall ruine of Ierushalem,
               Napeir Lo. of Marcheston, with others.
wherewith the Iewish Sacrifice ceased; and that
is, some 40. yeares after Christes ascension, being from
the birth of Christ 73. yeares. Daniels wordes lye in his
last chap. thus: From the time that the dayly Sacrifice sha
                     ••
                  
taken away, and the abhominable desolation set vp, there shalbe
1290. dayes: b
                     •
                  essed is he that waiteth and commeth to the
1335. dayes. Hence is collected (comparing S. Iohn and
Daniel togeather:) First, that the Abhomination opposed
to the sole sufficient Sacrifice of Christ should be set vp,
(as the sodaine might beare it) about the yeare of our
Lord 73. what time, not onely the Romaines set vp their

Idols in the Temple, sacrificing vnto them, as Authors
of their Conquest; whereof Iosephus speaketh at large:
but also Menander, Ebion, and the Nicolaitans, then were
famous Heretikes: To whom the Diuell presently
ioyned others. By these, much poyson was powred into
the Body of the Christian Church, for raysing vp a
mysticall Abhomination.
            Secondly, that Abhomination was to continue 1260.
yeares: but then was to meete with a purger, for the
good of Christes mysticall Body, his Church. From
Christes birth to Ierushalems last ruine, 73. yeares: and
from thence to Antichrists fall, 1260. yeares: the whole
from Christ to Babels fall, be 1333. yeares. In which
yeare of the Lord, Ockam wrote in defence of the Emperour,
and defended Michael Cicens, condemned the
Decretals and Extrauagants, &c.
            Now the Prophet Daniel doth to S. Iohns 1260. yeares,
adde 30. to the First Blessing; which reacheth to the
yeare of our Lord 1363. the time of the Irish Bishop
Armachan, who writ against Friers, and could not
find foure Bibles in all Oxford. Then Daniel for the
Second blessed time, addeth to the former 45. yeares,
which bringes vs to the yeare of our Lord 1408. At
which time, the Doctrine of our Wicliffe was not onely
dispearsed ouer Christendome, (for he writ, sayth the
Romanist Genebrard,Genebr. in Chron. Plus quam 200. librorum volumina,
moe then 200. volumes of Bookes) but also, the same
Doctrine was held all ouer of many, at home & abroad;
and of the Romanists were called Wicliffians: Insomuch
as the Ramanistes were glad to gather in Councell at Constance,
for damming vp the passage of the Ghospell.
But all in vaine, for that the date of their Babel was out
foure-score yeares before that wicked Councell: and
both the blessed times (the lesser and the greater) mentioned

by Daniel were passed, and all the said 80. yeares,
a parcell of the 1000. yeares alotted for chayning vp
Satans mysticall iniquity.
            And it would not be forgotten, that presently vpon
Wicliffes death,Fox in Acts & M.
                God stirred vp one Wa
                     •
                  ter Brute here in
England; who not only held that the 1260. dayes of S.
Iohn, were prophetically so many yeares, and that from
his tyme back, to the first comming of the faith into this
Desart-land, it was so many yeares: But also, that the
Prophet Daniels nomber aforesaide, was to beginne the
account for so many yeares, euen with Ierusalems destruction,
as aboue saide. And because the words DVX
CLERI (in English, Captaine of the Cleargie) had in them
according to our and the Latines accompt, the number
of 666. he concluded the Pope to be the Antichrist.
            
            And as God stirred vp many worthy spirits at home;
so, abroad were Marsilius Patauinus, Gulielmus Ockam, Iohannes
de Gunduno, Luitpoldus, Vlricus Hangenor, Dantes,
Aligerius, Gregorius Ariminensis, Andreas de castro, Burdianus,
Euda, Taulerus, Franciscus Petrarcha, Iohannes de Rupe
scissa, Conradus Hagar, Penitentiarius Asiai, Michael Cesenas,
Petrus de Corbaria, Iohannes de Poliaco Iohannes de Castilione,
Franciscus de Arcatara, Ioan. Richetaylada, Nicholas Orem,
Mathias Parisiensis, with troopes many. Euery one had
his testimonie, and sundry hauing giuen in that testimonie,
the Beast that came out of the bottomlesse Pit, did
put them to death. Diuerse againe, were miraculously
preserued to the fulnesse of age, notwithstanding the
plainenesse of their testimony; as Wicliffe, Chaucer, and
many others. The walles of Babel are so taken, and the
Tower is on fire, howsoeuer many at it doe murmure,
and labour by watery Arguments to quench it. But all
in vaine, for Babel must be razed, and no more be.
         
         
            
            CHAP. xvij.
            Touching Satans Binding vp.
            SAint Iohn in Apocalips 20. presently vpon Babels
fall, doth see Satan chayned of an Angell, and so
put vnder locke and key for a thousand yeares;
that so he may not deceiue the people any more.
That this should be for 1000. yeares next after Christ,
or his Apostles, is against experience it selfe; for in that
thousand yeares, the contrary hath falne out. He is shut
vp, not from euery euill, but from deceiuing the people
as afore. Before, he aduaunced a false Ghospell in midst
of the Church, which brought with it 1000. other euils;
but Babel once falling, the Angell goes to chayning:
and as the Essentiall euill decreaseth, the linkes of the
Angels Chaine encrease; and Babel downe, the Ghospell
riseth vp.
            And if we marke it, we shall finde, that Satan was
fast gyued in Wicliffes time: For as heere he set much
trueth at libertie, so his sound by writing, went all ouer;
and many abroad by his writinges, came out of darknesse
into Christes marueylous light. At the brightnesse
whereof, the Romish Cleargie fretted: and to salue
the matter, they conuened at Constance and there (as men
Constant in Euill) they condemne Wicliffe (a long time
before that, dead) and send order into England, for taking
vp his bones, and burning them. Vpon which
Councell, Iohn Hus and lerom of Prage, were burnt for
Wiclifians; for so, they nicknamed the Christians. And
which would not be forgotten, that howsoeuer this
Councell of Constance was begun vnder one Pope (namely,
Iohn 24.) it was quickly graced with two Popes more,

               Ferebantur enim tunc tres Pontifices, &c. Sūma concil. per F. Bart. Carranzam. Printed Anno M.DC.I. Lugduni. 
               Benedict 13. and Gregorie 12. What an head had the
Romish Church then? Three Popes at a clap, make a plaine
Cerberus. Such a monstrous deuided head, presaged a
fall: and in the next Councell (which was held at Basill)
the Pope lost his Headship, being made Subiect to the
body of his Councell. I troe that the Angels Chaine,
then came ouer Satans head: and sure I am, that all Stories
make cleare, that from Wicliffes time hiterto, he hath
been so farre from seducing Generally, as he hath generally
been of the loosing hand, people and kingdomes
still falling away from him. Nor need we to feare the restauration
of his mysticall Idolatrie, for the generall.
It was but an ordinarie Stone which Serajah, tying his
Scrolle too, did cast into Euphrates; but the Stone whereto
this Babels curse is tyed, is as a Milstone in S. Iohns
eyes; and this throwne downe into the Sea, with these
wordes: It shalbe found no more. Amen.
         
         
            CHAP. xviij.
            Touching the loosing of Satan, and Gog and Magog.
            AS Saint Iohn seeth Satan, first Apprehended, secondly
Chayned,Wicliffe writ a Booke, De solutione Sathanae. thirdly cast into Prison, and
fourthly shut vp from power of seducing vniuersally,
& that for a thousand yeares: all which
no doubt befall, through the Mediation of Christ, the
Churches Head: so, he foreseeth that Satan vpon the
expirement of the thousand yeares, is loosed for a litle
season. Which season (how litle soeuer) he taketh vp, in
vsing all meanes of seduction; for heere is the same word
Planáô vsed as before: of which word commeth Plané
                     •
                  a,
which we tearme a Planet; and in S. Iude haue turned it,

a Wandring Starre. Whereby may be collected, the
instabilitie of such spirites as Satan seduceth; soone caryed
about hither and thither, as Cain was, the auncient
Arch-runnagate.
            
               
                  Lactantius in Epit. diuin. Iustit. cap. 11. may very well be admitted, & read profitably here. If the tearme Chiliast was giuen but for that, I cannot but thinke, that some maledicted that they vnderstood not. The vniuersall seduction that forewent the 1000.
yeares Iubile, was close and mysticall, growing vp with
the Body of the Church, and somuch the more dangerous.
But after the expirement of the sayd 1000. yeares,
Satan hauing but a litle time, cannot hope by that kinde
of cousenage quickly to ouertake the Church. That litle
time therefore he vseth in another kind of seducement;
and that is, by bearing certaine (without the
Church) in hand, that they may easily conquer the
Christians, and subdue the whole earth vnto them. The
Cheifetaines of that aduerse power, are stiled Gog & Magog;
whose armie (for number) is as the sand of the Sea.
            Some haue sayd, that Gog and Magog signifie in
English, Couered and Vncouered: as if the Couered one
should be Antichrist (of Rome) that couers himselfe
with Christianitie: and the other, an Vncouered or
plaine open-foe, as the Turke. Gog indeed signifieth a
Couering (such as were the flat battlements on the tops
of the Israelites houses) but not Couered:
               the Root of them both, is, Gog, which is Tectum.
                and Magog must
either be but the very same (howsoeuer M be prefixed)
or at most, can but stand for Man-gog; that is, one that is
Of Gog, and not opposite to Gog.
            
            Passing by the wordes signification, we find Gog and
Magog in Ezekiel. 38. to intend Vncircumcised Aduersaries,
dwelling North from Iudea (it may be sproung
of Magog, Iaphets second Sonne) of whom (it is held of
many) the Scithians and Tartars had their originall. Gyg
is famous in Historie, for giuing name to Mountaines,
to a Lake neare Sa
                     •
                  dj, to men, and particularly to a brother
of Briareus, who was called Gyges, a Gyantlike person,

at enmity with God.
            The Rabbines of the Iewes do hold,Paul. Ricius, in Cabal. art. Tom. 1. de Talmud. that the Warres of
Gog and Magog, shall goe before the setled Kingdome
of Messiah: or, asH. Br. in Coheleth. p. 35. 
               Ram bam (that is, according to the 4.
radicall letters, R. M. B. M. Rabbj Moses Ben Maymony)
sayth, in the beginning of Messiahs dayes, shalbe the
Battailes of Gog and Magog. The poore wretches speake
a truth, but vnderstand it not; inasmuch as they beleeue
not that Christes comming is twofold: the first in Humility,
the second only in Glory. With the heathenish Gog-magogs,
our Sauiour warred by the ministery of his Apopostles,
whose weapons were spirituall: but the Gog-magog
spoke of in the Reuelation, must arise after the
vnloosing of Satan. And indeed, vpon the downefall
of that enemie and his infinite Army (which can not be
done, but by the power of Christ) Messiah is to settle a
Kingdome of Glory.
            1. From Christes birth to Ierushalems finall ruine (the
world then being aged 4000. yeares) were 73. yeares.
            2. From Ierushalems downe-fall, through the times
of Antichrist, to the fall of his Babel, be 1260. yeares.
            3. From the Periode, to Satans being let loose, be
1000. yeares. The whole summe from our Lords birth,
till Satans loosing, be 2333. yeares: Then, the Christians
be to expect open Hostilitie. But God knowes
how to deliuer his, in that day of tentation, that shall
come vpon all the earth.Allegatur a Rau Katina, vt est in Paulo R
                     •
                  cio. A thousand yeares shall the
Desolation be, sayth the Talmud.
            
            ¶Meane time it would be remembred, that the R
                     •
                  bbi
                     •
                  es
ordinarily hold, that God reneweth not the world,
Nisi septem millibus annorum transactis, till 7000. yeares
haue passed from the Creation. And we may thinke,
that as for theMath. 24. 22. Electes sakes, he did shorten the dayes
of the Romaines siege layd to Ierushalem; so, he will cut

short the dayes of Gog-magog, besieging the Tentes and
Citie of Christians.
         
         
            CHAP. xix.
            Touching the last Iudgment.
            TOgeather with the Fire falling from heauen vpon
Gog-magogs Army, euen the whole body of Heathenrie
(for then the Saints liuing, shalbe taken vp
aloft and meete Christ in the Ayre (1. Thess. 4. 17.)
as the eight soules in the Arke, were caryed vp aloft
from the iudgment of Water) S. Iohn noteth, that the
great and glorious Iudgment presently followeth. Take
his owne wordes, for I thinke not good to paraphraze
(at this time) vpon them.
            10. Vers) And the Diuell that deceaued them,Reuel, 20. 10. &c. was
cast into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the Beast
and the false Prophet, shalbe tormented, euen day and
night for euermore.
            11. And I saw a great white Throne, and one that
sate on it, from whose face fled away both the Earth and
Heauen, and their place was no more found.
            12. And I saw the dead, both great and small, stand
before God: and the Bookes were opened, and an other
Booke was opened, which is the Booke of life; and the
dead were iudged of those thinges which were written
in the Bookes, according to their workes.
            13. And the Sea gaue vp her dead, which were in
her; and Death and Deapth deliuered vp the dead
which were in them: and they were iudged euery-man
according to their workes.
            14. And Death andAs the Latines tume Hadés by Infernus, so I by Deapth. But indeed we haue not an English word that will expresse it. Deapth were cast into the

Lake of Fire: this is the Second death.
            15. And whosoeuer was not found written in the
Booke of life, was cast into the Lake of fire.
         
         
            CHAP. xx.
            Touching a certaine description of the Church
in Reuel. 21. and 22.
            FInally, after the vniuersall day of Doome, S. Iohn
draweth an excellent Mappe of the Church: but
whether of the Church tryumphing after iudgement,
or of the Church militant heere before iudgement,
as it is seene by the eye of Fayth; it is not a litle
questionable.
            Many haue taken it for the Church Tryumphant,
not onely for his description in the last place (for that
will not necessarily conclude, seeing somewhat in the
last place, may be but an expositiue Commentary of
that which went before) but for that it is sayd of this
people,Reuel. 21. 4. that All teares are wipe away from their eyes, &c.
Which in proper sense accordeth to the Church Triumphant.
            Some againe do take it for the Church heere
                  So doth Conciliū prouinc. Senosense in decreto 1. with many others.
                
               Militant;
not onely for that the Apostle in Galat. 4. doth stile
the Christian Church heere, by the name of Ierushalem
from aboue; but also for that in this Church, there be
certaine Leaues of a Tree, wherewith the Nations were
to be healed;Ch. 21. 24. 26. & 22. 2. and after this life, there is no healing of
any errour; much lesse, of the Gentile-kinges bringing
their glory vnto the Triumphant Church.
            And I haueAs may appeare in my Bibles Briefe, in the argument vpon the Reuelation. long suspected, that it is a description
of that part of the Church Militant, which should betide
the Gentiles, vpon the vniuersall addition of the

               Iewes, or rather of all Israel. For as, we neuer read of the
ten Tribes vnited againe with Iudah (howsoeuer it be
plainely foretyped twyse ouer in Ezek. 37. and there
spoken of, next before the Warres of Gog and Magog)
so, S. Paul sayth, that after the fulnesse of the Gentiles be
come in, All Israel shalbe saued (Rom. 11. 25. 26.) And so, S.
Iohn seeth, not onely thousandes of Iudah, Benjamin, and
Leuj, sealed in the forehead to Godward; but also of
other Tribes (Reuel. 7.) following the Lambe, and singing
Moses his song of Deliuerance: of whom it is sayd,
that there was no guile in their mouth, and that they
were without spot before the Throne of God (Reuel. 14.
1. &c.) which is the state of all, to whom sinne is not
imputed. Herewith I haue marked, that S. Iohn doth
heere keepe the same methode, as did Ezekiel: for Ezekiel
presently after the downefall of Gog-magog, doth describe
the New Temple, and distinguish a new, the
Israelites portions in Canaan; all one (in effect) with this
description of S. Iohn: Ezekiel ending with Iehouah
Shammah, and S. Iohn with this, that in this new Citie,
The Lord is there. But, let it be at the first hand, that it is
a Description of Christes mysticall Body heere, whose
heartes are purified by Fayth:
               Act. 15. 9. yet, at the second hand, it
may (as a Type) giue vs a resemblaunce of the Churches
finall glory; and that the rather, for that to their
glory, there shalbe after the destruction of all by Fire,
A new Heauen,2. Pet. 3. 12. 13. and a new Earth; wherein shall dwell Righteousnesse,
as S. Peter plainely teacheth.
            Heere I know, that some vnderstand not according
to sobrietie; but, as if they were Prophets of extraordinarie
spirit, they boldly determine of thinges yet secret.
As the light of the Righteous encreaseth till midday,
so, the light of Gods Spirit shalbe enlarged vpon

his Church. But euery age, brings not with it all things;
and let vs be contented with our present measure.
Meane time, the meditation of the Glory to come, will
effect in vs patience vnder present tentations: because,
The Afflictions of this present life,Rom. 8. 18. are not worthy of the Glory,
which shall be shewed vnto vs.
            
            Heere Neighbours crosse & pierce both hands & feete;
            Angels and Saints be there our Neighbours sweete:
            Heere famine, sword, and sicknesse doe offend vs;
            There plentie, safetie, soundnesse doe attend vs:
            Heere Sorrow sits, and hand in hand she wrings;
            There Solace sweetly Hallelu-jah sings.
            While Satans seed it selfe doth ruinate.
            Turne thou aside my Soule, and meditate:
            And farre bejond thy earthly thoughts aspire;
            Draw neere to God, that he may draw the nier:
            That with theThat is, the Church. 
               Body of thy present Story,
            In fine, thou maist be swallowed vp of Glory.
         
         
            
            A Catalogue of Authors vsed in this Booke; togeather
with the times wherein they flourished, or, at
least where in they liued: as Chronicles deliuer.
            
               
                  First, such Writers as were before Christ
came in our Nature.
                  
                     
                        Mercury trismegistes, his time vncertaine.
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        Sibilla,
                        Cl. Alex. in protreptico. more auncient then Orpheus.
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        Orpheus,
                        
                           Suida (as in the small Greek Poets) placeth him in the time of Israels Iudges. about some
                     1300. yeares.
                  
                  
                     Isocrates,
                     360. yeares.
                  
                  
                     Aristotle,
                     300. yeares.
                  
                  
                     Septuagint,
                     260. yeares.
                  
                  
                     
                        Aristeas, about the same time.
                      
                  
                  
                     Iulius Caesar,
                     betweene 40. and 50. yeares
                  
                  
                     Virgil,
                  
                  
                     Horace,
                  
               
               
                  Secondly, after Christes birth.
                  
                     
                        Martialis Cephas, about 58. yeares, if not before.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Iosephus,
                     73.
                     yeares.
                  
                  
                     
                        Ignatius,
                        Ignatius, Bishop of Antioche, the third after Peter the Apostle: Hierony. de vit. scr. éccles.
                         about
                     112.
                  
                  
                     
                        Iustin, the Historian,
                     154.
                  
                  
                     
                        Iustin, the Martyr,
                     170.
                  
                  
                     Ireneus,
                           Ireneus the scholer of Polycarpe, said to be scholer to S. Iohn, Hierō. Ibid.
                     
                     200.
                  
                  
                     Clemens Alexandrine,
                     202.
                  
                  
                     Tertullian,
                     210.
                  
                  
                     Origen,
                     216.
                  
                  
                     Cyprian,
                     249.
                  
                  
                     Victor Pitab.
                     261.
                  
                  
                     Victor Antiochen
                     280.
                  
                  
                     Dorotheus,
                  
                  
                  
                     Eusebius,
                     326.
                  
                  
                     Lactantius,
                     338.
                  
                  
                     Hilary,
                     347.
                  
                  
                     Nyssen,
                     348.
                  
                  
                     Ambrose,
                     371.
                  
                  
                     Ierom,
                     375.
                  
                  
                     Basil,
                     378.
                  
                  
                     Augustin,I am not ignoraunt, that in the third Oration against the Ievves (bearing the name of Chrisostoms) the Writer saith (as Erasmus translates it) Hic quingentesimus ex eo tempore agitur annus, as if from Ierushalems fall, at furdest, from, Christes birth, it were to his time 500. yeares; eyther that must not be Chrysostoms speach (by generall consent of Chronicles) or by fift hundred yeare, must be meant 500. of yeares current, not nearely compleat. Let the Learned determine it.
                     
                     399.
                  
                  
                     Chrysostome,
                     402.
                  
                  
                     Hesichius,
                     310.
                  
                  
                     Cyril. Alexandr,
                     418.
                  
                  
                     Socrates scholast,
                     427.
                  
                  
                     Theodoret,
                     433.
                  
                  
                     Prosper,
                     467.
                  
                  
                     Fulgentius,
                     468.
                  
                  
                     Rhemigius,
                     478.
                  
                  
                     Gelasius,
                     492.
                  
                  
                     Boetius,
                     504.
                  
                  
                     
                        Gildas the Britaine,
                     580.
                  
                  
                     Gregorius Mag.
                     591.
                  
                  
                     Mahomet,
                     660.
                  
                  
                     Beda,
                     720.
                  
                  
                     Ans
                           •
                        ert,
                     767.
                  
                  
                     Idiota,
                     848.
                  
                  
                     Giselbert.
                     879.
                  
                  
                     Theophylact,
                     885.
                  
                  
                     Rupertus,
                     1102.
                  
                  
                     Barnard,
                     1110.
                  
                  
                     Pet. Lombard,
                     1148.
                  
                  
                     Decretals,
                     1232.
                  
                  
                     Tho. Aquin.
                     1240.
                  
                  
                     Durand.
                     1287.
                  
                  
                     Scotut,
                     1340.
                  
                  
                  
                     Wicliffe,
                           
                              VVicliffe (as M. Fox recordeth in Act, & Mon▪) was of K. Edward the 3. sent with the Bishop of Bangor and others, Embassador into Italy, for treating with the Popes Legates, about affayres betweene the King and the Pope—He had the publique testimony of Oxford, for good life till his death; and for learning, the testimonie, is that he had written in Logicke, Philosophy, Diuinitie, Morality, and the speculatiue Art, without peere. Many yeares after his death, the Councell of Constance condemned him: Caused his bones to be taken vp at Lutterworth (his Parioch) and burnt. In the same Councell, Husse and Ierom of Prage were burnt for followers and defenders of VVicliffe. Fiftie-foure Nobles of Morauia writ vnto that Councell, in defence of Husse and Ierom, adding their seuerall seales and hands: with sharpe reprehensions, for taxing Bobemia and Morauia of Haeresie. Many Nobles in England, (about the yeare 1385. as M. More recordeth) did maintaine VVicliffes doctrine; namely, L. Montague, L. Clifford, Earle of Salisburie, &c. Latimer, Neuel.
                           
                           ¶From the beginning of the first Rest in Canaan vnto Christes death, be reckoned but 28. Iubilees. And the 1400. yeare after Christ, bringes with it an 28. Iubilee.
                        
                     
                     1367. &c. yeares.
                  
                  
                     Walter Brute,
                     1384.
                  
                  
                     Wideford,
                     1396.
                  
                  
                     Bessarion,
                     1433.
                  
                  
                     Sabellicus,
                     1482.
                  
                  
                     Pol. Virgil vrb.
                     1520.
                  
                  
                     Paul Ricius,
                     1537.
                  
                  
                     Wolphius,
                     1544.
                  
               
               
                  These being but moderne Writers,
I passe by their yeares.
                  
                     Folengius.
                     Melanchton.
                  
                  
                     Nannius.
                     Zegedin.
                  
                  
                     Ferus.
                     P. Martyr.
                  
                  
                     Granatensis.
                     Zanchius.
                  
                  
                     Carranza.
                     Beza.
                  
                  
                     Hospinian
                           •
                        .
                     Bellarmine.
                  
                  
                     Goropius Becanus.
                     Fr. du Ion.
                  
                  
                     Ia. Brocard.
                     More.
                  
                  
                     Caluin.
                     Napeir.
                  
                  
                     Musculus.
                     Fr. Trigge.
                  
                  
                     Bucer.
                     H. Br.
                  
                  
                     Ph. Lonicer.
                     Gerard.
                  
                  
                     Zuinglius.
                     
                        Burges, with others.
                  
                  
                     Bullinger.
                      
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            LECTORI.
            
               HErein, against Romanistes, I alleadge
Auncientes, euen such as themselues
doe graunt woorthy to be heard in the
matter. Against Nouelistes, I alleadge
such as themselues hold most
woorthy to be listened vnto. And to
deale otherwise, were to make the Plea, partiall.
            As for Rome, the Talmudistes dealt wittily, when
not onely one sayth, he saw Messiah amongst poore Lazers,
without Romes Gates: but also, when (by way of
parable) they teach, that what time Salomon matched
with Pharaohs Daughter, the Angell Gabriel pitched a
Reed in the Sea, which grew to a Rocke (a Reedish-rocke)
whereupon Rome was built. Old Idolatry ouerturned old
Rome (howsoeuer, some Chappels may yet stand there)
and new Idolatrie (doubtlesse) will quickly ouerturne the
New. For faythfull is he, that by S. Iohn hath spoken it.
            As for the Nouelistes, who count euery passage to a
new faction, for grouth in the fayth (which is indeed, but
the multiplying of a scab into a scurfe) Iotham in his Parable
of the Trees, annoynting the Bramble, hath deliuered
their destinie. The fire shall come out of their sides,
and consume their corporations as Stubble: For the
Plant which God hath not planted, must be pulled vp by
the Rootes.
            When I had an irregular Conceit of our Churches
Discipline (as for the Fayth, I held it close, and somuch
Communion with the Church, as my trauailes then

could well afforde) I then did perceiue in the Nouelistes
(not onely some Absurdities of Opinion, but also) a flat
Opposition betweene their Fayth and Practise. As
for whith cause, the Archbishop Whitguift could sometimes
say; If I were of Cartwrights opinion, I would
be of the Brownistes Practise: so, the like caused mee in
wordes and writinges, still to be taxing of them. Wherevpon
I found them (no lesse then the Romanist) iniuriously
implacable. Which as it continued to the time of
that Conference, which was to be held at Hamptoncourt
before the King; so then, after bragges of their vnmatchable
Champions, I was braued by them in the Citie
of London, as one that should haue no part in their expected
Prey, because of yore I had not playde their prize.
Sed apagè, vah, I shame to thinke, how they there fomed
out their owne shame. But more I blush, that they should
in hugger-mugger still striue to vphold their Gyant of
Straw, hauing broken off his hands and feete so lately,
in presence of the Arke of Testimonie. He may feare
litle Birds at the first; but no doubt, they will ere long
sit vpon his pate, and picke Strawes out of his nose. In the
hope whereof, I so cease this speach.
            
               H. Cl.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by W. White, dwelling
in Cow-lane ouer against the signe of
the White Lion. 1609.
         
         
            
            Errata.
            
               
                  
                     In the Title page, for Nouum,
                     
                     read
                     Nonum.
                  
                  
                     In A 2. backe-side, line 4.
                     Briareus.
                  
                  
                     A 3. foreside, line 3.
                     Viuis.
                  
                  
                     B 2. foreside, line 11.
                     sanguinolent.
                  
                  
                     C foreside, in the margine,
                     Leda.
                  
                  
                     E backside, in the margine,
                     Quis enim hoc.
                  
                  
                     E 2. backside, line 30.
                     1. Tim. 3.
                  
                  
                     E 3. line 1.
                     Factious.
                  
                  
                     F 4. line 3.
                     maugre.
                  
                  
                     G 2. line 3.
                     Sorex.
                  
                  
                     G 4. line 27. blot out, etsi.
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     H bacside, line 20.
                     perfidos.
                  
                  
                     K 2. line 2.
                     vocales
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        .
                  
               
            
         
      
   