
      
         
            
            
               
THE TRVMPET OF APOLLO: Sounding out the ſweete blaſt of Recouerie, in diuers dangerous and deſperate diſeaſes.
            Experientia mater Medicinae.
            
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Printed at London by P. Short, dwelling on Breadſtreet hill at the ſigne of the Starre, 1602.
         
         
            
            
               
To the curteous and well diſpoſed Reader.
            
               HAuing at the length as well out of mine owne manifold labours, charge and experience, as alſo out of the learned and induſtrious practiſes of ſundrie my well affected friends vnto the chimical and spagirical arte, obtained many rare and excellent medicines for the health of mans body, whereof I haue here g
                  •
               uen ſome taſte, reſeruing a further ſatisfaction for thoſe who vpon iuſt occaſion ſhall at any time hereafter require the ſame. I haue now preſumed out of the fulneſſe of my affection towards my naturall and well deſeruing place and countrey, to preſent and offer the beſt and moſt approoued remedies, which by my 17. yeeres practiſe, I haue gotten either out of mine own workehouſe, or from other mens Laboritories, which haue ſpent ſome time in Pellicanes, circling glaſſes and furneſſes both calcining and reuerbaratorie, &c. and ſuch like as well as my ſelfe. Hoping, that thoſe Gentlemen, who in great kindneſſe haue conferred both their receipts and cures vpon me, will not be offended though I ſhall raſhly publiſh the

names of ſome of their patients togither with mine owne, which they had happily purpoſed to reſerue onely for their priuate remembrances. I am heere alſo to craue pardon of the patients themſelues, whoſe names (for the better credit of the medicines, and comfort of others that ſhall happen to fall into the like diſeaſes) I haue aduentured to diſcloſe: My offence herein I hope will be the more tolerable, becauſe my ende and ſcope is charitable, ayming principally at the health of man, without the which no honour, no wealth nor any other worldly pleaſure can giue any true contentment. Herein I haue alſo had a speciall and honest care not to nominate any, whoſe infirmitie might worke either diſgrace or reproch to the patient; neither can I iuſtly be taxed with a vaine-glorious & vaunting humor in blazing out theſe cures by a Printers proclamation, ſaying in all Chriſtian humilitie, I challenge no part of the glorie to my ſelfe, but acknowledge as I ought, that omnis ſalus à Domino: and likewiſe for that in caſes either of death or torment vnto men as theſe are, I thinke there can be no meanes ſo generall or ſo ſudden, but they will come farre ſhort of their deſires, that haue cauſe to vſe them.
            Neither am I ſingular in this courſe, for men of great iudgment▪ and learning haue heretofore alſo made publike obſeruation of their cures,

and diuers of mine owne countreymen haue long ſince commended their speciall labours in this kinde to the world: As that painfull practizer I. Heſter, who Printed a large Catalogue of his oyles and waters, vnder many strange and ſtately names: and Giles that anncient Chimiſt, who hauing blowne away his wealth in the ſmoake of Alchimie, did yet at the length light vpon a Balſamum which remaineth to be ſolde at this day, commended for many rare & excellent vſes. The credit of Moyſes diet-drinke lasted a long time, and was generally vſed in the ſcab of Venus. And an other auncient and skilful diſtiller of my name doth at this preſent make great profit of that his excellent aqua bezoartica, with the which I dare boldly compare (be it spoken without offence) my aqua comfortans ſtomachū
                for the ſtrengthning of any weake ſtomacke. Neither can I forget that full and foule-mouthed phyſitian D. Burcot who ſolde his generall purging drinke ſo many yeeres togither for 10. groats the quart beſhite the bottle (for ſo he vſually pronoūced the word beſide.) Theſe and many more inſtances in this kinde I could produce, to prooue my ſelfe to be no Author of nouelties. But what need I ſo much to inſiſt vpon examples, ſeeing the medicines thēſelues are ſuch as were firſt deriued from the ſacred cloſet of nature, and are now long ſince ratified and confirmed

with that ſure and autentique ſeale of experience. We ſee that Indian weede Tabacco, hath now found out both learned & honorable patrons, being firſt made known by publike impreſſion, and afterward by continuall practiſe euen vntill this daie: and without all respect of age, ſex, complexion, method or other circumſtance. And why ſhould not Engliſh ſimples truely and chimically prepared by Engliſh Artiſts haue alſo their free allowance, and be made familiar with Engliſh bo: dies? I reſt then gentle Reader in the expectation of thy fauour, whoſe infirmities I pitie, and whoſe recouerie I deſire and hope to performe. I will ſell nothing, but that which I dare and will take my ſelfe in the ſame diſeaſe, for which it is commended. And for thy better ſafetie and ſatisfaction, I haue here contained my ſelfe wholy within animal and vegetable medicines, wherewith I will at all times (God willing) bereadie to furniſh thee▪ at reaſonable rates, out of my ſhop in Sheere lane neere Temple barre, faithfully and workmanlie drawne without all ſophiſtication or aduſtion.
            
               Thine in all chriſtian loue,
IOHN CLARKE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               PLAGVE.
               A Notable defenſatiue Cake againſt the plague, being firſt practiſed in Millain vpon a generall infection there, about the yeere 1579. by M. D. Siring, and after brought ouer and practized in England in the great yeere of viſitation An. 1593. by N. Romero Gentleman, commended and graced by Rodulphus the Emperour, with many honourable termes of fauour vnder the great ſeale of the Empire.
               
                  I Am bold to front my Pamphlet with this defenſatiue, becauſe I vnderſtand by many ſecret informatiōs of my friends, that diuers Phyſitians and thoſe of great

reading and iudgment (whoſe graue cenſures I doe greatly reuerence) doe expect a fearefull and generall infection of the plague this ſommer, by reaſon of the vnnaturall and intemperate ſeaſon of the ſpring, which hath already ſhewed both his deadly and daungerous effects in the bodies and liues of many thouſands of her Maieſties ſubiects: which if it ſhall pleaſe God the great Gouernor both of heauen and earth, in his vnſpeakeable mercies to turne away from vs, I hope it will prooue a ſtrong motiue to ſtirre vs vp to a general & chriſtian thankfulnes. If othewiſe, ſo that our ſins do call for vengeance & viſitation from heauen, I haue thought good in my tender loue and affection towards my natiue countrey to publiſh this preſeruatiue, which in fiue weekes ſpace (by the great bleſſing of God) did cleare that famous Citie of Millain being ſo grieuouſly infected, as that in ſome one weeke there died three thouſand perſons. And the citizens in their great loue and thankfulneſſe

towardes D. Siring beſtowed a gratuitie of fiftie thouſand crownes vpon him.
               
                  Obſeruations in this Medicine.
                  
                     IT is made in the forme of a little round cake or tablet, and the doſe is two drams.
                  It is moſt properly giuen to ſuch as are free and not poſſeſſed with the ſickeneſſe, although abiding in viſited houſes.
                  It is an excellent and eaſie purge, being wrought vp with many cordials and antidotes.
                  If theſe cakes be kept betweene papers in a cloſe box and neere ſome fire, they will laſt good for ſeuen or eight moneths.
                  Two drammes is a good doſe or proportion for all ſuch perſons as are ſixteene yeeres of age, and vpward to fiftie or ſixtie; ſo as they bee ſtrong of body: but

weake men of fiftie fiue, or ſixtie; or children betweene eight and ſixteene muſt take only the halfe proportion.
                  The cake may be eaten, and a cup of burnt wine drunke after it, or els diſſolued in white wine.
                  The ſaid Romero hath alſo giuen the ſame with good ſucceſſe in many burning feauers.
               
               
                  The practiſe of the aforeſaid defenſatiue in the latter end of the Plague, An. 1593. in London.
                  
                     THere were diſperſed abroade within London and Middleſex, great numbers of theſe defenſatiue cakes vnto perſons whoſe names are not here remembred.
                  It pleaſed the right Honourable Lords and others of her Maieſties priuie counſell to haue fiue and fortie of theſe cakes.
                  Doctor Fletcher that learned Prelate

then Byſhop of Worceſter bought to the number of fiftie of theſe cakes and diſperſed them in the then viſited houſes of the ſaid Citie, and it pleaſed God to preſerue all the inhabitants of them from the infection, as he himſelfe reported at the counſell table.
                  The right honourable Sir Iohn Puckering knight, then L. Keeper of the great ſeale of England, appointed certaine of theſe cakes to be conueyed to the towne of S. Albons by Ma. Belfield, for the clecring of the infected houſes againſt the terme, which was then kept there.
                  Maſt. Richard young Iuſtice of peace in Middleſex and one of her Maieſties cuſtomers, deliuered abroad many hundreths of them, and made one eſpeciall triall in the pariſh of S. Marie Abchurch where he himſelfe dwelled, vpon nine viſited houſes in which there aboade three and thirty perſons, which trial gaue great contentment vnto the Lords of the counſell, who ſent for the true note vnto him

to be fully informed thereof. And therupon Sr 
                     Romero ſhould haue proceeded to a general triall in one of the greateſt Wardes in London, by her Maieſties pleaſure ſignified in the letters of the right honorable the LL. of her Maieſties priuy Counſell, and directed to the chiefe Magiſtrate of this honorable Citie, in whoſe hands vpon what reaſon the ſtay was made, I doe heere forbeare to vtter, becauſe I would haue the dead to reſt in peace: only it ſhall ſuffice, that himſelfe by the opinion of diuers (ſcorning and diſgracing the medicine) died within three weekes after, either of the plague it ſelfe or of a burning feauer his Couſin German, as I haue been credibly enformed.
                  
                     Thomas Bland of the patiſh of Alhallowes-barking, had defenſatiues for himſelfe, his wife and one ſeruant.
                  10. Smith of the pariſh of Creechurch, had for himſelfe, his wife and foure ſeruants.
                  
                     Frauncis Bradborne of Saint Swithins

pariſh, had for himſelfe, his wife and two ſeruants.
                  Maſt. Merick preacher in crooked lane had for himſelfe, his wife and two children.
                  The daughter of goodman Hawes being infected and taking it, eſcaped.
                  Maſt. Iarfield preacher at Saint Marie Abchurch going vſually amongſt the infected of his pariſh and others, and hauing taken this medicine togither with his wife and maide, were all (thanks be to God) preſerued.
                  The maide▪ſeruaunt of one Mopſey
                  
                  Flax-wife, hauing the plague vpon her, was cured by one of theſe defenſatiues.
                  
                     Iohn Webſter a Purſe-maker dwelling at the entrance into Gutterlane, he and his man both tooke the ſame.
                  Miſter Eare a maker of gold lace in Gutterlane, he and his wife had each of them a defenſatiue.
                  Miſtris Hunt a victualer in Gutterlane,

ſhe and both her maides tooke of this defenſatiue.
                  A Seruaunt of Maſter Deacons the Queenes Sergeant Plummer, hauing an extreame burning feauer, was cured with this medicine.
                  A dutch Goldſmith dwelling amongſt the feather dreſſers in the Black-friers took one of theſe defenſatiues.
                  A Ruby-cutter lying at the Dolphin in Gutterlane, hauing the plague vpon him tooke one of theſe and was cured.
                  Goodwife Ruſſell an hearbe-wife in Cheapſide, hauing buried her husband of the plague, ſhe & her maid were both preſerued by taking this defenſatiue.
                  Maſt. Heywood a Copper-ſmith tooke one of theſe cakes.
                  The wife of Rowland that excellent Artiſan dwelling in Southworke, tooke one of theſe defenſatiues.
                  A French gentleman being Couſin to Monſieur de la Now lying neere the Exchange, tooke one of them.
                  
                     
Sr 
                     Romero that brought the receipt from Millain, being then bedfellow with Doct. Siring, tooke the ſame twiſe himſelfe.
                  Maſt. Crauen a Draper in Watlingſtreete, and now a graue and well reputed Alderman of this Citie, bought one of theſe cakes.
                  A ſeruant of Maſt. Cordals in Milkeſtreete tooke one of theſe defenſatiues.
                  Miſtris Bradſhaw an auncient gentlewoman and a Couſin of hers then dwelling with her, tooke of theſe cakes, ſhee beeing then at her houſe at Stebon
                     
                        •
                     eath.
                  Maſt. Gamedge, a man much troubled with the gowte, and dwelling in Saint Tantlins pariſh, tooke one of theſe cakes to cleare his body of bad humors, and commended the working thereof greatlie.
                  Maſt. Colfe th'apothecarie dwelling at the Artichoke in Cornhill ſolde diuers of theſe cakes: ſo likewiſe did one other of

the ſame facultie being a man of ſpeciall note amongſt them, whom I forbeare to name at this time.
                  Maſt. Moulton ſecondarie of the counter in Woodſtreet, bought two of theſe defenſatiues.
                  Maſt. Shepham of the pariſh of Saint Thomas th'apoſte bought two cakes.
                  Maſt. Richard Wilbraham Eſquire, and late common Serieant of this honourable Citie, though preſerued by this defenſatiue Ann. 93. from the contagion; yet by a violent feauer this laſt yeere, to the vnſpeakeable loſſe of this Citie, to the incredible griefe of his friend and louing ſpouſe (though to his owne immortall glorie and comfort) was in the flower of his age, and in the higheſt hope of his aduancement taken from vs to his euerlaſting peace and reſt.
                  Maſt. Chambers a merchant of good account bought two of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Swaynes man bought one of them.
                  
                     
Maſt. William Nichols a draper in Watling ſtreete bought two of theſe defenſatiues.
                  Maſt. Culuerwel citizen and mercer of London, had 30. of theſe cakes for himſelfe and his friends.
                  Maſt. Linford a draper in Waltingſtreete, a man greatly beloued whileſt he liued, and as greatly lamented now he is dead, had one of theſe defenſatiues.
                  Maſt. T. G. had foure of theſe defenſatiues.
                  A ſeruant of Maſt. Archers had one of theſe defenſatiues.
                  Ma. Paumer of Woodſtreet had three of them.
                  Maſt. Dauenant in Bowlane had foure of theſe cakes.
                  
                     Henry Ienkes a ſeruant at Biſhops hall tooke one of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Suſans the Barbarie merchant had one of theſe defenſatiues.
                  Maſt. Scales dwelling at Dowgate had one of theſe cakes.
                  
                     
Miſtris Duttons man of Woodford, had one of them.
                  Maſt. Albanie a Draper in Watling ſtreete, had one of theſe cakes.
                  The Author heereof and his men tooke of theſe cakes, and were all preſerued.
                  
                     Iohn Ailſwoorth of Redding Clothier, tooke one of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Vrie Babington had two of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Edwin Babington his brother had alſo two of them.
                  Maſt. Haruie a Grocer, had for him ſelfe and nine others.
                  
                     Peter Peerſon Clothwoorker, had one of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Filkins a Scriuener, had two of them.
                  
                     Suſan Perches beeing ſicke of the plague, tooke one of theſe defenſatiues, and recouered.
                  
                     Iohn Dauiſon of S. Michaels, took one of them being infected, and it helped him.
                  
                     
The wife of Garret Iames in S. Michaels pariſh, had one of them.
                  
                     Iohn Iackſon in S. Michaels, had one of them.
                  
                     Iohn Stokeley and his wife of the pariſh of S. Michaels, either of them had one of theſe cakes.
                  
                     William Haruie in S. Michaels pariſh, had one of theſe cakes.
                  
                     George Goodall Cooke, had one of them.
                  Maſt. Elcoks maide at the Faulkon in Cheape ſide, tooke one of them.
                  An Vpholſters man at the Stockes being ſicke, tooke one of them and was preſently well.
                  Maſt. Cotton a merchant dwelling in Colman ſtreete, tooke one of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Heyward a Merchant, tooke one of them.
                  Maſter Atmore a Pewterer (and if I be not deceiued) the moſt exquiſite workeman of his trade, had one of

theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Streete had one of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Gardner had four of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Bland had three of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Philippus of the cuſtome houſe, for himſelfe and his family bought fiue of theſe defenſatiues.
                  Giuen to the Biſhops man of Worceſter two.
                  
                     Smith, M. Richard Youngs man tooke one of theſe cakes.
                  M. Saunderſons men had two of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Shaw a Cooper, had for himſelfe and his family three of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Collet dwelling at Hackney had foure of them.
                  Maſt. Chune dwelling with M. Hacket a Draper in Candlewick-ſtreete had two of them.
                  Maſt. Thorpe the Vintner dwelling at the Miter on Breadſtreet hill had foure of theſe cakes.
                  Ma. Weſtwraies the Grocers maid dwelling

neere the Stockes had one of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Greenham preacher of Chriſtchurch had for himſelfe and his family three of theſe cakes.
                  
                     Iohn Blackſtone conſtable of Abchurch pariſh had one of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. William Marſh of the pariſh of great Alhallowes hadde one of theſe cakes.
                  
                     Richard Parnam of Sherborne lane had one of theſe cakes.
                  A Ropeſeller neere the cuſtom-houſe had three of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Smart the ſword-bearer had one of them.
                  Maſt. Iohn Ellis Eſquier had one for his man.
                  A Baker dwelling without Algate bars himſelfe infected, took one of theſe cakes and was preſerued.
                  Maſt. Henricke the Gunmaker without Algate had for himſelfe and his family ſix of theſe cakes.
                  
                     
A linnen Draper dwelling ouer againſt the Dukes place neere Algate, had for himſelfe and his wife two of theſe cakes.
                  Maſt. Kilwell a Diamond-cutter, hauing buried his wife and two children of the plague, was preſerued by taking one of theſe defenſatiues.
                  A browne Bakers wife without the barres beyond Algate, being deadly ſick of a burning feauer, and keeping her bed three weekes, was cured with one of theſe cakes.
                  
                     Hauns van Streete a Diamond-cutter in a little alley in Woodſtreete hauing buried a daughter of the plague, he a
                        ••
                      his wife tooke this defenſatiue.
                  Maſt. Lawe a Scriuener in Gutter-lane, hee and his maide tooke of theſe cakes.
                  
                     Iohn Todde a Taylor in Gutter-lane, hauing buried foure of the plague, the next day he and his wife tooke this medicine, he had afterwards three other of

them for his friends.
                  A Golde wier-drawer at the Cocke in Gutter-lane, hee and his wife being both ſicke of an extreame burning feauer, tooke of theſe cakes and were ſoone helped.
                  Miſtris Rundell a Golde wier-drawers wife in Kerry-lane, hauing a plague ſore vpon her, was preſerued by one of theſe defenſatiues.
                  
                     Iudith Hatfield dwelling with her mother in Dees alley in Gutter-lane, hauing a plague ſore, was preſerued by this medicine.
                  See ſome cures of Agues performed with this medicine in the title of Agues following.
               
            
            
               
               AGƲES.
               
                  HAuing found by manifold experience the ſingular and eflectuall vſe of diuers, both delicate and extraordinarie Medicines for the rooting out of Agues of all ſorts (although in burning feauers I haue no pleaſure to practiſe, becauſe they prooue oftentimes deadly and alwaies verie dangerous, and therfore I leaue them wholy to the graue and profeſſed Doctors) I haue thought i
                     •
                   conuenient to offer my poore skill alſo i
                     •
                   this kinde, which if any man ſhall at any time contradict (becauſe I am no graduate in Phyſicke, though happily I haue been as bolde with natures Cabinet and the forge of Vulcan as ſome of them) I will at all times be ready to redouble any reaſonable ſumme that ſhall be deliuered, vpon the faile of any cure in any one patient which I ſhall vndertake, not but that I may ſometimes miſſe in ſome ſtrange

bodies and ſtrangely poſſeſſed with theſe furious Fiends (for then I ſhould be more then a man, cuius eſt aliquando errare) but that hauing found already that my faithfull medicines haue hitherto ſcarcely deceiued me in the twentith patient (I durſt not write thus boldly of my cures if the ſtatute of 34. Henry 8. were not my warrant for Agues) I hold it no great aduenture, where the oddes is ſo apparant on my ſide, to make this offer in defence of my medicine to all ſuch as ſhall either ignorantly or maliciouſly oppoſe themſelues againſt it.
               And here leauing the multiplicitie of Agues to the ſeuerall writers that haue ſo curiouſly defined and determined of them, I will contain my ſelfe within thoſe few names and number of Agues onely, which are moſt vſually knowne to the common ſort of people, viz: a Quotidian, a Tertian, a double Tertian, a Quartane, or a double Quartane. For the reſt I referre all men to my Auncients and

Signiors in Phyſicke, who are better acquainted with their names and cures, then my ſelfe.
               Theſe medicines, becauſe they are coſtly and hard to be gotten, are reſerued only for ſuch as make ſome good valuation of their health.
               The moſt of my medicines are giuen in ſmall doſe, viz: halfe a dram or thereabout in powder to be ſwallowed in wine, beere, ale, or ſome appropriate liquor which ſhall be diſcloſed vpon the deliuerie of the medicine.
               In all theſe cures I doe neither vſe cliſter, bloudletting, vomit, nor purge, happily in ſome deepe rooted Agues, a larger ſweat will be prouoked then in others by this medicine.
               Neither the taſte, nor the ſmell, nor the working (in my experience) hath bin any way offenſiue to the patient, they are all either vegetable or animal medicines, and not minerall, although for my part I thinke as well and much better of minerall

then of any or all the reſt being truely and philoſophically prepared, and hope to be a meanes one day for the publiſhing of ſome of them to the generall good of this land, and the credit of our Engliſh Phyſicke: that Maſter Boſtocks obteſtation to almightie God long ſince written, may at the length receiue ſome anſwere from the clowdes, if God ſhall thinke it good to beſtow ſuch a heauenly fauour vpon vs.
               The patient retaineth his full ſtrength during this cure, which ſeldome or neuer falleth out in ordinarie cures.
               
                  THE PRACTISE.
                  
                     THe late Lord treaſurers Barber (who as I take it doth make the Gregorians for bald heads an inuention proceeding from a ſharpe and quicke ſpirit) was cured of an extreame Tertian very ſtrangely and very ſuddenly, by one of theſe medicines about ſeuen or eight yeeres paſt.
                  
                     
                     Ann. 1593. 
                     Nurſe Pace dwelling in Whitecroſſeſtreete was cured of a Tertian by one of theſe medicines, and within fourteene daies after, ſhee fell into the like againe by relapſe, and was recured at the firſt taking.
                  Maſt. Robert Albanie of Lincolnes Inne was cured of a Tertian at the firſt taking.
                  The wife of Ma. Nichols a Draper in Walting-ſtreete was cured of a Tertian at the firſt taking.
                  Goodwife Harſley dwelling at Biſhops haul tooke one of the defenſatiue Cakes and was cured of an extreame Tertian 
                        〈◊〉
                      the ſecond taking.
                  
                     Robert Betterton a ſeruant dwelling at Lewſham was cured of a Tertian at once taking.
                  
                     Iohn Dawley the Millers man dwelling at Lewſham was cured of a Tertian.
                  
                     Reynold Rowſe a Clothworkers ſonne in Trinitie lane of the age of ten yeeres, was cured of a Quotidian by one of

theſe medicines.
                  Maſt. Thorpe a Vintner dwelling at the ſigne of the Miter on Bredſtreete hill was cured of an extreame Tertian, whereof ſome fits held him 24. houres.
                  
                     William Brooke of Bromley in Kent a Colemaker, was cured of a Quartane at the firſt taking.
                  
                     Iohn Glouer a painter dwelling in Grubſtreete cured of a terrible Tertian; hee tooke the medicine but twiſe.
                  
                     Elizabeth Rogers dwelling on the bankſide hauing a double Quotidian, was cured with one of the defenſatiue cakes.
                  Maſt. Filkins a skilfull Scriuener and an honeſt man, hauing had two fits of a Tertian, tooke a defenſatiue cake and was helped.
                  Miſtris Lee dwelling with Miſtris Brett her mother at Edmonton, hauing had a double Quartane a long time, was cured with one of the defenſatiue cakes.
                  
                     William Brooke aforeſaid poſſeſſed of a Quartane by relapſe, was cured at the ſecond

taking of the medicine.
                  
                     Ioane Gwin a poore widow poſſeſſed of a Quartane, was cured thereof by one of theſe medicines.
                  A Gentlewoman dwelling at Biſhops hall, was cured of a Tertian at the firſt fit, and afterward ſhe was alſo cured of a ſecond Tertian.
                  
                     Ann. 1594. Maſt. Preſcot a Goldſmith dwelling at the ſpread Eagle in Cheapeſide, cured of a Tertian at the firſt taking.
                  
                     Samuel Sheafe M.Albanies man in watling ſtreete, cured of a Tertian at the firſt taking.
                  Miſtris Norman the midwife dwellin
                        •
                      in Bow-lane, was cured of a Tertian.
                  Miſtris Gore a merchants wife of good account dwelling in Bow-lane, being great with childe, and hauing a Tertian Ague, was cured by one of theſe medicines.
                  
                     Ioane, ſometimes ſeruant with the Author hereof, but then dwelling at Brainford, was cured of a Tertian.
                  
                     
Maſt. Suſans a Barbarie merchaunt, then lying at his houſe at Biſhops hall, was cured of a violent Tertian.
                  Maſt. Iohnes of Radcliff being a Maſter of a ſhippe, was alſo cured of a Tertian at the requeſt of the ſaid Maſter Suſans.
                  
                  I cured Nurſe Price of two ſeuerall Tertians, ſhe then being nurſe to one of my children.
                  
                     Anne Maſon (Maſt. Pemmerton the elders maid being a Gold-ſmith) was cured of a Tertian.
                  Maſt. Brooke dwelling within Ludgate, hauing had diuers violent fits of a Tertian before, was cured very ſtrangely with one medicine.
                  A Cutlers boy in Holborne, was cured in the ſame manner of a Tertian.
                  Miſtris Wamſlow a merchants wife was cured of a Tertian.
                  T. G. Eſquier was cured of a Tertian in a moſt eaſie manner.
                  
                     Ieffrey Norman the midwifes ſon was

cured of two Tertians at two ſeuerall times.
                  
                     Chappels wife the Ioyner a moſt excellent workman dwelling in woodſtreet, was cured of a Tertian.
                  Ma. Barnes the Mercers wife in cheapſide, was by her owne confeſſion cured of an ancient and inueterate Tertian; and after walking abroad a farre off from her houſe at Batterſey in an extreame colde euening, ſhe fell into it againe: at which time vpon ſome good reſpect, I forbare to cure her the ſecond time.
                  I cured Miſtris Shaw a Coopers wife in Saint Iames pariſh of a violent Tertian.
                  
                     An. 1600. I cured a Courtiers wife a Gentleman of good place of a Tertian, in ſo ſtrange a manner, as I neither had nor deſerued any thankes, and yet ſhee was helped at the firſt fit hauing been long before moſt terribly vexed with a Tertian.
                  
                     An. 1601. In Iune or Iuly laſt, I▪ gaue a redde powder in a cuppe of wine to a Carpenter

that wrought at Teddington with a moſt deere and worſhipfull friend of mine, hauing had a long and violent Quartane, whereby vpon his ill day hee was not able to worke, and yet was able to performe his labour well at his next fit. I doubt not, but that a ſecond medicine would haue made a perfect cure; which I did forbeare to ſend, becauſe I heard no more from him.
                  In September laſt I cured nurſe Wetherleis father in law dwelling at Hiegate, of a long and extreame Tertian with my red powder at twiſe taking.
                  In Ianuarie 1601. I cured a knights ſon of an old Quartane with my Mummia at once taking, he had only a ſmall fit or two after.
                  In Februarie I cured Edmond Sawer, ſeruant with a worſhipfull neighbour of mine of a Tertian.
                  I cured the ſame perſon againe of an other Tertian in March after, at the firſt taking.
                  
                     
See diuers agues cured with my defenſatiue cakes ante Tit. of Plague diſperſedly.
               
            
            
               A generall purgatiue and opener of obſtructions both of the Spleane and Liuer, with the rare and approued vſes thereof.
               
                  IF you would roote out any diſeaſe therewith, then vſe no other drinke to your meales nor betweene meales, but ſuch as is mixed with this opener according to ſuch direction as ſhall be giuen.
               A quart or three pints euerie day a
                     •
                   the moſt is a reaſonable portion of th
                     ••
                   compound drinke for the patient to take▪ during his cure, the drinke it ſelfe wherewith it is mixed is only beere or ale which is ſtrengthned thereby.
               Holde halfe a ſpoonfull of this medicine a prettie while in your mouth in a morning faſting, and then ſpit it out, to diſſolue a great ſtopping in the head ariſing

of colde, it worketh from the braine and ſtomacke more kindly in my opinion then Tabacco.
               It is a verie likely medicine to helpe deafeneſſe, ariſing vpon obſtructions in the head.
               It is a preſent remedy againſt a ſurfet vpon any exceſſiue eating, to take halfe a ſpoonfull of the opener ſimple without mixture.
               The compounde drinke cureth any dropſie that is not inueterate, and ſo likewiſe of the French pocks being taken ten or twelue daies, or rather till the humour be ſpent, eſpecially concluding the cure with a ſtrong bath made of the decoction 
                     〈◊〉
                   Guaicum.
               It is alſo exceeding good againſt the Palſie being an obſtruction of the Nerues (as diuers learned Phyſitians doe holde) whereby the ſpirits cannot haue their free paſſage. It alſo cureth the yellow iaunders, it diſporſeth all winde and all diſeaſes ariſing vpon colde Rheumatique

cauſes, it comforteth the braine, and in a fewe daies it procureth a good ſtomacke to him that refuſeth his meate, and cauſeth a kindly and naturall reſt.
               It agreeth with all complexions, as often experience can witneſſe, only I find the cholericke man the vnfitteſt patient of all the reſt.
               It neuer leaueth working till it haue rooted out the cauſe of the diſeaſe (if it be curable) ſo as you take the ſame long enough. It worketh only vpon ſuperfluous humors, not ſpending or waſting the balſame of life, or humidum radicale at all, as ordinarie purges doe. And if in foure, fiue or ſix daies taking, it happen to giue tenne, twentie, thirtie, or fortie ſtooles in a patient that hath a full body, and wel repleniſhed with groſſe humors; he ſhall finde himſelfe no weaker at the laſt ſtoole, then he was at the firſt, ſo as he leaue before inflammation or pricking in the fundament.
               If the patient hauing ſome extreame

diſeaſe finde himſelfe heauie or melancholique (but ſicke it will not make him) the firſt, ſecond, or third day, let him not diſmay himſelfe, for this is rather a good ſigne of comfort that the medicine now is in contention with the diſeaſe, ſeeking to vanquiſh the ſame.
               A ſmall and ſlender diet is beſt during all the cure, if the diſeaſe be olde and rooted, wherein, butter, milke, pottage, broth, ſalt, and all fattie meates would be forborne, and the moſt nouriſhing meates, & ſuch as be of lighteſt digeſtion would be vſed: let the patient during his cure keepe himſelfe out of the ayre, hauing a 
                     ••
                  e in his chamber, according to the ſeaſon of the yeere; and let him be carefull that he take no colde, nor vſe Venerie (as he loueth his life) either during the cure, or in one moneth after hee is in good health.
               This compound drinke is an excellent remedie againſt the greene ſickeneſſe.
               
                  
According to the ſtrength and weakeneſſe of your patient or of his diſeaſe, make your drinke ſtronger or weaker, and giue more or leſſe quantitie accordingly: for here diſcretion muſt guide you.
               There is not any one of the common or ordinarie purgatiues vſed in this opener.
               This medicine being taken a fewe daies at the ſpring and fall of one yeere in a young gowte, or for two or three yeeres togither in an olde and inueterate gowte, will either make a perfect cure thereof, or bring the ſame to bee a verie eaſie and tollerable gowte vnto 
                     〈◊〉
                   patient.
               This compounde beere or ale taken ſome reaſonable time doth cure an vlceration in the ſtomack.
               Where there is alſo occaſion of Surgery offred, there firſt take away the cauſe of the diſeaſe inwardly with this medicine, and then the Surgeon ſhal after find an eaſie cure.
               
                  
In the pocks annoint the Nodes and other ſores with the ſimple extract.
               This opener cureth any green wound beyond the naturall Balſamum, it is alſo excellent for a bruſe.
               You may giue this opener in Endiue or fumitorie water, or ſome other coole diſtilled water in hot bodies.
               For accurtation in a long diſeaſe after 14. or 20. daies if the patient be not perfectly cured, let him vſe a ſtrong bath of the decoction of Guaicum twiſe a day, & before he go into the bath, let him take a warme draught of this opener mixed with beere or ale, then let him go into the bath that he may ſweate.
               During all the time wherein you take this mixed drinke, warme your bed when you go into it, and your cloathes when you put them on.
               This extract purgeth very gently and without any conuulſions, and without leauing any drought in the body after, as ordinarie purges moſt commonly doc.
               
                  
If you take foure draughts of a ſtronger mixture in the day time beſides mealdrinke, viz. at ſix in the morning one, and at nine another, and the third at three in the afternoone, and the fourth going to bed, it will commonly prepare the body the firſt day, and purge ſufficiently the ſecond day. This is a good courſe for all ſuch as cannot ſpare any longer time about their Phyſicke. But otherwiſe if a man doe onely take it at meales with a mornings draught ſomething ſtronger, whereby it may onely giue two ſtooles euerie day after the firſt day, or if that proportiou will not procure two ſtooles euerie day, then if the patient doe alſo at bed time take an other draught of the ſtronger mixture, by this meanes in longer time, according to the deepe rooting of the diſeaſe, he ſhall cleere his body of all obſtructions, and procure vnto himſelfe a good ſtomacke in a moſt delicate and eaſie manner, without any offence vnto his body, either during the cure, or after:

and if the patient pleaſe, he may onely take ſo little thereof and that in his meale drinks, as that after he findeth himſelfe to haue ſufficiently purged to his owne deſire, it may ſerue to keep his body ſoluble as long as he liſteth, and finde no inconuenience euen vntill all the ſuperfluous humors that offend him, be wholy rooted out and extirpated.
               To eaſe the raging paine of the goute, take the ſimple extract vnwarmed, lay it on gently with your hand vpon the place grieued, & warming your hand at a cha
                  
                     •
                  ingdiſh of coals placed by your foote or hand, which paineth you, work it in gently by little & little til you haue ſpent a ſpoonful or two vpon it, one quarter of an houre at the leaſt, the longer the better; & in the end driue it with your hand till it be in a manner ſtiffe like verniſh, then lay on a linnen cloth, leaſt it happen to ſticke to your hoſe or gloue, lappe the member warme, and go into a warmed bed, and ſo it hath been often prooued to giue eaſe in

leſſe time then one houre, and the patient hath ſlept well all the night after. You may leaue the cloth on til it will come off eaſily: note the paine is eaſieſt to remoue vpon the firſt approch, before you haue vexed the humour, and therefore good to haue ſome of this alwaies ready before hand.
               If the patient be troubled with the running of the raines, firſt ſtay them by ſome apte medicine, before you giue this compound drinke by way of diet.
               This ſimple extract healeth any itch or ſcabbes applied outwardly and rubbed well in, but if the skinne be broke or the fleſh rawe, it will ſmart for a while, but healeth the ſore ſpeedily, & at a few dreſſings: qre of Serpigo, tetter, ringworme, &c. to be cured with the ſame.
               This medicine will neuer decay, onely you muſt keepe your glaſſes well ſtopped, that the ſpirits thereof doe not euaporate.
               This is an excellent medicine to preuent

the gowte, ſciatica, iaunders, greenſicknes and all diſeaſes ariſing of rhumes, ſuperfluous humors or obſtructions, and ſo I haue both vſed it my ſelfe, and perſwaded diuers of my deereſt friends to take it. It will alſo cure the ſame ſpeedily being taken before they be deepely rooted, and howſoeuer they be rooted it will greatly qualifie and eaſe them, and if it procure a perfect cure take it for an aduantage.
               This medicine is not yet of ſo auncient a date as to yeeld many patients, and ſome of thoſe which haue found benefit hereof, I know are veire vnwilling to be 
                     •
                  amed, but the medicine is ſo ſafe both for ſound and ſicke men to take; as that the expoſer or ſeller thereof will at all times bee willing either to begin or to pledge a health thereof vnto his patient.
            
            
               
               EIES.
               
                  HAuing my ſelfe beene often troubled with a thin filme growing ouer mine eie, and ſometimes euen ready to couer or clowd my ſight; at the lenght I happened vpon a kinde gentleman, who by earneſt entreatie did firſt, beſtow an excellent water vpon me for the cure of mine infirmitie which did then exceedingly grieue me, and afterward gaue me the receipt thereof, which had been moſt carefully kept as a ſacre
                     •
                   relique within the poſſeſſion of one na
                     ••
                   for a long time.
               With this water I haue helped diuets hauing filmes or skinnes, and white ſpecks in the eie, whoſe names I did not obſerue.
               It tickleth a little, but it ſmarteth not being dropped into the eie: and therefore the youngeſt childe may well endure the ſame.
               
                  
It laſteth good a moneth or ſix weekes after it is made.
            
            
               THE STONE.
               
                  THis medicine was obtained at the hands of a Iewe being the Popes Phyſitian in the time of King Henry the 8. who curing an Italian in Rome, being then a companion with an Engliſh knight there imploied in the ſeruice of his prince of his deadly pain and torment, by reaſon of great abundance of grauell in his kidneis; did for his cure and 
                     •
                  he receipt of his medicine, receiue a 
                     ••
                  ule of the knight, which with his coſtly 
                     •
                  rappings and other rich furniture was eſteemed woorth ſeuen hundreth pounds: from this knight by meſne degrees it came at the length into the poſſeſſion of the publiſher hereof.
               
                  
                  THE PRACTISE.
                  
                     ONe Ioane an hearbwife dwelling in Chatterhouſe lane, and keeping her ſtanding commonly ouer againſt the Starre in Cheapeſide on the market daies, was helped with this medicine.
                  Miſtris Wentwoorth dwelling in the whitefriers, hauing taken this medicine twiſe did voide either a bone or a ſtone like a bone and ſharpe pointed, being alſo of ſuch greatneſſe, as that in mans reaſon it ſeemed impoſſible that ſhe ſhould haue expelled the ſame at ſo narrowe a paſſage, the bone is yet to be ſeene.
                  Goodwife Reynolds dwelling in the Church lane in Saint Martins hath two ſtones as yet to be ſeene that came from a childe being of the age of three yeeres, who had not made water in foure daies before.
                  Diuers other perſons, but of better account

haue alſo found eaſe by this medicine, whoſe names for feare of giuing offence vnto them I doe willingly ſuppreſſe, and haue thought it more conuenient to giue a priuate teſtimonie of them to ſuch as deſire for their own good to be better ſatisfied, then by publique impreſſion to make thē generally known to all men.
               
            
            
               Strangurie.
               
                  THere is alſo good proofe to be made of cures performed with this drinke, but becauſe it is ſuch a diſeaſe, as no man of good ſort would willingly either haue or be knowne to haue, I doe therefore referre my experience herein to priuate ſatisfaction.
            
            
               
               For the Hicocke or deadly yexing.
               I Haue alſo a moſt ſoueraigne water to helpe the ſame, and that preſently, & can ſhew good proofe thereof.
               
                  Sundrie other drinkes and waters of rare vſe and vertue, which the ſaid I. Clarke will deliuer at reaſonable prices to ſuch as haue cauſe to vſe them.
                  AN excellent Aqua vita to bee drunke vpon a ſurfet.
                  2. A drinke whereof one ſpoonfull at a time doth eaſe an olde cough that tickleth in the throate.
                  3. A notable diet-drinke to roote out anye ache ariſing of any Rheumatique cauſe, or of the French diſeaſe, often prooued.
                  4. A moſt ſingular Gargariſme to purge the head ſpeedily of all ſuperfluous humours,

often prooued.
                  5. An aſſured remedy both for the yellow and blacke iaunders.
                  6. D. Steuens water.
                  
                     7. Aqua mirabilis.
                  8. The water of life.
                  9. The Electuarie of life.
                  
                     10. Aqua Caleſtis.
                  
                     11. Aqua imperialis.
                  12. Aqua confortans ſtomachum▪ whereof ſome late experiences doe here enſxe.
               
               MAſter Robens a Gentleman of Lincolnes Inne, hauing an exceeding weake ſtomacke, was helped therewith: a verie late cure.
               Maſt. Foreſt a Gentleman lying in Salisburie Court, not being able to digeſt any meate which hee did eate in three moneths before, at the firſt taking of this water, was able to digeſt a piece of powdred beefe to his dinner: a very late cure alſo.
               
                  
Maſt. Monke a Gentleman of the temple alwaies caſting vp whatſoeuer he did eate, was perfectly cured at the ſecond taking of this medicine. This was performed in the laſt Sommers vacation, being the moſt auncient of al the cures here remembred.
               Maſt. Nye an Attourney dwelling neer Croydon, hauing ſurfeited vpon a piece of raw beefe was preſently eaſed with this water: a late cure.
               Maſt. Streets wife in Holborne, hauing her ſtomack very vnapt to digeſt hir meat, found a perfect remedy with this water▪ late cure.
               
                  Iohn Winningtons wife dwelling ouer againſt the houſe of the publiſher hereof, being giuen to a continuall caſting had her ſtomack perfectly ſtrengthened with this water: a verie late cure.
               
                  13. Spirit of wine perfectly rectified.
                  14. Cinnamom water.
                  15. Roſa Solis.
                  16. Aqua vitae.
                  
                     
17. Aqua rubea.
                  18. An approoued water to be held in the mouth, and to procure a flux of Rheume.
                  19. An excellent Fucus for Bewtie called a Pigeon water.
                  20. A notable water for a ſtinking breath.
                  21. A Water to helpe the Morphew.
                  22. A water to whiten and faſten the teeth.
                  23. An aſſured remedy for the running of the Raines.
                  24. An excellent and approoued remedy for the collique.
                  25. A preſent remedy for the Mother.
                  26. An excellent water for rheumatique or gummed eies.
               
            
            
               
               OINTMENTS.
               
                  AN approoued ointment to take away haire from any place ſpeedily, and without paine.
               28. An aſſured ointment to cure a red face that is full of heat and pimples, without paine or ſmarting.
               I Haue here alſo thought it not impertinent to the ſubiect which I haue in hand, after many references to ſet downe ſome true and approoued receipts, which euerie man according to his owne inf
                     •
                  rmitie may ſafely vſe or apply vnto himſelfe, if he haue iuſt cauſe.
            
            
               Approoued remedies for the tooth-ache, if the tooth be hollow.
               
                  POwder, a little of ſal Armoniake, and according to the bigneſſe of the hole, apply your remedy in a ſmall ragge of lawne bound about with a

threed, and dip the ſame in a little ſtrong Aqua vitae, or rather ſpirit of wine; or if the paine be verie extreame, in a little of the oyle of Vitrioll, then cut away all the ſuperfluous lawne and threed: and hauing put the ſame into the tooth, cloſe it vp with linte, and commonly it giueth eaſe in halfe an houre. Some doe vſe to ſtoppe the tooth with linte dipped in the oyle of Origanum, or oyle of Thime. The hollow tooth being ſtopped with Pellitorie of Spaine firſt bruiſed, doeth often times leaue aking. Alſo a good quantitie of featherfew bruiſed and applied behinde the eare, hath often been 
                     •
                  ound a good remedie. A little Laudanum put into a hallow tooth, doth ſometimes helpe. Alſo take Henbane ſeede, and boyle it in Wine-vinegar, then take the ſyrrup of white Poppy and mingle it with the vinegar and gargle both firſt warmed toward the tooth that aketh. This is an excellent and approoued remedie. I haue ſet downe diuers receipts

that the patient might haue choice, if one or two ſhould happen to faile him.
            
            
               Approoued remedies for Cornes.
               
                  FIrſt pare the corne very low, then take the fat of a rabbets kidney, apply it to the corne, binding a fine cloth about it, renue the ſame euerie night, and at a few dreſſings it will ſo ſupple the ſame, that you may eaſily pluck it vp by the roote. ſapius probatum.
               
               The ſoft roe of a red herring incorporated with the pulpe of figges in equall proportion, and ſpread vpon leather, and then applied to cornes, 
                     •
                  irſt we
                     •
                   pared, wil helpe them at a fewe dre
                     •
                  
                  ſings: an excellent and approoued receipt.
               Mix the powder of calcined or burnt Allom with red wax, pare the cornes and apply it: often prooued.
               Faſting ſpittle mixed with powdred chalke and applied to a corne, and then

leauing it two daies, and pilling off what you can with your nailes euery time before you vſe freſh chalke and ſpittle, will ſoone roote them out.
               Some doe labour to digge the corne vppe by the roote, and then they droppe one droppe of the oyle of Sulphur in the hole to preuent it for growing againe, but this is a painfull way.
            
            
               Diuers excellent vomits with their ſingular vſes.
               
                  INfuſe vpon Elleborus albus Brionie rootes and Panis porcinus ſome ſpirit of wine for two daies, then diſtill the ſpirit ouer, then reinfuſe and diſtill againe, reiterate this woorke three times; then take a few drops thereof, put them into a cup of wine or other drinke, or dippe a feather therein, and ſtir the wine therewith, and it wil giue an excellent vomit. Take this vomit two daies togither, each morning, if you feele your

ſelfe ill at eaſe, or finde any great repletion in your ſtomacke. This being vſed once euerie moneth or in ſix weekes will keepe a mans body in a perfect ſtate of health. As it was aſſured Maſt. Rich of Lee by a moſt graue and learned Phyſitian, who for many curteſies conferred vpon him, during his aboade at his houſe, gaue him the receipt as a great teſtimony of his loue and requitall. This, Maſt. Rich by his owne confeſſion continually vſed the ſpace of thirtie yeeres after, and euen till his dying day without feeling any touch of diſeaſe.
               I haue alſo found by often experience in my ſelfe, that a vomit taken once in a moneth or ſix weekes hath preuented diuers infirmities in my ſelfe, and to be an excellent meanes to cleere an ague, being taken vpon the firſt approch thereof. But this vomit which I meane is very pleaſant and worketh very eaſily, and without any violence, and for mine owne opinion, I am verily perſwaded that if it were generally

vſed, it would ſaue 20000. pounds a yeere in Tabacco, and performe all or moſt of the effects which Tabacco doth, and that in a more eaſie and familiar manner, eſpecially in ſuch bodies who by nature haue any facilitie in caſting with ſmal prouocation; for it cleareth the head and ſtomacke exceedingly of all ſuperfluous, rhumatique, cold and vndigeſted matter; it is made in this manner.
               Make an ale quart of poſſet ale, clarifie the ſame, and put therein a ſmall handfull of freſh Camomill, let it boyle therein a fewe walmes, deuide the ſame into three parts; drinke one third thereof faſting at two ſeuerall draughts, and after a little pawſe, force your ſelfe with your ſinger or a feather to caſt: then take the ſecond part doing as before, and deuiding it into two draughts; and after this, take the third part likewiſe. So ſhall you both caſt vp all your poſſet drinke, and cleare as well your head as ſtomacke of a great deale of phlegme and crude humours,

which you ſhall eaſily perceiue to lie in the bottome of the baſon by the ſtubbed end of a broomeſticke folded therein, which will bring vppe the phlegme roping there at in great aboundance.
            
            
               Diuers excellent and approoued waies for the ſtaying of bloud.
               
                  I Haue often ſtayed bleeding at the noſe by receiuing a fewe droppes of the bloud in a linnen cloth and burning the cloth, the reaſon whereof I leaue to better Philoſophers then my ſelfe.
               Drie a little of the parties bloud in a fireſhouell ouer the fire, blowe it vp with a quill into the parties noſtrils, this ſeldome or neuer faileth. Some blowe vp bole Armoniake in the ſame manner. The dried bloud of the partie doth alſo ſtay the extreame bleeding of a wound, when all other remedies haue failed.
               The drie moſſe gathered from an Aſhen tree or billet, and powdred, doth

preſently without all faile ſtay the bleeding at the noſe, or of any wound; this one remedy hath ſaued the liues of manie.
               It is an ordinarie meanes to ſtay bleeding by letting of bloud, as it is to ſtay a great looſeneſſe by ſome apte purgatiue.
               
                  IOhn Clarke the publiſher hereof will alſo be ready at all times to drawe any other waters, oyles, ſpirits, extracts, ſalts, tinctures, &c. both faithfully and according to Arte for all ſuch perſons as ſhall at any time vpon reaſonable warning require the ſame. His dwelling is in the middeſt of Sheere-lane hard by Temple barre leading into Lincolns Inne fields.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            1602.

                  printer's or publisher's device
               
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Peter Short, dwelling on Bred-ſtreete hill neere to the end of old Fiſh-ſtreete, at the ſigne of the Starre.
            
         
      
   