
      
         
            
            
            THE
RECANTATION
of THOMAS CLARKE
(ſometime a Seminarie Prieſt
of the Engliſh Colledge in Rhemes;
and nowe by the great mercy of God
conuerted vnto the profeſſion of the
Goſpell of IESVS Chriſt) made at
Paules Croſſe, after the Sermon made
by Maſter BVCKERIDGE
Preacher, the firſt of Iuly,
1593.
            Whereunto is annexed a former Recantation
made alſo by him in a
publique aſſembly on Eaſter
day, being the 15. of
April, 1593.
            1. Reg. 2.6
            Dominus mortificat & viuificat, deducit
ad inferos & reducit.
            The Lord killeth and maketh aliue,
bringeth downe to the graue,
and fetcheth vp againe.
            
               Imprinted at London by the Deputies
of CHRISTOPHER BARKER,
Printer to the Queenes
moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            Anno Domini.
1594.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Reuerend
Father in God, IOHN Archbiſhop
of Canterburie, Primate and Metropolitane
of all England, and one of her Maieſties
moſt honourable priuie Counſell, Thomas
Clarke wiſheth increaſe of vertue and honour
in this life, and in the world to
come, eternall happineſſe.
            
               IT hath alwayes bene
an ancient, neceſſary,
common, and commendable
cuſtome amongſt
the moſt ſorts
of writers (right Reuerend
father, and my
honourable good lord) in all their works
to ſeeke the patronage of ſome woorthie
perſon to whom the defence of the matter
handled did moſt eſpecially either in
duetie or deuotion appertaine: And becauſe
I am to publiſh in print, to my
countries good (as I am perſwaded by diuers
my worſhipfull friends) my recantation
made at Paules Croſſe, conſidering
with my ſelfe that in cauſes Eccleſiaſtical,
the gouernment is giuen by God, (next
vnder her Maieſtie) principally to your
grace, and becauſe the matter here treated
of is ſuch, I thought it moſt conuenient

to offer the ſame to your grace, vnto
whom both I and my labours do of dutie
on our partes (next vnto her highneſſe, by
whoſe gracious clemencie and mercy we
haue that we liue) chiefly belong, & vnder
whoſe protectiō we may ſafely walke
without feare of controll, and both our
wants be more then ſufficiently furniſhed
by your graces countenance and fauour,
which haue hitherto bene alwayes ready
to helpe thoſe that haue relied thereupon,
the which vndeſerued grace (whereof I
nothing doubt) if your honourable good
lordſhip doe affoord me, I ſhall be further
emboldned without diſmay, to put foorth
to vſe my maſters talent, which hitherto
hath lien hidden in a napkin without any
maner of gaine: and if the commoditie amount
to any thing, your graces portion
no doubt, will be therein double; in this
world increaſe of vertue & honour, things
according with your high calling & zealous
profeſſion, and after this life eternall
happineſſe wherewith God will crowne
in you all his works, your graces labours,
which God graunt for his mercies ſake,
through his onely ſonne Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               Your Graces bounden in the Lord.
T. C.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN
READER.
            
               BEing minded (Chriſtian
Reader) to publiſh
in Print my Recantation
made at Paules
croſſe, I thought it conuenient
to make thee
priuie what occaſions
mooued me heereunto. Firſt therefore know
that the requeſt of a worſhipful frend of mine,
and his reaſon for the ſame alleged were principall
and chiefe motiues in this matter: his
manifolde good turnes on the one ſide did ſo
greatly binde me, that by denying his reaſonable
and godly demand, I ſhould haue ſpotted
and defiled my ſelfe with the ignominious, vnnatural,
& beaſtly ſtaine of ingratitude which
I haue alwayes in all men diſcommended and
hated, and in my ſelfe (to the vttermost of my
power) ſhunned and auoided: on the other ſide,
his reaſon propoſed did, as it were, command
me for my countries good, to bring to publike
view my weake and vndeſeruing labors. His
reaſon was, that as I had, in alienating the
faithfull children from the obedience of their
naturall mother, bin a publike hurt (the ſcar
whereof would long be a blemiſh in that faire

ſpouſe the Church of Chriſt) ſo I might hereby
vſe a publike meanes, both to heale the wound,
and alſo (if it were poſſible) to take away the
ſcarre. His demand ſeeming euery way both
reaſonable, neceſſary, & not to be denied, I cō
               diſcended:
conſidering alſo with my ſelfe, that
as I had done great hurt in the church of God,
ſo I was in cōſcience bound to make her all the
ſatiſfaction for the ſame that I could. To theſe
motiues I added further certein cōſiderations
of mine owne, why it was neceſſary that ye thing
ſhould be printed: which were theſe. First,
that I might ſhew a reaſon for the ſatiſfying of
euery man, why I did omit ſome things which
were thought neceſſary by diuers to haue bene
ſpoken of, as Tranſubſtantiation, Indulgences,
Seruice in an vnknowen tongue, & ſuch like:
whō I deſire to remaine ſatiſfied with this anſwere.
My purpoſe & meaning was not at that
time to diſcourſe of cōtrouerſies, or particularly
one by one to confute euery error, for that (as
euery wiſe man knoweth) had bene impoſſible
for me as then to haue performed: for euery
error and controuerſie doth miniſter ſufficient
matter for a whole, yea, for many ſermons, but
my cōming thither was to no other purpoſe, but
to confeſſe & acknowledge my fault, and generally
to renounce and abiure all thoſe falſe opinions
which I once held. Neither do I think

it greatly neceſſary to make any ſupply in this
Preface of thoſe ſuppoſed wants which before
I mentioned: onely I deſire thee (gentle Reader)
to haue this opinion of me, that, although
I haue but ſpoken of a few particulars, yet that
(according to my proteſtation made) I haue
a generall, and faithfull deteſtation of all the
reſt, as my future life and labours (by Gods
grace) ſhall ſufficiently witneſſe. Wherefore
reſt not diſcontented or vnſatiſfied in any
thing, but if haply thou be driuen to any doubt
through the malicious ſuggeſtion of the Deuill,
or thine owne infirmitie and weakeneſſe,
know that in ſuch caſes thou art bound both
in religious charitie and Chriſtian duetie to
reforme and remooue ſuch corrupt & vncharitable
opinions against thine euen Chriſtian,
or at the leaſt ſuspend thy iudgement in what
matter ſoeuer that is not too openly manifeſt
& apparent. Carie not a ſuspicious & doubtfull
iudgement of the trueth and ſinceritie of
my ſoule, for feare of iudging thine owne ſoule.
In quo enim iudicio iudicaueritis,
               Mat. 7. 
               iudicabimini:
&, In qua menſura menſi fueritis,
remetietur vobis. With what iudgement
you iudge other men, you ſhalbe iudged: and
with what meaſure you mete, the ſame ſhalbe
meaſured to you againe. But thinke that I
am a Christian as thou art, and haue a care

to pleaſe God, as haply thou haſt, and haue further
knowledge in spirituall matters then euery
one, to whom the peruſing of theſe preſents
may come, & therefore do know in more
ample ſort, that hypocriſie and double dealing
with God and his Church is a double wickedneſſe,
at whoſe girdle there hangeth a fearefull
ſcourge and puniſhment. Remember that
thou art admoniſhed by the the Apoſtle Saint
Paul,Rom. 14. not to iudge another mans ſeruant for
he doth either ſtand or fall to his master; that
is, to God, before whoſe tribunall we ſhall all
ſtand, and giue an account euery one for himſelfe:
let vs not therefore, ſayth he, any more
iudge another, but iudge this rather, that no
man put a ſtumbling blocke, or an occaſion to
fall in his brothers way. My meaning herein
thou mayeſt eaſily gather, and God grant
thou may vſe it to the benefite of thine owne
ſoule, and Christes ſmall flocke.
            The ſecond cauſe that mooued me to the
publiſhing heereof, was the good that might
hereby grow to thoſe that be but lightly infected
with Papiſtrie, that by my example, ſeeing
my conuerſion, and reading my Recantation,
they may be mooued to conſider, for the
ſafetie of their ſoules, the great perill and imminent
danger wherein they doe continually
liue, and ſo they may call to God for the heauenly

vnction of his holy spirit, and the precious
gift of his grace, that may cure their
wounds, and leade them to the perfect knowledge
of his pure trueth. And thoſe that perticularly
by my doctrine & example haue erred
or doe goe astray, may by theſe meanes
(which I heartily aske of God for his ſonne
Ieſus Christ his ſake) be reduced againe into
the right way: and for mine owne part I ſhall
for euer heereafter haue the teſtimonie of a
better conſcience, that I haue not bene negligent
herein to performe the duetie of a good
Chriſtian, in putting ſuch in minde of their
estates, and ſhewing them the meanes (the
like wherof, if they aske it as they ſhould, God
doubtleſſe will not denie them) of my conuerſion.
If I had contented my ſelfe with the vttered
matter, and not haue proceeded any
further to publiſh the ſame, the world might
haue layed ſome blame on me, and reprehended
me for lighting of a candle, and putting
it vnder a buſhell, but being put on a candleſticke,
and left indifferently to giue light to all,
not preſently, but for posterity, I ſhall be, I
hope, in this behalfe, free from the calumniation
of any.
            Conſider I pray thee (deare Chriſtian) if
thou bee a Papist, or any thing addicted that
way, that thou canst not imagine any ſinister

cauſe for the which I ſhould (as they ſay) haue
turned my coat; the greateſt cauſe of all things
which thou canſt thinke of, is worldly wealth,
which on that ſide I neuer wāted, nor any thing
els that was cōuenient either for my pleaſures
or neceſſities, and therefore I had no cauſe for
that to forſake them, if I had not bene induced
thereto by further conſideratiōs & means, thē
is the regard of worldly cōmodities: but cōtrarywiſe,
(as thou ſhalt more largely vnderſtand
in my recantation) they were the onely things
that for a lōg time withheld me frō embracing
the pure waters that ſpring to euerlaſting life.
But perchance thou wilt ſay, I hoped for better
then I had, beleeue me no, I neither hoped for
better, nor haue ſo good; notwithſtanding (if I
ſhould be driuen to beg my bread) let all the papists
in the world know, that I will not forſake
the kingdome of heauen for this worldes good,
neither doe I make my bodily life more precious
then my ſoule: for what would it profite
me to winne the whole world, and to loſe my
ſoule? or what exchange ſhould I make
with God for my ſoule? I know they would receiue
me againe, if I would like a dog returne
yet to my vomite, but farre be that from me:
better it were for me neuer to haue bin borne
then once to thinke on any ſuch matter, and I
hope, God that hath done thus mercifully by

me, and delt thus mightily with me, hath not,
nor will not beſtow his grace in vayne vpō me,
but will perfect his worke ſo effectually begun.
The laſt cauſe that moued me to publiſh theſe
preſēts, was, to aſſure the aduerſaries (to whoſe
hands I am ſure they wil come) that I neither
haue done, nor hereafter wil doe any thing againſt
thē of malice, but in all my procedings I
haue, & will deale as charitably as I can, not
betraying the trueth of God, which I preferre
before the eſtimation of the whole world: neither
would I haue any mā to think, that I ſpeak
as though I did any thing at all relie vpō their
good opinions of me, for that I am aſſured they
hate me as the deuil, and will not ſticke to employ
all the labour they can to deface and diſcredite
both me and my calling. But let them
not ſpare, their enuious carping will demonſtrate
in them the lying ſpirite that ouerruleth
them, and euery one that is not as blinde
as themſelues, will ſoone perceiue their legier
de maine: and although their buzzing will
obtaine place in the eares of their complices
and fautors, who are alwayes ready to bandie
the balls which their leaders toſſe, ſo farre as
the ſlanderous blaſtes of their wicked mouthes
will cary them, yet I hope the force of them
(flie they neuer ſo ſtiffely) ſhall not bee able to
make winke the leaſt child in Gods Church,

much leſſe ouerthrow him.
            Moreouer I doe heartily deſire euery
Chriſtian reader to weigh with good conſideration
theſe preſents. Yf thou be already infected
with error and blindneſſe, pray to God
that he will beſtow vpon thee the cleare light
of his truth: perſiſt not wilfully in wickednes,
but take occaſion hereby to ſift and try the ſpirit
that is aſwell in thy ſelfe as in thy teachers,
if thou be ignorant and vnlearned, builde not
thy faith vpon the credite and good opinion of
other men, ſay not (as I know many haue and
doe ſay) I am not able to render an accompt
of this or that thing, but I know it is true, I
muſt beleeue ſo, becauſe this learned man, or
theſe diuines, and good men beleeue ſo: aſke,
them, they are able to giue you an anſwere
both for themſelues & me: it is a weake building
that hath ſo ſhallowe, and vncertaine a
foundation, and a ſimple faith is it that is pinned
ſo ſlenderly to other mens ſleaues: the Apoſtle
Saint Peter biddeth thee to bee able
and readie to render an account of thy faith
to euery one that ſhall demand it at thy hands,1. Pet. 3.
I meane not that thou art ſo exactly bound as
he that teacheth both thee and others, but in
ſome good meaſure according to thy abilitie,
and the talent that God hath lent thee, thou
art bound to knowe what thou beleeueſt, in

whom thou beleeueſt, & what thou art bound
to beleeue. Build not therefore thy faith vpon
the faith of other men, for that foundation
cannot chuſe but faile thee, but erect thy building
vpon the immooueable rocke Chriſt Ieſus,
of whom the ſcriptures doe moſt plentifully
beare witneſſe.Iohn 5. Art thou learned? ſearch
the ſcriptures for in them ye thinke to haue
eternall life, and they are they that teſtifie of
me, &c. Art thou vnlearned? goe to thy
Paſtor, goe to him that hath charge of thy
ſoule, and receiueth inſtruction from God for
thee, The Prieſtes lippes ſhall preſerue knowledge,
& thou ſhalt ſeeke the law at his mouth,
for he is the meſſenger of the Lord of hoſtes.Mal. 2.
So thou ſeeſt whether thou be learned or vnlearned,
thou art without excuſe if thou be ignorant
in thy duety, becauſe God of his great
goodneſſe and infinite mercy hath left thee
ſufficient meanes to come vnto him, for which
cauſe we were all created, I meane truly and
duetifully to ſerue God. God hath created all
things both in heauen and earth for the behoofe
and benefite of man, but hee hath made
man onely for his owne ſelfe, for his owne ſeruice,
wherein to be negligent and ignorant, is
a hie contempt of God, & meere ingratitude
for his manifold benefites. If hitherto therefore
thou haſt beene negligent and blinde, redeeme

thy time with thy future diligence.
What ſhall I ſay (deare Chriſtian) but onely
this, leaue the muddie and troubled waters,
which thou draweſt out of the durtie pits of
mens imaginations, and returne to pure
ſprings and welles of life, where thou mayeſt
freely without money or danger drinke thy
fill, and ſo ſatiate thy ſelfe, that thou ſhalt neuer
thirſt againe.
            Thoſe whom God hath called in his feare,
I doe earneſtly wiſh to bee warie how they
walke, and carefull that they be not circumuented
by any maner of falſe prophets: if at any
time thou conuerſe with them by chance, deſire
God to giue thee ſtrength and grace not
to be tempted, if thou be tempted, that it be not
aboue thy ſtrength. Qui ſtat videat ne cadat,
hee that ſtandeth let him take heede hee
fall not: for wee carie this treaſure that God
hath giuen vs in veſſels more brittle then
glaſſe: for glaſſe is not more ſubiect to breaking,
thē our bodies (which ought to be the tē
               ples
of the holy Ghoſt) be ſubiect to pollution by
ſinne, and our ſoules to bee infected with falſe
doctrine, which will ſeeme in the mouth as
pleaſant as hony, but in the throate it will bee
more bitter then wormewood and gall. It is
like a canker which creepeth ſecretly, and hauing
infected is moſt hardly killed. Wherefore

if thou wilt not be bitten with the ſnake, ſleepe
not neere the hedge: hee that toucheth pitch,
muſt needes cary away ſome ſtayne, and the
Mariner that harkeneth to the Syrene ſhalbe
in danger of ſhipwracke: ſo hee that will curiouſly
talke and hearken to the papiſtes ſweete
perſwaſions, ſhall ſcape very hardly, (ſuch is
the outward face & ſhew thereof) but he ſhall
be intrapped, (expertus dico, I haue tried it)
and therfore giue credence to me that knowes
more therein then thy ſelfe, and wiſh thee ſo
much good as my ſelfe.
            Laſtly, I am to giue thee to vnderſtand
(good Reader) that for ſundry cauſes I haue
hereunto ioyned my firſt recantation made alſo
in a publique aſſembly, where I am to admoniſh
thee not to looke for any expreſſe methode
of my ſpeeches therein, as in this other, for I
neuer meant to publiſh it eyther in print or
writing, but was only requeſted to make knowen
to ſome of my friendes, by way of declaration,
what I had done, and nowe it is thought
meete to publiſh it in the ſame forme together
with this: whereby thou mayeſt conſider how
willing I am to make ſuch ſufficient ſatisfaction
to the Church of God as my abilitie may
extend vnto, and how glad I ſhal be if any one
doe take benefite by my labours. And for that
I knowe it a thing impoſſible that any one

worke ſhould pleaſe euery man, but that there
will be ſome fault foūd, & either the inſufficiency
of the man, or the maner of his methode,
or the raggedneſſe of ſtile, or ſome ſuch like
matter will bee reprehended, becauſe it commeth
to the ſcanning of farre more ſufficient
perſons then the Author himſelfe commonly
is, (though one man ſometimes is as ſufficient
as another) ſome alſo are more ignorant, and
therefore can not iudge vprightly, and ſome
are curious, and ſeeke rather a fine and filed
phraſe, then the ſounde ſubſtance of the
matter, and becauſe they are ſicke of the facions,
there remaineth a great corruption in
their taſte, ſo that nothing will pleaſe them bee
it neuer ſo conuenient and fit for them: for
my part I regard not the ſlanders of the enuious,
nor the ſcoffes of the curious, nor the
blunt bolts of the fooliſh, but as in humilitie I
vndertooke theſe labours for the cauſes aforeſayde,
ſo in humilitie I offer them for the
benefite of the good and vertuous, without reſpect
of any other gayne but of their good
prayers, which if I obtayne, my paynes are requited,
and my ſelfe ſatisfied. Vale.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ The Recantation of
Thomas Clarke, a Seminarie Prieſt,
made at Paules Croſſe, after the Sermon,
made by Maſter Buckeridge
Preacher, the firſt day
of Iuly. 1593.
            
               ALthough I haue once
already in a publike aſſemblie
made open recantation
and abiuration
of my former errors
(right Honorable,
Worſhipfull, and welbeloued)
yet becauſe the place wherein it
was done (notwithſtanding publike) was
more obſcure then I could haue wiſhed, as
alſo the audience (conſiſting for the moſt
part of yong perſons) not altogether ſufficient
witneſſes in ſo weightie a cauſe, I was
the more willing againe at this time in
more ſufficient maner to publiſh my former
act in this worthy aſſembly: chooſing rather
thereby to ſuffer ſome blemiſh in my credite
(if the renouncing of errors may blemiſh
my credite) then in any part to ſeeme negligent
in diſcharging the duetie of a truely
reformed Chriſtian: whereby the worlde
might iuſtly holde me in ſuſpence, y• Church

of God remaine vnſatiſfied, and mine owne
conſcience ſtill reteine in it ſelfe ſufficient
matter of accuſing & condemning her ſelfe.
For I am of this opinion (vnder correction)
that ſatiſfaction in reſpect of the world (for
to God we are able to yeelde no equalitie)
ought to be in weight and meaſure, according
to the offender his habilitie, euery
way equall with the offence made; except
the offended be content to remit, either in
part or in all, the duettie growing from the
offender. Which grace of remiſſion, I aſſure
my ſelfe to haue already obteined at God
his hands, and the like (I hope) this Honorable
and Chriſtian aſſembly will this day
afforde me, & conſequently all thoſe (which
I humbly and heartily craue) to whome relation
of my preſent deede ſhal come.
            And for the further manifeſtation of my
cauſe, may it pleaſe you to vnderſtand, firſt,
touching my fault, that I was ſometime a
Prieſt, brought vp in the Engliſh Seminarie
at Rhemes in the kingdome of France,
a Colledge there erected and ſupported by
the Pope & his complices, for the mainteining
or rather reuiuing of his deuiliſh doctrine,
& damnable errors in this our Countrey,
now for a good ſpace raked vp in hel, &
in this happy Iland almoſt extinguiſhed.
            
               
To this mother of errors and nurſe of Idolatry
did I repayre being from my childhoode
in ſome ſort foſtered with hers or the
like poyſoned milke. I omit to ſpeake of
my vnnaturall and vnduteifull departing
my natiue Countrey without authoritie or
leaue obteined from any Magiſtrate, for as
our Sauiour Chriſt ſayde,Iohn 3. 
               qui mala facit,
odit lucem, & non venit ad lucem, vt non
arguantur opera eius, he that doeth euil hateth
the light, neither commeth to the light,
leaſt his deedes ſhould be reprooued.
                Euen ſo
my cauſe being faultie in it ſelfe could not
abide the touch of due examination, & therefore
put me in feare to depart by authoritie,
but by ſtealth, which with great difficultie
I performed.
            Hauing ſtudied ſometime in the Vniuerſitie
aforeſayd, I was made Prieſt, and after
ſome ſpace was by the Preſident of the
Colledge ſent into this Realme of England
to winne ſoules (as they terme it, and
as I then tooke it) to God: but had not God,
whoſe mercies are aboue all his workes,
plucked me backe with his mercifull hand,
I had doubtleſſe periſhed together with many
ſoules of that profeſſion on whome hee
ſheweth no mercie: but ſuch is his great
goodnes and infinite mercy towardes his

elect, that euen in the depth of their ſinne he
can and wil raiſe them; the which is moſt
euidently manifeſted in me, who neuer in
my life gaue any regard to the true doctrine
of Chriſt, though in ſome part I knewe it,
but farre otherwiſe then I ought to haue
done, & as it is in it ſelfe, becauſe that from
my youth I was led aſtray and blinded with
the choking myſt of Papiſtry, and was now
come euen into the midſt, & as it were perfection
of all error and blindneſſe; inſomuch
that I did not now walke in the counſell of
the vngodly, nor ſtand in the way of ſinners,
but in the higheſt degree of ſinning, I ſate
eſtabliſhed in the ſeate of the peſtilent, whom
it is farre more hard to raiſe and remooue
then either him that walketh, or him that
ſtandeth: wherefore in me raiſed, that ſate,
the great mercie and wonderfull worke of
Almightie God is more commended & more
euidently ſet foorth then if I had but walked,
then if I had but ſtoode: the which (becauſe
I wil be as ſhort as I may) I leaue to
the deuoute conſideration of euery good
Chriſtian preſent, onely my ſelfe will ſay
with the Prophet Dauid,Pſalme 116. 
               Quid retribuam
Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi?
Calicem 
                     •
                  alutis accipiam & nomen Domini
inuocabo, What ſhall I render to the

Lorde for all his graces and benefites beſtowed
vpon me? I will receiue the cup of ſaluation,
and I wil call vpon the Name of the Lord.
            
            Hauing with great danger, by reaſon of
a tempeſt that happened, paſſed the ſeas, and
being arriued in England, I fell buſtly to
worke in my profeſſion and calling, letting
paſſe no opportunitie, but vſing all meanes
that I could to become a worthy workman,
(in deede a waſtfull deſtroyer) in God his
vineyarde. I forbeare to ſpeake of the zeale
I had, the paines I tooke, my dayes labors,
my night watchings, &c. In all which I
humbly confeſſe to Almightie God, and acknowledge
before this worthy aſſembly,
that I did nothing els but dayly more and
more offend God, impugne his trueth, ſupplant
his Church, and peruert his people, by
labouring to ſeduce them from his true religion
into idolatry, and to bring them from
their naturall & dutifull obedience towards
their Prince, vnto the ſeruile yoke and bondage
of the Pope, I meane, in perſwading
them to acknowledge his Papall dignitie,
and vſurping ſupreme authoritie ouer all
Kings and Princes of the world. Whereby
beſide the hatred of God, I incurred ye high
diſpleaſure of my dread Soueraigne, and
moſt gracious Queene, as alſo the penalties

of her godly and moſt iuſt lawes made againſt
ſuch offenders. Notwithſtanding I
proteſt before the dreadful ſeate of the moſt
Higheſt, that I neuer offended againſt her
royall perſon, neither was I euer guiltie in
platting any thing againſt the good eſtate of
my deare Countrey, or conſenting to any
lewde practice in that behalfe: neither did
I any thing touching my function in matters
of Religion of malice, as knowing and
would not knowe, but wherein ſo euer I offended,
it was of blinde zeale maſqued and
caried away with ignorance and error. And
although I ſayde before that I had ſome
knowledge of the trueth, yet I tolde you it
was but afarre off, it was but a ſuperficiall
and carnall knowledge. Who more rare or
better read in the Scriptures then the Phariſes?
yet our Sauiour Chriſt tolde them,
that they erred and knewe not the Scriptures:
whereby wee are giuen to vnderſtand,
that a man knowes nothing (knowe
he neuer ſo much) except the Spirit of God
doe further illuminate and quicken the vnderſtanding
with his grace: for it is the ſpirit
that quickeneth.
            Thus haue I (though confuſedly) confeſſed
vnto you my guiltines and offence:
it followeth, that I giue you to vnderſtand

the meanes which God vſed to reſtore me
againe to life that was dead. But herein I
feare to exceede (as they ſay) my compaſſe,
in promiſing more then I am able to performe.
For how can I declare and manifeſt
that vnto you which I neuer knewe my
ſelfe, ſurely I can aſſigne no meanes, but
muſt ſay with our Sauiour Chriſt,Mat. 11. 
               Ita pa
                  
                     •
                  e,
requoniam ſic fuit placitum ante te. It
is ſo, O father, becauſe thy good pleaſure
was ſuch. Wherefore let vs all be amaſed,
and fall into admiration of God his workes,
and with the Apoſtle Saint Paul crye out.
O altitudo diuitiarum ſapientiae & ſcientiae
Dei!
               Rom. 11. 
               quàm incomprehenſibilia ſunt
iudicia eius, & inueſtigabiles viae eius! O
the deepenes of the riches both of the wiſdome
and knowledge of God, how vnſearchable
are his iudgements, & his wayes
paſt finding out? and let vs confeſſe with
the prophet Dauid,Pſal. 118. 
               A domino factum eſt
iſtud, & eſt mirabile in oculis noſtris. This
is the Lord his doing, and it is marueilous
in our ſight. Maruailous in deede it might
and would be in our ſight, if I weare in any
reaſonable meaſure able to expreſſe the
ſecret working of God in my ſoule by his
often holy inſpirations, which I did oftentimes
repel, not of malice, but of ignorance,

taking gods holy motions for deuiliſh temptations:
well did our mercifull Sauiour
verifie, and more then verifie in me his
owne ſaying: Ecce ſto ad oſtium & pulſo:
Behold I ſtand knocking at thy dore, but
he not onely ſtood knocking, as one ready to
goe his way, if he were not let in, but he
perſeuered knocking, he ſate knocking as
one that meant not to be wearied, as one
that would not away, as one that would by
force enter. O gracious God, what was I?
what am I? nay what can I bee that thy
high Maieſtie ſhouldeſt be ſo mindefull of
me? that I ſhould bee in ſuch reputation
with thee?Pſal. 21. 
               Vermis ſum ego & non homo,
opprobrium hominum, & abiectio
plebis. I am a worme O Lord and no man,
the reproch of men, and the outcaſt of the
people. I ſay not of thy people O Lord but
of all people, for in hearing thy voice I
hardened my heart. Long was it or that I
did heare, and when I heard, I was vnwilling
to heare, I would not heare.
            At the length, when God had brought
me to heare in ſome good meaſure, he
taught me to conſider of diuers things, the
which for breuities ſake I will omitte to
ſpeake of in this place: by conſideration he
bread in me a doubting of the eſtate of my

ſoule: by doubting he wrought a deſire of
the cleare knowledge of his trueth, the
which as then I had no meanes to atteine,
but by the ſecret manuduction of his holy
ſpirite, and the reading of holy ſcriptures:
by bothe which, it pleaſed his
heauenly Maieſtie of his accuſtomed mercie,
to reforme my ſtrayed iudgement, and
thus by little and little, he taught me as it
were, the firſt rudiments of his true faith,
and at the laſt he cauſed me abſolutely to reſolue
to come forth of Babylon. But ſuch
was the malice of the deuill the auncient enemie
of mankinde, that ſeeing and enuying
this my reſolution, he caſt ſuch a ſtumbling
blocke in my way, that for a whole
yeeres ſpace I was not able to moue it,
much leſſe to remoue it. This blocke in
deede was heauy and very heauy, conſiſting
of two woods, of life and of death. Firſt, he
layed before me the terror of death, the rigor
of the lawes, and my iuſt deſertes in
tranſgreſſing the ſame: againſt this I oppoſed
my voluntary ſubmiſſion, preſidents
that had eſcaped the like danger, and haue
before me occupied this place, and moſt of
all, her Maieſties clemencie and moſt gracious
mercie vſed towardes all, eſpecially,
to men of my coate and profeſſion.
            
               
This part of his ſtumbling blocke being
but a little ſtirred, he aſſaulted me preſently
with a ſecond thing of no leſſe importance
then the firſt, which was mine owne eſtate
in this maner: That admit my life were
ſpared, yet I had not to looke for any liuing
or maintenance, and hauing of my ſelfe
none, I ſhould by recanting, bring my ſelfe
to pouertie and miſery, and be of none accompt.
Whereas now I wanted nothing
I could wiſh for, and was reputed amongſt
the beſt. Againſt this I had nothing to oppoſe,
but onely an vncertaine hope (as I
thought) of her Maieſties bountie, and the
wiſdome, and charitable care of her honorable
counſaile, for the prouiding for of ſuch
manner of perſons. Briefely after the deuill
had throughly wrought in me, the feare
and vncertaintie of both life and liuing,
therein he left me miſerablie deiected, and
wreſtling, in ſo much that for a great ſpace
after I remained here and there in the countrey,
for vpon this my reſolution, I quite
forſooke the chiefe place of my vſuall ſtaye
and abode: but could proceede no further,
till at the laſt in place where I was, in my
ſecrete chamber, word was brought me of
the taking of one of my coate, whom I wel
knew. Theſe newes bread in me ſuch a preſent

feare, that from thenceforth I could
not be in quiet. Wherefore with as much
conuenient ſpeede as might be, I prouided
for my iourney towards London, whither
being come, becauſe I was in the place as
it were a meere ſtranger, and being acquainted
with no one to whom I durſt impart
my minde in a matter ſo dangerous, I
was (by reaſon of my feares aforeſaid) conſtrained
to deferre my ſubmiſſion, vntill it
would pleaſe God, either to offer me fit opportunitie
thereto by ſome one or other, or
that he ſhould endue me with ſufficient courage
and fortitude to peforme my determinate
purpoſe, the which at the length of his
great goodnes he graunted me, but making
me to knowe withall, that his honour and
glory muſt alwayes be ſought of me, whether
it be for my temporall auaile, or diſaduantage.
Thus at the laſt he hath deliuered
me from all mine enemies, for which great
worke and mercie of his, what haue I, but
with the prophet Dauid to ſay,Pſal. 123. 
               Benedictus
Deus, qui non dedit nos in captionem
dentibus eorum, anima noſtra ſicut paſſer
erepta eſt de laqueo venantium, laqueus
contritus eſt, & nos liberati ſumus. Bleſſed
be God which hath not giuen vs ouer for
a pray vnto their teeth. Our ſoule is eſcaped

euen as a birde out of the foulers ſnare
the ſnare is broken and we are deliuered.
            It followeth touching the a
                  •
               iuration of
thoſe errors which once I held, but now deteſt,
that I ſpeake ſomewhat. To ſtand vpō
euery particular it is not my meaning, neither
doe I purpoſe to make any long diſcourſe
vpon thoſe poynts which I will
touch: alſo I meane to ſpeake but of a fewe
things, becauſe this time will not ſuffer me
to handle many, neither theſe fewe as I
would. If my order in placing the poynts
handled ſeeme prepoſterous to the learned,
I preferre their iudgements, and deſire
them to pardon my wants, and accept herein
my dutifull labours.
            Furthermore, if at the firſt I ſhall attempt
to put the axe to the roote of the tree
whereon the reſt of the branches growe, I
ſhall at once ouerthrowe both the one and
the other, and becauſe I will leaue my ſelfe
more ſcope (though otherwiſe I could finde
ſufficient) I will beginne with ſome particular
branches and ſo deſcend to the bodie
and roote: but whether I beginne at the
toppe or in the middle it is no great matter,
for my meaning is to deſtroy all, though not
in all, yet in my ſelfe.
            Firſt therefore to ſpeake of the worſhipping

of Images, which the aduerſe part
holdeth for great pietie and religion, I can
finde no warrant therefore in holy writ, but
contrarily I finde it expreſly forbidden,
with fearefull curſes therefore threatned:
as in the ſecond commandement of the firſt
table it is forbidden in theſe wordes,Exod. 20. 
               Thou
ſhalt make thee no grauen Image, neither
any ſimilitude of things that are in heauen
aboue, or in the earth beneath, or in the
waters vnder the earth: thou ſhalt not
bow downe to them nor ſerue them. Alſo
when ye are come ouer Iordan,
               Numb. 34. 
               &c. ye ſhal
driue out all the inhabiters of the land before
you, and deſtroy all their pictures, and
breake aſunder all their images of mettall
&c. That worſhippers of Images are accurſed,Deut. 27.
we reade in Deu. theſe words, Curſed
be the man that ſhal make any carued
or molten Image, which is an abominatiō
vnto the Lord.
               Wiſd. 13. Alſo in another place, Miſerable,
(which may import ſo much as to
ſay accurſed) are they, & among the dead
is their hope, that call them gods which
are the works of mens hands, golde, and
ſiluer, and the thing that is inuented by
arte, &c. Many other places I could alledge
againſt the making and worſhipping of images:
but I will omit them, onely I will rehearſe

vnto you the wordes of Tertullian
vpon this matter,Tert. de Idol. & ſo I will paſſe further.
God (ſaith he) hath forbidden an Image
aſwel to be made as to be worſhipped &c.
And a little after hee goeth forward in this
ſort, Some one or other to mainteine idolatrie
will ſay, Why then did Moſes make
the Image of the braſen ſerpent in the wildernes?
Which obiection he anſwereth in
this ſort. One and the ſelfe ſame God hath
by his eternall lawe forbidden any Image
to bee made, and alſo by his extraordinarie
and ſpeciall commandement the Image of
a ſerpent to be made: If thou be obedient to
the ſame God, thou haſt his lawe, make thou
no Image: but if thou haue a regard to the
Image of the ſerpent afterwards made by
Moyſes, then doe thou as Moyſes did, make
not any Image againſt the law, vnleſſe God
command thee as hee did Moyſes. What
neede we to ſtand vpon moe proofes herein?
theſe I take for this time ſufficient to confirme
the trueth of the matter: And herein
I aſſent and conſent to the true doctrine of
Chriſt his vniuerſall Church & affirme the
doctrine of the Romane Church herein to be
falſe and erronious, and therefore I vtterly
renounce and abiure it.
            Touching prayer for the dead, which adhereth

to another abſurditie like to it ſelfe
which is Purgatorie, although out of the decrees
of Councels and olde Fathers many
profes ſeeme to be deducted for the mainteining
therof, yet in the whole proceſſe of holy
Scriptures, (which as the Prophet Dauid
ſaith,Pſal. 118. 
               are lanternes vnto our feete, and
lights vnto our paths) I finde no warrant
for either of them, but contrariwiſe that they
are both vaine and friuolous. As for example
in the Reuelations it is ſaid,Reuel. 14. 
               Beati mortui
qui in Domino moriuntur. Bleſſed are the
dead that die in the Lord, for they reſt
from their labours, &c.
                If euery ſoule that
dieth in the Lord bee bleſſed, then there are
none that die in the Lorde in Purgatorie,
where there is no bleſſedneſſe, (but according
to their opinion) all miſerie and calamitie
euen as in hell it ſelfe. Secondly
it is ſaid, that they reſt from their labours.
If then they reſt from their labours, it muſt
needes followe that they are not in Purgatorie,
where (as they themſelues ſay) are extreme
labours, though not actiue yet paſſiue.
Whereupon I inferre two things. Firſt,
that no ſaued ſoule goeth to Purgatorie,
which is meant by thoſe which die in the
Lord, for euery one that dieth in the Lord by
ſufficient teſtimonie of this place is bleſſed,

which cannot be but in poſſeſſing the viſion
and ſight of God in whome onely the dead
haue and enioy all bleſſedneſſe, the which
none can haue and enioy, but onely thoſe
which are ſaued, as alſo reſt from all, and all
maner of labours which cannot bee had nor
found in Purgatorie, being as I ſaid before
(according to the aduerſaries opinion) a
place of torment and vnreſt, and this place
of Scripture attributing both bleſſedneſſe
and reſt, and that immediately after their
death to all that die in the Lord, that is the
ſeruants of the Lord, it muſt needes be that
euery ſuch ſoule is in heauen & not in Purgatorie.
Secondly, I inferre that there is
no ſuch place as Purgatorie, becauſe there
is no vſe of nor for any ſuch place. For all the
creatures, things and places which God
made, hee made them for ſome ende, vſe and
purpoſe: for he made nothing in vaine, and
in all the Scriptures we neither finde mention
made of Purgatorie, nor vſe for any
ſuch place, which no doubt would haue bene
done if the place had bene, and of ſuch neceſſitie
as the aduerſaries affirme it to bee,
either by Chriſt himſelfe, or his Apoſtles
(who haue left vs written all things neceſſarie
for our ſaluation) therfore I may ſafely
conclude that there is no Purgatorie.
            
               
That praiers auaile not the dead (becauſe
I haue bene ſo tedious before) I wil only alledge
one example out of Eccleſiaſtes.Eccle. 9. 
               The
dead (ſaith he) knowe nothing at all, and
they haue no more portion for euer in all
that is done vnder the ſunne. If it bee ſo,
then in praiers they haue no portion. If they
haue no portion in prayers, then in vaine doe
they pray for the dead. Thus wee ſee this
their doctrine, both of praier for the dead and
Purgatorie, to be falſe and ſuperſtitious, and
therefore I renounce and abiure it.
            Prayer to Saints as Mediatours betweene
God and vs, I finde to derogate
from the ſole mediation of Chriſt by theſe
teſtimonies of holy Scripture:Matth. 11. 
               Come vnto
me (ſaith Chriſt) all ye that are laden and
wearie, and I will eaſe you. Alſo in another
place,Ioh. 14. 
               I am the way, the trueth and the
life: no man commeth to the father but by
me.
               1. Tim. 2. And S. Paul to Timothie, There is
one God, and one Mediatour betweene
God and man: euen the man Chriſt Ieſus,
which gaue him ſelfe a ranſome for all
men, &c. In all which places wee finde no
mention made of this or that Saint, but of
Chriſt himſelfe. Therefore this doctrine
alſo as falſe and erronious I abiure and renounce.
            
               
Concerning the propitiatorie ſacrifice of
the Maſſe for the liuing and the dead, I affirme
that it is iniurious and derogatorie to
the death and paſſion of Chriſt: for our aduerſaries
will haue Chriſt to be dayly offered
both for the liuing and the dead. But
S. Paul ſaith that Chriſt needed not to be
dayly offered, or often times to offer for the
peoples ſinnes, as the Prieſtes of the olde
law did,Heb. 8. for now ſaith he, In the end of the
world he hath appeared once to put away
ſinne by the ſacrifice of himſelfe &c. And
in another place hee ſaith,Heb. 10. 
               That with one
oblation hee hath conſecrated for euer
thoſe that are ſanctified &c. And S. Peter
ſaith,1. Pet. 3. that Chriſt hath once ſuffered for
ſinnes, the iuſt for the vniuſt, that he might
bring vs to God. &c. Wherefore this one
oblation of Chriſt I confeſſe to bee ſolely
propitiatorie, and ſufficient for my ſinnes,
and for the ſinnes of ten thouſand worldes,
(if there were ſo many) and I abiure all other
propitiatorie ſacrifices and oblations
whatſoeuer as blaſphemous and iniurious
to this.
            Moreouer I find in the olde Teſtament
no mo Sacraments prefigured, and in the
new no mo inſtituted by our ſauiour Chriſt
(who onely had power to inſtitute them)

then two: that is to ſay, the ſacrament of
Baptiſme, and the Lordes ſupper: and the
other fiue I finde to be made ſacraments by
the preſumptious inuentions of men, therfore
as their vaine inſtitutions and fantaſies
I abiure & renounce them as ſacraments.
            Iuſtification is an other great poynt,
which the aduerſaries make to conſiſt of
two partes, that is to ſay, of Faith, and of
our owne woorkes and merites: but the
Scriptures allowe not workes as cauſes,
and reteine only faith as the inſtrumentall
cauſe of our iuſtification: for the Apoſtle
ſaith,Rom. 3. 
               There is no difference, all haue ſinned,
and are depriued of the glory of God,
& are iuſtified freely by his grace through
the redemption that is in Chriſt Ieſu &c.
And it followeth in the ſame Chapter,
Therefore we conclude that a man is iuſtified
by faith without the woorkes of the
law &c. And in another place he ſaith, By
grace ye are ſaued through faith, and that
not of your ſelues: it is the gift of God, not
of workes, leſt any man ſhould boaſt himſelfe:
whereby it is euident that mens merits
auaile not to iuſtification, and therfore
this doctrine of the aduerſaries, together
with the reſt, I renounce and abiure.
            As for the authoritie of princes in matters

Eccleſiaſticall, (for in Temporall I
knowe no doubt) had not Ioſua, Dauid,
Salomon, and other Kings and Rulers,
power to commaunde and intermeddle in
cauſes Eccleſiaſticall?Ioſh. 3. Did not Ioſua cō
               mand
and appoint the Prieſts and Leuites
how and in what manner they ſhould carry
the Arke of God? and by warrant from
Gods owne mouth, direct and gouerne
them in the bearing thereof ouer the waters
of Iordan? Did not God often times
manifeſt the diſpoſing of holy things to the
Kings rather then to the Prieſts? which in
no caſe he would haue done, if his will had
bene that they ſhould haue had no dealings
in ſuch kind of cauſes. As for the examples
of Dauid & Salomon, becauſe the wordes
of text are too long to recite, I referre the
Chriſtian audience to the peruſing of theſe
places of ſcripture, viz. 1. Chron. 13. 15. &
16. chap. the 7. 8. and 9. Chap. of the third
booke of Kings according to ſome tranſlations:
according to other ſome, the firſt
booke. By theſe and diuers other teſtimonies
both of the olde and new Teſtament,
I haue ſufficient warrant to acknowledge
not onely the right and authoritie of my
dread ſoueraigne in cauſes Eccleſiaſticall
within all her Maieſties Dominions, but

alſo of all Chriſtian kings and Princes in
their proper landes and Realmes, and the
contrary doctrine (as ful of lurking poyſon)
I renounce and abiure.
            And here I will ende with the Pope, as
the roote and body from whence & whereon
all branches of errors and ſuperſtitions
do grow: but becauſe I haue already plainly
declared vnto you his groſſeneſſe, or rather
impudencie in doctrine, I ſhall haue
leſſe occaſion to ſtand vpon himſelfe, for by
the fruite we are to iudge what the tree is.
It is impoſſible,Mat. 7. ſaith Chriſt, that a man
ſhould gather grapes of thornes, or figs of
thiſtles: euen ſo it is impoſſible that a man
ſhould draw vertuous and wholeſome doctrine
forth of an infected fountaine, ſuch an
one as the Pope is, who ſeeketh his owne
glory, and mainteineth his glory by his
owne doctrine, neglecting or rather contemning
both the glory & doctrine of Chriſt.
Whoſe inſolent pride and vſurping authoritie
ouer all Chriſtian kings and Princes,
as alſo his deuiliſh madneſſe in oppoſing
himſelfe againſt God and his Church, by
ſowing the ſeede of falſe doctrine in the
hearts of people, make me to confeſſe him
to be that abomination of deſolation ſitting
in the holy place, which was prophecied by

Daniel,Dan. 9. and mentioned of our Sauiour
Chriſt himſelfe in S. Matthewes Goſpel.Mat. 24.
Wherefore, as an infectiue poyſon, and
creeping canker, I loath, deteſt and abiure
him, renounce his authoritie, & from hencefoorth
vtterly reclayme from the whole
heape and maſſe of all his confuſed errors
and deuiliſh opinions whatſoeuer, aſwell
thoſe hereafter to bee inuented and publiſhed,
as thoſe already by him & his taught
and authoriſed.
            Alſo I denie that he hath any power, authoritie
or iuriſdiction ouer our ſoueraigne
and gracious Queene Elizabeth, or ouer
any of her Highneſſe ſubiects and liege
people, either in cauſes Eccleſiaſticall or
Temporall, and in defence of this doctrine
in particular, as alſo of all the poyntes of
true religion taught in this Realme, and
by her gracious Maieſtie aucthoriſed, I
now my ſelfe and whatſoeuer from henceforth
I ſhalbe able to performe. And I am
heartily ſorie that euer I offended (in profeſſing
the contrary) my merciful God, my
dread Soueraigne, & my deare countrey.
            Firſt therefore with penitent heart & proſtrate
ſoule before the tribunall of the Almightie,
I deſire his diuine Maieſtie for his
mercies ſake, and for his onely ſome Ieſus

Chriſt his ſake, to regard mee at this preſent
with his merciful eyes, and from henceforth
to guide and protect mee with his mightie
hand, that I may alwaies reſt vnder the ſhadow
of his wings, and at the dreadfull day of
his iudgement, that he impute not vnto mee
my grieuous ſinnes and tranſgreſſions, but
that he wil burie them in the ſacred and precious
wounds of his deare Sonne, and couer
them with the vaile of his holy mercies.
            Secondly, I beſeech my ſoueraigne and
gracious Queene to pardon my ignorances,
preſumptions, and whatſoeuer beſides I
haue offended in, eyther againſt her or her
Maieſties godly lawes & proceedings: with
bended knees beſeeching her Highneſſe to
accept of my humble and voluntarie ſubmiſſion,
and to admit me again into the number
of her Maieſties loyall ſubiects, and from
hencefoorth I vowe vnto her Maieſtie my
true ſeruice and duetifull obedience.
            Furthermore, I craue pardon of all men
in generall, whom I haue any wayes ſcandalized,
and offended: but moſt eſpecially
thoſe whome by erronious doctrine I haue
miſlead, praying heartily to God that they al
may be ſo ſincerely cōuerted as my ſelfe am.
            Laſtly, I humbly beſeech this honourable
& Chriſtian aſſembly to pardon my confeſſed

crime, and to accept mee as a member
of your myſtical body, vnder our head Ieſus
Chriſt. And for that I doubt not but that
your deuout mindes are readily mooued
thereunto, I wil omit to vſe any further inſtigation
therein, but will leaue the matter
wholy to the motion and working of Gods
holy ſpirit in all men.
            To conclude, for as much as I haue bene
credibly enfourmed by ſome, and haue further
found it extant in writing, that ſome in
this our Realme and in other places haue
promiſed, ſworne, ſubſcribed, and for a time
vſed the holy Sacraments in the Church
deceitfully, againſt their owne conſcience,
minding hereby firſt vnder the externall
cloake of religion to corrupt and ſubuert
ſecretely Gods true religion within the
Church, and afterward when time hath ſerued,
became open enemies and perſecutors
of the ſame, vnder vaine hope of the Popes
diſpenſation deuiſed againſt the worde of
God, to his great confuſion and their double
condemnation at the day of iudgement: being
willing for mine owne part, ſo farre
foorth as in me lieth, to take away all ſuſpition
of ſuch hypocriſie, diſſimulation and
double dealing with God and his Church, I
proteſt before the dreadfull Maieſtie of Almightie

God, who is the ſearcher of all
hearts, that my heart and minde doe fully
agree with my vttered ſpeaches. Moreouer
that I haue not, nor euer had any diſpenſation,
Bull, or any maner of facultie, for any
ſuch purpoſe. Alſo that I haue not bene moued
to this preſent act by any conſtraint or
rigor vſed, or for any worldly reſpect or hope
of gaine, or other ſiniſter cauſe whatſoeuer,
but onely by the meere perſwaſion of conſcience,
through the knowledge and loue of
Gods true religion begun in my heart by
the holy Ghoſt, the profection and perfection
whereof, I leaue to the mercifull working
of his diuine power, to whome with the Father
and the Sonne, be all honour, prayſe,
power and dominion nowe and for euer,
Amen.
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
         
            
            THE RECANTATION
of THOMAS CLARKE, made in an
other publike aſſemblie and congregation after
the hearing of Diuine ſeruice, and a Sermon
made by M. MVNSEY, Preacher, and before
the holy Communion, which together
with others I there and then receiued
on Eaſter day, being
the 15. of Aprill,
1593.
            
               I There ſtanding before the
dreadfull throne of almightie
God and the face of the
preſent congregation humblie
confeſſed my ſelfe to
haue bene for the ſpace of
theſe fiue yeres laſt paſt a traitour to God, an
enemie to his holy Church and Goſpel▪ a profeſſor
of the errors, and deuiliſh opinions of
papiſtrie, and conſequently a rebellious tratour
to my Soueraigne prince and deare
countrie.
            Howe that about fiue yeres paſt I departed
my natiue countrey, and went into forraigne
landes beyonde the ſeas, without the
leaue or authoritie of any Magiſtrate: wherby
I incurred the danger of the lawes prouided
and inſtituted for the ſame cauſe.
            How that being beyond the ſeas I ſuffred
my ſelfe to be perſwaded by the counſaile of

lewd and ſeditious men to take vpon me the
gawling yoke, and ouerſwaying burthen of
popiſh prieſt hoode: and for that cauſe I went
into the kingdome of France to the Vniuerſitie
of Rhemes, where I ſtudied certaine
yeres, & was then made prieſt, & ſhortly after
was by the Preſident of the Engliſh Seminarie
Colledge at Rhemes ſent into England
to the ende and intent to withdrawe the
peoples heartes from the true ſeruice of
God and their dutifull obedience towardes
their prince, vnto the pernicious and damnable
errors of papiſtrie, and the tyranical ſubiection
and ſlauerie of the Pope: Whom together
with diuers of his anteceſſors & ſucceſſors,
I acknowledged to be that cōtinuate
whore of Babilon, and that antichriſt whom
Saint Iohn hath moſt liuely painted foorth
and deſcribed in his Reuelations.
            In this danable buſineſſe aforeſaid I confeſſed
yt I had laboured for the ſpace of two
yeeres, cōmitting dayly more and more high
treaſon againſt God, & my Souerainge and
moſt gratious Queene: affirming that wtout
all doubte I had obſtinatly died in that wicked
& damnable eſtate (as many of my coate
and profeſſion had done before) if by Gods
will I had bene apprehended in any ſearch
or by any other meanes before the grace of

God had lightened the blindnes of my vnderſtanding,
which by his holy prouidence and
tender mercy was in due time powred, and
that aboundantly, into the feſtered woundes
of my gaſping ſoule. For being forcibly touched
with the diuine finger of Gods holy ſpirite,
I began to reuiue, and manifeſtly to ſee
my deſperate eſtate and deuiliſh madneſſe.
            Then was I taught by Gods holy ſpirite
and the reading of holy Scriptures, that I
ought to be ſubiect and obedient to my ſoueraigne
prince.
            That mans iuſtification and righteouſneſſe
commeth not of himſelfe by his owne
merits, but that it is the free gift of God
through faith in Ieſu Chriſt.
            That praying to Images is flat Idolatrie.
            That praying to Saintes, Purgatorie,
mens traditions and ſuch like, are damnable
errors, and derogatorie to the honor of God.
            That in Chriſts holy ſupper we doe eate
his fleſh and drinke his blood ſpiritually
through faith, not groſly and carnally as before
I helde.
            That the dayly offering vp of Chriſt in
the maſſe is damnable, and derogatorie to the
death and paſſion of Chriſt.
            Laſtly, I confeſſed my ſelfe to be heartily

ſory for hauing herein ſo highly offended
God, my Soueraigne, and the world, humbly
crauing pardon for the ſame.
            And there I did from the bottome of my
heart & ſoule abiure and renounce the Pope
and al his tyrannicall power & iuriſdiction,
abhorre and deteſt the maſſe, and al the heape
of his wicked errors and damnable opinions
whatſoeuer, as wel thoſe which I haue not
here mentioned, as thoſe which I haue here
touched, & by teſtimonies of holy ſcriptures
briefly confuted. And with all reuerence of
ſoule and ſinceritie of conſcience, I then did,
now doe, and for euer (by Gods grace) will
embrace the true faith and wholſome doctrine
of Ieſus Chriſt.
            This done, I deſired the people to ſay for
me the Lords prayer (which they did) to the
ende I might eaſely obtaine of God truely
to bee inſerted into his myſticall body, and
made a liuely member of his holy Church,
that I might bee a woorthy partaker of his
heauenly table, and that I might hereafter
faithfully walke all the dayes of my life in
the true light of his holy Goſpel.
            Moreouer I then certified the aſſembly,
& do now by theſe preſents verifie, y• I vndertooke
not this preſent matter either conſtrayned,
or for feare of torture, (the Magiſtrates

well knowing yt mans faith is not to
be wreſted by violence) or for the auoiding of
any diſpleaſure, or for hope of fauour, or for
any ſiniſter cauſe whatſoeuer, but ſimply and
ſincerly for y• honor of God (who hath wroght
in me this wonderfull worke) for the edifying
of his Church, & ſatiſfying of the world.
            This clauſe I openly proteſted to ye people
after my ſpeech, being demanded by the
preacher aforeſaid in the pulpit thereof, as alſo
of this, viz. that I had receiued neither frō
ye pope, nor frō any of his agents nor any mā,
no diſpenſatiō, licence, bull, or facultie to diſſemble
my conuerſion, neither that I euer (as
yet) heard of any ſuch thing to haue bin granted,
& if there were, I acknowledged my ſimplicitie
to be ſuch, that I was not accompted
a man ſufficient to haue ſo prodigious a matter
committed to my truſt and charge.
            This is the ſūme & effect of my ſpeaches
to the people. And whatſoeuer I then ſaid,
I do preſently confirme in and vnder myne
owne hand writing: And if this my preſent
acte, and that which I haue already performed
ſeeme not ſufficient to the eies and iudgments
of the wiſe to teſtifie the ſinceritie and
true meaning of my inward repentant ſoule,
I am further readie dutifully to perfourme
whatſoeuer (within my power) ſhall be demaunded

at my handes, and am willing to
ſpende my life for my Soueraignes
ſafety and my countries good,
againſt whome I haue ſo vnduetifully
and vnnaturally
rebelled.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by
the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER
BARKER, Printer
to the Queenes moſt excellent
Maieſtie.
         
      
   