
      
         
            
            
            HENOCH CLAPHAM His Demaundes and Answeres touching the Pestilence:
Methodically handled, as his time and meanes could permit.
            
               1. Iohn 4. 1. 
               Try the spirits whether they are of God.
            
            
               1. Thessa. 5. 21. 
               Try all things, keepe that which is good.
            
            
               1. Iohn 3. 16 
               Hereby haue we perceaved loue, that the (namely Christ) layd downe
his life for vs: therefore we ought also to lay downe (our) liues for the
brethren.
            
            
               Phil. 2. 4. 
               Looke not every man vpon his owne things, but every man also on
the things, of other men.
            
            1604.
         
         
            
            To the Church of God wheresoever dispersed, Elect according to
the foreknowledge of God the Father vnto Sanctification of the Spirit, through
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Iesus Christ, (apprehended with true
faith) Grace & peace be multiplied vnto you all, Amen.
            CHristian Reader, it was wy lot to light vpon these few leaves.
And being pervsed by som that had in times past bin acquainted with the author
him self, And so finding in this canvasing cōference such sound satisfaction
for matters of doubt, which in the other Epistle of the pestilence, were short
& brief, learned and scholerlike reasons, still striving to bring out the
kernel of knowledge, which lay couched vnder the shell of obscuritie. And the
further he ripped and reached, to make Gods glorious power knowen, which others
so long had masked: it caused many questions to bee mooved, which in this
canvasing conference is answered to the full. I my self being an eare-witnes,
to som part of that doctrine: which was as strange to many at the first, as it
was to the men of Athens in Mars street, which counted Paul but a babler,
because he preached vnto them, Iesus and the Resurrection.
            But I heare the Author is in prison, And why? Because som
Ministers complayned that he preached a doctrine (which they could neither
begin nor end) past the boundes of their knowledge.
            But Henoch wher are thine accusers? hath the finger (ofIohn. 8. 6. God) written their faults easie to be read, doe
they not stand out to accuse thee? Then I hope the learned will not condemne
thee, that haue trod out the corne before thee in the same path.
            So was the doctrine of possession likewise distilled out of the
cloudes, and so high past every lay mans reach, that the layety were driven to
their Pastors for satisfaction in the doubt of that doctrine (because the
Priestes lippes should preserue knowledge) but they being found nonresidence in
those studies, one made answer thus: I am no Prophet, I am no Apostle, Miracles
are ceased, &c.
            These hearers could not be at the beginning & ending of all
these Sermons, which was the cause they rested vnsatisfied,One made that aunswer. and so they began to expounde the
doctrine them selues according to those parcels which they had gleaned by peece
meale from the author, never vnderstanding the Author as he meant. But
whosoever thou be, that will take vpon thee to say all, before thou heare all,
shall be sure to lye all.
            And so damnable speaches were bruted abroad, before either of the
doctrines were finished: but the last Sermon of possession, made all plaine,
and so plaine, that since that time (to the glory of God be it spoken) I never
heard of any about London nor elswhere that were so extraordinarily possessed.
But ordinary wicked persons that are never dispossessed of a wicked tongue:
like the Athenians which gaue them selues to nothing els, but either to tell,
or heare som Newes. but in the end M. Marbery set in foot▪ to maintaine
the same doctrine, vpon Christes Temptation in the Wildernes, affirming that
[Ergo no possession. If no going in, no coming
out.] So did the last Sermon of the Pestilence make all attentiue hearers
satisfied.
            These circumstances considered, I tooke it for duty, once towards
the Church [who is the piller and ground of truth] as also for profitable
acquaintance heretofore had with the Author: I could do no lesse but diuulge
it. And so much the rather, for that therein is cleared, what in all points is
to be held touching the Pestilence: A doctrine hetherto, over-confusedly and
slenderly handled of many, If my iudgement fayle me not.
            
               Thine in Christ Iesus, Amen. P. R.
            
         
         
            
            The Authour to the Reader.
            THE last great Pest-time (I speak of the Great plague in
London, for otherwise, it is now the greatest Pest-time in the
country, and throughout his Highnes Dominions) it pleased God to give me
affection and strength to continue & hold out my Ministerie to the end,
publikelie teaching, and privately comforting the Lords poore flocke abyding in
the Citie of London (as occasion here and there, night and day was
administred) what time the Citie was much infirmed for Civill governement, and
well-nigh emptied of due ecclesiasticall cure.
            SatanRevel. 12. 10. 
               The
accuser of our brethren, maligning the happy successe of my labors, he
gets som vnwise Spirits to bruite abroad, that Clapham taught The
plague not to be infectious, and that All that dyed of the plague were
damned, as dying without faith.
            
            The first accusation came readily to the present Lo. Bb. of
London, but the second (it seemeth) not so. For about som 34. wekes after my
first Cōmitment, the said Lo. BB. and Sir Edward Stanhope in Court
did publikely affirme, that they had not heard of that bruite before: what time
I my selfe then first vttered it in their court, that so then in the face of
all by-standers it might be checked, so well as other slaū
               ders, forged only
for obscuring myne innocency.
            The BB. beleeving the first tale, he (without sending for me, or
talking with me) caused me to be taken (euen presently vpō a Sermons ending,
wherin I had opposed to such insensible reportes) and so was conveyed to
theAnno Do: 1603. Novemb.
  
                     •
                  4 Clinck prison. Passing by
some inter-currentes (which in som other my writings are layde downe) he at the
eleven weekes end convented me, thē signifying that I had bene imprisoned for
teaching, That the plague was not inf
                     •
                  ctious; as also for publishing An Epistle concerning the
Pestilence; and that in contempt of the booke of Orders for the
Wednesdayes fast, authorized by the King. To both I answered
Negatiuely, if so by Plague they vnderstood not that stroke
of the Angel termed of the Holy-Ghost Deber; but that which grew from
corruption of the Creature. Well to the Gate house prison I was sent, and to my
booke and the contentes, I should answere in another place.
            To passe by the second Convention, it being to no other end then
the former, the weeke before the Archb. death, I was called to
Lamboth. There, after assurauce had of certaine Articles their
compasse, I  tooke my othe to answer truly to them. The next Monday
at the Registers office I did so. The answere was sent to the BB. of Londō.
He seeing it made not to his purpose, did not convent me, but (without all
adoe) he let me ly in prison still as afore. My wordes nor writings prevayling
any whitt, I complayned to the King on1604.
               Easter monday, who appointed the same to be conveyed to the BB.
And he thereto to giue in his answer. Hearing nothing more of that of
7. weekes, I on the day of Pentecost insuing, complayned to his
Highnes againe. Thereto, Sir Iulius Caesar in his Maiesties
name subscribeth thus. 
The Kings Maiesty hath eftsoones referred this petitiō to the
  Lord Bishop of London, who is required by his Highnes calling other of the
  Hycommission vnto him, withall convenient expedition and according to the Law,
  to proceede to iudgement, either with or against the partie, as his cause
  shall deserue; that his Highnes may not further bee importuned herein. So farre
  the Kings commaund.
            
            To the Bishop I sent it, but hearing nothing from him, a fortnight
after, I sent to the King againe. About a week after, I was convented. And
after much talke to no purpose, the Bishop concluded thus: you may doe this
at least; the Doctrines being put downe as supposed to be taught of you, you
may subscribe herein, I was truely or not truly vnderstood. I answered,
let that be done, and I shall doe what I ought. Doctor Stanhope then
said, Maister Deanes of Westminster & Pawles are appointed to that, who (at
their convenient leasure) will send for you. So the Court broke vp. This was
the eleventh of Iuly last; and then the first time also of excepting at the
doctrine of Faithes apprehending deliverance from the plague, taught
in the foresaid Epistle.
            
            Being thus left to the two Deanes, I writt to them sundry times
for speedy proceeding. One of them sent my messenger to the other, backward and
forward. At the Monethes end, Doctor Androes sends me word, that he
had put the matter from him. And so he never sent for me, according to the
Courtes Depute.
            Passing by inconvenient repeates, about three weekes after, I was
sent for to the Registers office. Coming thither, his man lets me see Doctor
Androes his moneths worke. And what was it? A flat
recantation, and nothing answerable to that which the Court (in myne
hearing) appointed as afore. So much I signified to the Bishop, as also to the
Doctor, But other answer since I could haue none but this: put in
bondes so to protest, When and Where we shall appoint, and so 
 departe prison. So my cause at the penning hereof standeth.
            The severall pointes, for the which I am thus handled, in the
sequent Discourse I do treat of, by way of Quere and
Response; that is by way of Question and Answere. Wherein my cause is
vnsound, reiect; wherein Orthodoxall, accept: and so farre be Gods instrument
for my Good.
            
               Art thou a Magistrate?
               Then hearken what Salomon saith: Deliver them that
  are drawen to death;
                  Prover. 24. 11. 12. 
                  and
  wilt thou not preserue them that are ledd to be slaine? If thou say, Behold, we
  knew not of it, he that Pondereth the heartes, doth he not vnderstand it? And
  he that keepeth thy Soule, knoweth hee it not? Will not he also recompence
  every man according to his workes? Thus let the Magistrate take heede how
  he pleades ignorance, and wincketh at the fall of the innocent. For such a
  looking through the fingers, may fill the earth with innocent blood, till it
  roare again for heavens iudgement. And so not only such, but also the whole
  lande shall fare the worse for iniustice.
            
            
               Art thou a Minister?
               Then heare what Moses and Salomon say:Leuit. 5. 1. 
                  And if any haue sinned, namely, by hearing
  the voyce of an othe, and he can be a witnesse, whither he hath seene or
  knowen of it, he do not vtter it, he shall beare his iniquitie.
                  Prou. 31. 
                        •
                     .
                  Open thy mouth for the dombe in the cause of all the children of
  destruction. Some of you are reported to say that Clapham hath a good
  cause, but it is to be doubted, if so he haue sufficient learning to defend it.
  That I haue, I haue: God make me faithfull in that I haue. But thou that art
  able to giue in thy Testimonie, art bound also to do it. If thou wilt not be a
  Procter for Christ in his members, one of the two Theeues executed with lesus,
  shall turne Preacher, & giue in s
                     •
                  fficient evidence, to thy condemnation.
            
            
               To the People.
               Also Brethren, I beseech you for our Lorde Iesus sake and for
  the loue of the Spirit,Rom. 15. 30. &c. that ye
  would striue with me by prayers vnto the Lord for me, that I may be deliuered
  from the disobedient, and that my seruice (which I haue yet to do) may be
  accepted of the Sanctified: that I may come forth to his people with ioy, by
  the will of God, and may with you be refreshed. Thus the God of peace be with
  you all, Amen.
               
                  Yours, Henoch Clapham.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Qu. Is the Plague infectious?
            CHAP. I.
            
               Answer. EVery Answer is to be made, either byAffirmando. Negando Distinguendo. Retorquendo.
               Affirming or Denying, or Distinguishing, or by
Retorting. Affirme it to be, or not to be I cannot, for reason
ensuing. For retorting an answer I could, by vrging a Quere of like
nature, thus: Is the crab restoritiue, yea or no? If answer be made,
tell me whither you speak of the fruit crab or Sea-crab, and then I will
satisfie you: euen so I say, tell me whither you speake of the Naturall
Plague, or the Supernaturall Plague, and then I will say it is,
or it is not, infectious. The doubtfulnes then of the answer, doth arise from
the doubtfulnes of the question. The question is doubtfull by reason of the
word Plague, for that it hath sundry significations. For the better
vnderstanding whereof, let vs first examine the seuerall senses.
            
               Plague, is a word taken in the evill part, and spoken of
any harme inflicted vpon any Creature. All diseases are termed plagues, be they
inflicted vpon mankinde, or others. So be Crosses in Common Wealthes, Ch
                  •
               rches, Famelies: So be som Windes, and
Weathers to Trees, hearbes, flowers, &c. And so Egypt had his ten sundry
plagues. But passing by all such inferiour sortes, it is in this dispute taken
for a speciall kinde of evill inflicted on mankinde. The Divine Prophets
Canonicall do terme it in Hebrue DEBER. The divineThey
  were 70. Hebrues that turned the law into greek, at the appointmēt of Ptolomy
  Philadelph the Egyptiā king, vnder whom Daniels people were capti
                  
                     •
                  ed. 
               Septuagint
                     •
                  
                do specially terme it in Greek
Logos. The Ancient Heathē Phisitians do terme it Loimos. The
Latines call it Pestis, and Plaga: whereof do come our
English wordes, Pest. Pestilence, Plague: but Plaga in playne
English, A Stripe or Blowe: and therefore how many stripes,
so many Plagues.
         
         
            Quere. That plague which is so straingly mortall at this time
throughout England, is it infectious, yea or no?
            CHAP. II.
            
               Answer. I vnderstand that plague, or pest not to be
single, or of one kinde. And so farre as I conceaue, no learned Divine 
 or Phisition, is otherwise minded. Thereof it is, that sometimes
they vrge textes of scripture for making the Angell Agent, according to that
speach of our King in his Parliamentall Oration, who termes the Pest
the viol
                     ••
                  lence of Gods
devouring Angell: and sometimes againe they discourse of Corrupt ayre in
suing Constellations and fuming corruptions. In which respecte, naturall
politicall Orders are vrged; as for the other, Fasting and Prayer. In regard of
the first, one (speaking of the Plague in Davids time) writes thus:W. Cupper, on 2. Sam. 24. pag. 78. 
               This Plague came not by any Caryer or Travailer, or by any
  infected persons travayling from place to place & infecting the people
  wher they came, but it was sent sodainly from God, as the revenger of
  sinne. He afterwardes graunteth, that such a plague is not at this day for
vniuersalit
                  •
               e and quick dispatch,
but yet still that God hath the same meane at his pleasure, so to do. And this
writer must be remembred, to haue beene authorized by the Sea of
London: and the same Booke applauded with the Preface of an ancient
paynfullStephen Egerton. Preacher. For the
other sorte of Pest, namely derived from some corruption of the Creature, and
not immediatly from the Angells stroke, any learned (skilfull in nature) do
graunt. And for that, take a Christian Physitians testimonie amongst vs. He
having alleadged som reportes from histories touching naturall Contagion, doth
then conclude thusDoct. Fran Hering in his Epist. to
  his Defence, &c. 
               This may be sufficient to shew, that the Plague
is not always the immediat stroke of an Angell. In this Pestilence
generally scattred through the land, there so falleth out some stroke
Supernaturall, some Naturall, as I haue againe and againe
taught in my Epistle so much traduced. He that is against me in this, is so not
contrarie minded to me, but to our King, to our Divines, and Phisitians also.
No marvayle then though another authorized Divine do say with the right learned
Phisitian Fernelius,
               See H▪ Hollands Spir.
  Preservatiue Pag. 36. 
               Hisunt morbi, &c. These be the
diseases whereof I haue said often, they haue som secret cause. And a litle
after; the first causes which breed the Pestilence, are so vnknowen, so
invisible, and so strange to all our senses, that we are altogeather ignorant
of them, &c. Necessarily so it foloweth, that som thing in this plague be
Supernaturall; and somwhat Naturall, as at large I haue
delivered in my Epistle of the Pestilence; without which observation, one shal
deliuer Quid for Quo, as haue done my Articlers; what is
saide of the Supernaturall to vrge it as spoken of the Naturall, (Et
è contra) to the seducing of the Hearers.
         
         
            
            Quere. The stroke of the Angell immediatly inflicted, is it
infectious, yea or no?
            CHAP. III.
             
               
                  Answ. FIrst let me heare what infection is. A domestick
Doctor, signifying what person is infectious, doeth write thus: 
D. Lodge in his booke of the Pestilence,
  cha. 1. Very properly (saith he) is he reputed infectious, that hath in
himselfe an evil, malignant, venomous, or vitious disposition, which may be
imparted and bestowed on another by.Touching is of
  sundry natures. 
                  Touch, producing the Same and As
Dangerous effect in him to whom it is cōmunicated, as in him that first
cōmmunicateth and spreadeth the infection. So farre He. It being
remembred, that Infection properly vnderstood, is not that which begetteth
Another but the Same euill, so Argumentate.
            
            That stroke which the Angell inflicteth, is
Supernaturall, and not within the compasse of Phisicall causes:
            But Infection is Naturall and within the compasse of Phisicall
causes:
            Therefore the Angells stroke not infectious.
            For the second proposition, I leaue it till anone. Meane time the
first proposition would be cleared, seeing the conclusion dependes
primordially of it. That the Angels stroke is Supernaturall, it may
appeare, once in that He the Angell (be a good or bad one,Bucer in Mat. 8. for either may be so imployde) he is a
Spirit, and this his Action done by an immediate spirituall power beyonde our
reasons pitch. Secondly, we see the Angell in Aegpit, as also in
Iudea & Israell (nor els where do we ever heare the contrary) to
be imploide in smyting house after house, and City after City, even all along
the Coastes, from Dan to Beersheba, and not smyting that
which might smyte another, which otherwise (if but for instruction sake) would
somtyme haue bene done, and mentioned. And this (no doubt) caused one to write
as afore in the former chapter, thatW. Cupper on 2.
  Sam. 24. 
               The Pest in Davids tyme, came not by any infectious
person. Thirdly, by the Septuagintaes version of the word DEBER,
it may be collected to haue bene then the Church of Israels iudgement.
The word DEBER in proper English The Pestilence, they turne by the
Greeke word Logos in English  
               The word; as
if in the text it were not DEBER but DABAR, this indeed signifying a
word; and the very terme that Saint Iohn in his first chapter
doth giue vnto the Son of God, by whom as by a word, the Creature had
his beginning and beeing. So that the 91. Psal. and third verse, they thus
read, He shall deliuer thee from the word, not fro the Pestilence. And
why? because that Pest (as the comon Creature at first) had the beginning and
beeing solely by the word of God: and this plague for contemning the blessed
Covenaunt sealed vp in him that is Logos the Word. Afterwardes in the
sixt verse of the same Psalme, the Hebrue-Greekes read, thou shalt not be
affraide [Apò toû pragmatos] of the thing, in steed of
pestilence. Why? Because it was such a RHEMA, such a PRAGMA,
such a Thing, as they knew not properly how to terme it in the Greeke language:
They well vnderstood that the Heathen-Greekes did terme it LOIMOS,
and in respect of the popular spreading Epidemia, wherefore then in
their translations should they so avoyde these wordes, and rather choose such a
terme, as should drive the Heathen to a Non-plus? No reason I
can render, but that thereby they finely checked the Gentiles, as Ignorant of
that plagues cause, and therfore must be glad (leaving their great Naturians)
to come vnto the written woord of God for better learning. And in so
doing, they shall finde that DEBER is indeed DABAR, which not only signifieth a
Word, but also a Thing; Yea, a miraculous Thing; as
in Genes. 18. where Sarah thinking the woord of promise impossible,
the Angel thus checkes her; shall any DABAR be heard to the
Lord? where that miraculous thing was to be effected by the power of the
word DABAR signifying both. Now if the Pest was such a word, or such a thing,
effected by a word, then it is to bee nombred amongest Supernaturalls,
and so not infectious, seeing the partie so smitten, could not by all the
corruption in his nature sende out such a Word, such a Thing,
begetting the same effect in another: for so (which I thinke were a petie
blasphemie) in steed of Iehovahs Angell, mans beastly corruption
should equalize the Angell, & take the worke out of his handes, as being
Iehouahs messenger herein (for Angell is the Greeke word, and
Messenger the English) which I haue not read of, at least not observed. True it
is, that the Angells blowe, rayseth vp mudde in mans nature, giving it an head
to the heart; and therefore in Psalme 91. 3. with Logos they ioyne
Tarachodes turned of vs noysome, but in proprietie,
Bemudding, as if by such a stroke,  the mudde of
our vncleane poole, were stirred vp to the poysoning of all the blood and
powers; even as è contra, the Angells Mooving of
Bethesda,
               Iohn 5. brought sanitie to the
diseased. And true it is also, that that corruption may offend and
hurt nature in others, but yet not infect, that is beget the Same and
as dangerous effect in another: for many things

                  •
               e noysom, that be not infectious.
Fourthly, that the Angells stroke is Super
                     •
                  aturall, it may appeare from the meanes whereby it is stayed.
The meanes by Prayer,
               Rom 12. 1 
               and
the offring vp our selues a living Sacrifice, which David ran vnto in Sam
24. He seeing the Angell smyting the people in ver. 17. (and not the people
infecting one another) he humbles him selfe, offring his lyfe (few such
Governors) for the ransome of his people, who are indeed A Kings
glory, Pro. 14 28.Galen in 1. lib. de temp. observed by
  Doct Katachius in Regimine sanitatis. That this holy Interpellation
(and not Gallens Northeren winds breathing the Chambers) was the
meanes whereby that Pestilence DEBER was stayed, the Angels hand staying to
smyte and longer.
             
               To that purpose, One by authoritie thus writeth:W. Cupper on 2. Sā. 24. 147. This noysom
                     •
                   Pestilēce (in 2. Sam. 24.) ceaseth
  here as we see; but by whose meanes? Did tyme weare it out, or did the
  Phisitian cure it? or did a fine devise remooue it? no, no, it was done only by
  the Commaundement of God, enioyning the Angell to stay his hand. This
consideration moveth also another Domestick Preacher vpon Nombers 16. 46. not
to teach Physicall, but Metaphysicall perfumes for putting away this
sorte of Pest. 
Amongst other things thus he writes:Roger Fē
                     ton in his spirituall Perfum
                        •
                     . If the cause of this Infection were
  Elementarie, why must holy fier bee taken from the Alter? Fier out of
  the Chimney would purifie that: A
                        •
                     terwards. Let euery one therefore bring his Censer, that is,
  his heart vnto the Lord an hallowed and Sanctified vessell for this purpose, to
  offer vp incense of pray
                     •
                  r vnto
  God, a vessell layde vp in the holy of Holyes. The Medicine so being
Spirituall, Supernaturall; it remaynes (as afore) that the stroke is
not infectious.
            
            Lastly,Publisher. the absolute
mortalitie of the Angels stroke, doth argue i
                  •
                not to be infectious: For if it were, then every pestilenced person
must dye, without such a supernaturall andThe Adding
  of 15. yeares to his life, and the sunne going back 10. degrees in the Diall
  of 
                     〈◊〉
                  : without
  
                     〈◊〉
                   help, was
  
                     〈◊〉
                   raculous, 2. King. 20. 2
                     •
                  
                miraculous recoverye, as
wherewith Hezekiah was revived. But as none will graunt such a
communitie of Miracle, so all must graunt the Angels stroke not to infect
another with the same or like. That the Angels stroke is absolutely deading in
his nature, it may appeare, once, in that no one smitten with DEBER is read to
haue recovered life. For Hezekiah, 
                he was first a
dead man in respect of his diseases nature [els Isa
                     •
                  ah
                     •
                  
               
message were vntrue] howsoever the humbled King was afterwardes
miraculously restored: and yet his malady not DEBER in the text, but a
sicknes to death, howsoever not without his Boile,
               Isa. 38. 1. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                or swelling there termed Shechin, one with the
sixt plague inflicted on Aegypt in Exod. 9. 10. But DEBER (for terme)
one with the first plague, Englished A moraine; whereof no Beast
smitten escaped. Secondly, it is to be gathered from the 2. Chro. 21.
where the Angel is sent to Ierusalem LEHASHCHITHAH to
corrupt it, namely to death; for SHACHATH implyeth corruption taking head to
the death and graue. Thirdly the Angells stroke appeareth to be deadly, from
the Epithets giuen to it in Psal. 91. where it is termed a
Lyon, an Aspe, a Dragon, who naturally devoure and
poyson to the death. Such is the iudgment of someMa.
  Holland. Domestick writers authorized by the Sea of London so
to teach and print. For iudgement of foraigners, take the learned
Mollerus (approved of the Vniversitie of Witteberge,
               M. Cupper. and his labours printed at
Geneva, who in the 91. Psalme so vrgeth the Epithets meaning, In
specialty (saith he) I take the Prophet willingly alludeth to the Pest
in these Appellations.
               Henricus Mollerus in Psalmo
                     •
                  . 
               
                  For it is not to be doubted, but he had respect to the
  nature of these Beastes [vt vim veneni significantius exprimeret] for
  more significant expressing the force of the poison.
                So farre He.
Whereby also may appeare the stroke not to be infectious; seeing the
corruption in a man so stoong and poysoned of Aspe, or Dragon, it sendeth out
of that body no s
                  •
               ch

                  •
               avour or power, as whereby the
same evill and so dangerous an effect can be begotten in
another, not so stoong of the serpent. And herevpon it is, that the same
Learned Man (so well asBeza and others her
                     •
                   at home. others) doeth
vnderstande that Psalme to be penned vpon Davids deliverance in Sam.
24. and the Angell to be that Fowler, in Psalme 91. 3. whose
particular act is, to pitch the same Pest-snare and so to strangle
people, as the Fowler doth birdes. And so (as afore) the stroke deadly, and
vn-infectious. But because our people are so infidelious touching the Angels
stroke, it pleaseth God somtymes to let the smitten feele a sensible blow, and
both he, and others playnely to see, the print of a blew hande vppon the place
so smitten. This indeed was flouted at in my booke, as if there were no such
thing. But lett vs heare another Writer of their owne Authorizing,H. Hol. sp
                     ••
                   preser. p.
  33. thus he writes: 

                  Because the Lords power and might more appeares & is
  more manisest in this great evil, then in any other,  I
  thinke it not fabulous what I haue heard som reporte, that they haue seene (as
  it were) the print of a hand vpon the Armes and other partes of the body of
  sundry smitten with the Pestilence.
                So farre He. Wherewith would be
noted, that no one so printed doth escape death, so far as I could ever heare;
nor yet that pest
                  •
               print beget the
like in any of the beholders, and so not infectious.
            Thus if men would haue vnderstood them selues (but
Nebuchadnetzar had forgot his dreame) Clapham should not
haue beene so vnbrotherly, and vncivilly entreated, for teaching the Angels
stroke to be Supernaturall, and in his nature not infectious. But many
supposing the Doctrine I taught herein, to haue no proppes from some other
Teachers, to whom Sectary-wyse they were addicted (they holding faith, which
Saint Iames forbiddeth, in respect of persons) they so in their blind
zeale,Ia
                     •
                  . 2.
  1. were helping to hammer my Chaynes, adding affliction to my bondes.
Heavenly Father forgiue them, for they knew not what they did.
            
         
         
            Quere. Whither or no is that Plague infectious which ariseth
immediatly from some corruption of Nature?
            CHAP. IIII.
            Answ. IN his owne nature it is infectious, howsoeuer somtymes
bridled of God from infecting; as the Lyons naturally devouring howsoeuer the
Creator did bridle that Creature from touching of Daniel. And this to
be vnderstood, not only of Corruption following open knowen naturall causes,
but also (as afore) of that muddy corruption raysed by the vn-infectiue
miraculous stroke of the Angell▪ for corruptiō can beget nothing but the
same, or the like corruption or otherwise be noisome, according as the Subiect
it worketh vpon, be more or lesse thervnto affected. This in my
Epistle (vniustly traduced) I teach againe and againe. 
In the Addition to the first Section there I
  say thus; This kinde of plague of pestilence, is of him (namely Galen)
  termed Loimos, respecting only bodyes bursting out in corruption,
  which may be cause sometimes of corrupting bodyes; specially such as are
  inclinable to, and capable of such corruption. Then to the second Section
  this, The Angels stroke so is the cause, the  plague
  sores and markes appearing & arising, are an effect. The first not
  infectious. The second is Infectious sometimes more or lesse. Afterwards
  in the third Section having said, It is for none to make
  Physicke their staffe, nor yet their first meane, I then write
  thus: Is Phisick then in this, and all other plagues to be avoyded? No, we
  are not to neglect such naturall meanes, as reason & experience haue found
  out to avayle against Naturall infirmity [Deo non obstante] the Lord
  not crossing nature. Otherwise, we shalbe found tempters of God, leaving our
  way; rather then faithfull keepers of our way. 
               Thus much there,
and much more then this, for approving and enioying Phisical practise, in
regard of such contagious corruption. How greatly then haue they sinned against
the evident trueth, who haue said, that Clapham taught the
Plague not at all to be infectious, as also that he reiected the
practisers of Phisicall meanes for Atheistes? But how deepe haue their sinne
bene,Publisher, was it not Doctor Andros that culled
  thē? who laying my said Epistle before them, haue culled out
all spoken of the Angells stroke, & of pretence haue skipped over
these aforesaid speaches and the like, touching Infection &
Phisicall meanes; and that for so framing their Articles, as it might be
thought, that my saide Epistle taught no such infection, no such vse
of Phisicke, and so consequently (as they speake) Clapham an occasion
of the death of thousands. If (as He, that write the spirituall perfume) I
should haue skipped ouer such naturall respectes (and why? may not a Divine do
it, whose practise is, not to preach Phisick) how would all accusations then
haue passed for current against me. Yea, the Bishop knowes by a letter writ to
him, how in the Pulpit I said, Whosoeuer dee
                  •
               es pestilenced ayre, earth bodyes to be
in their owne nature infectious; they deserued rather to be taught it in
Bride-well with stripes, then out of the pulpitt with Argumentes. And
yet this hath helped nothing.
            That the Plague (that is, pestilenced ayre, earth bodyes) should
bee infectious naturally (for we speak not against Gods providence, somtimes
crossing nature, as once it hindered the Lyon from hurtinge the Asse, who
otherwise according to his devouring nature, killed the disobedient Ryder, 1.
King. 13. but we speake of the nature of the corruption it selfe) it can not be
marvayled at or gaynesayd, when as we finde and graunt, inferiour diseases
amongst mankind & beastes to be readily and sharply infectious, and
ordinarily to be prevented & healed by naturall remedy. To particularize
them are over-lothsom and vnnecessary this discourse.
            
                If thou say, thou hast conversed nearly with
such as haue bene p
                  •
               
               stilenced, and
yet that way vntouched: I answer, so haue I, not by way of tempting God, but in
way of discharging holy & necessary duty, and also I (with all my famely
somtymes so imployde) vntouched that way. That this fell out, it is not because
there was no contagion in such pestilenced persons, but because God bridled it,
that wee so survi
                  ••
               ing, might speak
of his wonderfull workes, and laud him for his mercies.
            Of this naturall Pest, the Phisitians and Clarkes of Nature, thus
write:Do▪ Lod▪ from Hipocrates de humana
  natur. 
               The cause of the Generall pestilence, whiche
indifferently attaynteth all sortes of men, is the Ayre which we sucke, that
hath in it self a corrupt and venemous seede, which we draw with our
                  •
               in breathing. By which ayre,
Hipocrates doubtles meant not Only the common ayre element
all investing all bodyes, but also the Ayre fluctuated (as Winde) from out
of pestilenced bodyes. Were it not for such Gust and Touch,
we need not to feare to converse nearely with such as be taynted with Morbo
Gallico, and other such peculiar peccatorious maladies.
            But for this worke of nature, I leaue to the Reverend Studentes of
natures secretes; contenting my selfe only with this, that I know no learned
Divine, to be heerein contrary minded. And every Maister is to be heeded in his
owne Faculty.
         
         
            Quere. Can the Angels stroke by som essentiall marke be
differenced from the Taint of naturall corruption?
            CHAP. V.
            Answ FOr my part I see no such assured ma
                  •
               ke. The blew hand and blew spots (commonly called Gods
tokens, and whereof I yet can heare no Phisitian to giue a reason, and
therefore they leaue them as vnphysicall, although I take it an acquaintance of
mine in the Citie was restored of the second) they seeme to be differenced
from the other, and the first in a speciall maner to put vs in minde of the
Angell smyting. And whereas now of late, many are killed vp (as report goeth)
without having vpon them, either sore or former markes, as if the Lord would
giue vs no signe by reason of passed abuse of signes, it might seeme to
administer an essentiall marke; but seeing that cannot be called an essentiall
differencing  marke, which either holdeth not in all so
smitten, or which falleth out besides in another kind of plague (and contrary
thereto, I haue no assurance) I leaue it with my ignorance: and instead of
exquiring, I reverence before the Lord, crying out, ô the depth of his
iudgments, his wayes are past finding out.
            One defineth the plague to be, A stroke of Divine anger for
the 
                     ••
                  nnes of mankind. So are a
thousand maladies more, and all stripes inflicted on mankind for sinne; and so
the Definition a meere Genus without his Differentia,
vttering what is common to all maladies, but nothing formall to the Pestilence
whereof he disputeth. Such a definition I could frame to the Angels stroke, but
then I should be as iustly derided for it, as he was reported in a leafe or
two, vniustly to impeach my iudgment of the Pestilence, Physico, Physica;
vt Theologo, theologia.
            
            The cause why God hath not revealed to vs a sufficient
Difference, as it may well grow from our sinne, so it teacheth vs in
such estate to vse and reverently to esteeme of, both Phisicall and Spirituall
remedies; least fayling in one, we be iudged for that one; and in neglecting
neither, we may haue a good conscience in both. And from this consideration it
was, that I not only taught and prayed, but also (all the time of Pestilence)
did vse Phisicke my selfe, propounding it also to my family, & som other
acquaintance.1 Tim
                     •
                  . 4 4
                     •
                   5. 
               all
the creatures of God are good, and nothing to be refused, if it be receaved
with thankes-giving; for it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer.
And seeing the Angels stroke doeth leaue behind it, bodies wounded to death
(howsoever that stroke, beget not the like naturally in another; more then the
stroke of God vpon Ananias a
                  •
               d Saphira infected the by-standers and porters, Act. 5.)
yet seeing the Elements in such bodies resolue all into hatefull putrifaction,
it should be (at the least, seeme to others) an Act over presumptious to gaine
say the vse of naturall preservatiue and medicine.
         
         
            Quere. Doth the 91. Psalme propound deliverance from the
Pestilence DEBER, to som sorte of people?
            CHAP. VI.
            Answ. THat it doth at large, as the learned Mollerus thus
writeth vpon the third verse; 

                  Eos qui fide certa in Deum  recūbereut
  tut
                        •
                     s fore à pestis sevitia
  affirmat, the Propher avoucheth that they shalbe safe from the
  Pests cruelty, which rest vpon God with a sure faith. To him take
  another writers testimonie sent out this last Pest-time.T.
 C. on Psalm 91. His words are these: How might God make vs a more
  excellent and fayrer promise, then that he promiseth to deliver from the
  Pestilence, vs that be his Children, and that we need not to be
  afraide thereof, though a thousand dye of the same at our left-side, and ten
  thousand at our right-side; yet shall it not reach vnto vs, If we do but
  beleeue the promise,
                  Chris. on Psalm. 91. and let
  it be our speare and shield. So farre He. Of such a beleever,
Chrisostome thus writeth: 

                  Securus habitat at in terra & prolixam vitam
  inveniet, he shall dwell secure in the earth and finde long life.
Afterwa
                  •
               des He tels how this is
done: totum hoe fit per spem, hope in God bringes all this about.
Other witnesses might easily be produced, but these shall suffice to shew,
that very vnadvised they were, that said, it was Claphams sole fancie,
to conclude any deliverance from the plague, from Psalme 91. though
(being learned) they might from the reverend Tremellius and
Iuniu
                     •
                  
                their notes
thereon, haue reformed their iudgment. Specially if therewith they had
conferred Bezaes argument vpon the 9
                  •
               . Psalme, 
attributing much there to Mollerus, desiring the
                     •
                   also Divines not to take in hand that
  disputation (which ought to be sent to the Scholes of Phisitians) whither the
  Pestilence be contagious or no; but rather to beate into the mindes of men, the
  doctrine which is so necessarie and godly set forth in this
  Psalme.
                So farre He.
            But reading not onlie the promise in Leviticus 26. and
Deut. 28. made to the obedient, so well as crosses and cursses to the
disobedient: and hearing also the Apostle teach Timothie, in 1. Epistle 4.
chap. That godlines is profitable to all things, which hath the promise of
the life present, and of that is to come: and David such an
interpretor of the Law as therewith (so well as Moses) secretly delivering the
spirituall benedictions vnder corporall blessings, and not the one but both:
my adverse-brethren having read all this, I wonder in what other sense they
could read and vnderstand the Psalme. Som new fangled sense it must
needs be. Let any such one now smite his hand on his thighe, and say, what haue
I don?
            If they had read only the vulgare Latine translation, which
(following the Greeke, not the Origenall) doth in Psalm. 91. and 3.
verse, read verbum asperum, a sharpe word, in stead of Noysome
Pestilence▪
                
                and in the 6. verse Negotium
busines, for Pestilence, then they in the ignorance of the Originall,
might haue intended a deliverance from sharpe slaundering tongues, and from
wordly businesses or molestations, As doth thē 
               Papisticall
Iansenius. And yet if they had done so, they had run vpō a doctrine which
they would seeme to avoid, namely a deliverance from temporary evils, &
that from such-ones, as Believers are no more freed from, thē 
               Middeber
hauoth (turned of Frier Felix and approved of Pope Leo
the tenth A Peste pravitatum. l. confrionum▪
               ) from the noysome
Pestilence.Frater Feli
                     •
                   his translation on th
                     •
                  
  Psalme. This chapter then I will finish with Iohn Campensis,
his Paraphrase Englished here and printed Anno Domini 1539. The wordes be
these on Psalme 91. 9. It is not for naught then, that I put my
confidence in the Lord. 
Therefore who so ever thou be that hast vnderstanding, set the
  Lord (whiche is aboue al things) afore thine eyes as
  
                     •
                   most trusty refuge; which if thou
  do, I that write these things dare bee bold to promise thee, that there shal
  never any suddain evill happē to thee, & that ther shall no plague v
                     •
                  xe thine houshold. So far his
  Paraphrasis in the person of David.
               
            
         
         
            Quere. What Faith is it, which the 91. Psalme propoundeth for
apprehending such deliverance?
            CHAP. VII.
            Ans. FIrst I will propound the sortes of Faith. For
though it bee said of the Apostle in the Epistle to the Ephesians and 4.
Chapter, There is one body, one Spirit, one hope, one Lord, one Faith,
he meaneth not that there be no moe sortes in any sence: seeing besides the one
body mysticall of Christ, there is another of Antichrist. Besides that one
Spirit which giveth life to the Church, the aforesaide body, there is
another Spirit, that breatheth in the Synagogue of Satan, & many Spirites
rationall, &c. So, besides that one, hope, which is the Ancker-hold of the
true Church, there is another of the false. And besides that one,
Faith, which apprehends Christ vnto eternal life, there is a
second Faith, termed Historicall, which is that Saint
Iames speakes of, whē he sayeth;Iame
                     •
                  
                  
                     •
                  . 15 
               Thou Believes
(or thou Faithes) that there is one God, thou dost well, The
Devils beleeve, and tremble. Such, Believing the Bibles history to be
true, the wicked haue in commō with the Godly. A third faith, ther is, termed
Miraculous, by reason wonderme
                  •
               tes are thereby effected, whereof the Apostle speaketh in 1. 
 Corin. 13. 2.Beza on 1. Cor. 1.
  13. If I had all faith (that is as Beza well noteth, the whole
of this kinde of faith) so that I could remooue mountaynes, &c.
And this faith also the wicked haue in comon with the Godly. There is another
fatth termed Temporary, whereof the Apostle speaketh in 1. Tim. 4. 1.
when he saith, That in the latter tymes som shall Apostate from the
Faith; that is shall fall away from the Ghospell, sometymes meant by
faith: for from the first faith abouesaid, there is no fallinge away, no more
then from Election. And this kinde of temporary faith is peculiar to som
Reprobate, speaking only of mans-estate since Adams fall. Otherwise in the time
of Innocency, Adam had faith touching the Trinitie, their workes and
goodnes (but not of the Son as a Saviour, for yet was no need, because
no Sinne) from the soundnes of which faith he [écousios]
frankly and freely fell,Hebrues 10 26. Admitting a
right hard conceypt of God, till hee was restored (more miraculouslie then was
Hezekiah) to the same and a more Excellent Faith touching a seede (not
seedes) which should arise from woman, for destroying the workes of Satan.
            Of these 4 sortes of Fayth or Beliefe, the first is of an Eternall
nature, of a grayne or cranell growing in fine to a Tree, having the Roote
grounded in Christ.Eternall or iustifying Faith. But
as the Vine riseth by meane proppes, so this faith ariseth
Gradatim, som and som by temporarie favoures and promises of this
life; as may appeare thorough-out Moses, who by such Shadowes
leades vs to the Substance.
               Temporarie Faith.
In which respect, I approve the distinction of Faith Temporarie, and
faith Eternal; not called Temporarie for that it selfe indureth for a
tyme, so much as for the Obiect, it eyeth and apprehendeth, which is som
temporary promise, and blessing: as also the other Eternall, for the
eternall promises and blessings, it eyeth, apprehendeth, and holdeth. Both of
them meet in the Elect, as two eyes in the soule, to see by, but often times
(as were Leahs eyes) very tender: yea, with the poore man in the
Ghospell, do often behold mē but as Trees: which caused another to cry, I
beleue, Lord, help my vnbelief. In this distinction of Eternall
and Temporary Faith I here rest as fittest to the present purpose, as
also to the meaning of such writers as already I haue vrged, and againe must
vrge.
            My Answer so to the second question is, that both these sortes of
faith are commended and called for in the 91. Psalme. The Temporarie
is propounded in the first sence, & according to the Letter. The
Eternall and Iustifying Faith, in the second sence, and according to 
 the myster
                  •
               e.
The first is the Shell, the second is the Cranell▪
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               having the promise of
both, and both the gift of God, David could teach no otherwise, seeing
Moses gaue him his Text from Levit. 26. and Deut. 28. and can be
construed no otherwise. Our Saviour sends his hearers to Moses for
triall of his wordes and workes; and in Moses they could never be
found, but by seeking a mystery in his Historie; a Spirit in his letter; a
substāce in his shadowe, an eternall blessing cōveyed vnder a Temporarie.
They that teach otherwise, must frame a man of only soule or only body; or
invent a Christ with the Familistes, that hath litle or nothing to do
with the body. When our Saviour sayth,Mark 9. 2
                     •
                  . 
               All things are possible to
him that beleeveth, doth he by All things, meane only the things
of the soule? no, he meaneth also, what so ever may be comfortable to the body.
And in that place the point is cleared, seeing by the Fathers faith, the Child
then became dispossessed of an vncleane Spirit; that bodily good being denied
vpon his state of incredulitie. A cloude of witnesses haue their faith extolled
in Hebrues 11. and for what? specially or at the first
                  •
               hand, for apprehending temporary
deliverances, though sealing vnto them a Greater. 
Hebr▪ 11. 33. &c.
               Daniell so stopped the Lyons mouthes. Ananias, Azari and
Misael did quench the violence of fire: David by faith
escaped the sword; Samson of weake, was made strong, &c.
            But what saith a writer authorised by the Sea of London
hereto? He shall giue in both Demaund and Answere.H.
  Hollāds sp. preserva. 
               I demand (quoth he) whither Gods Ministers, and good people
  now, may not receaue as great mercies and blessings (aswell corporall as
  spirituall) by faith, as the people of the Iewes did, when Christ was
  conversant vpon the earth? We know his knowledge, his love, his mercies are not
  diminished or chaunged; his power and might is the same & more glorified.
  Surely, then, that which letteth the free course of his graces and
  mercies from vs, must be in our selues, Ignorance, hardnes of heart, and great
  Infidelity. So farre He. If now Infidelitie hinder the course of corporeall
blessings; yea, of so great blessings as were vouchsafed to peoples bodyes in
our Saviours time, then necessarily it followeth, that the Lord in 91.
Psalme, & any other such place, doth make such promise. And this
was it, which mooved another last pest
                  •
               tymes to write thus:T. C. o
                     •
                   Psal. 91
                     •
                  
                
               If there he now such a faith as giveth
credence vnto God, be shall preserue him from wicked imaginatio
                     •
                  s and evill sicknesses.
            
            
                Thus Clapham in Nothing, wilbe found
odd, & singular: let the Accusers therefore be abashed, and leaue of their
vnthriving transgression.
         
         
            Quere. Are they then to be held faithles that dye of the
Pestilence?
            CHAP. VIII.
            Answ IT hath bene reported, that Clapham should teach,
that such so dying, had no Faith. Hearke what his wordes be wherevpon such
bruite was raysed. In his said Epistles fourth Section he writes thus:

But seeing the Lord promiseth deliverance from the plague, to
  all such as rest vnder his winges, & walke in his way,
                it may
be asked how comes it to passe,Psal 91. that som
Believers dy of the Pestilēce? The answere then is thus there made: The
Lords promise beeing ever fast to the Beleever (for he is faithfull that hath
promised) There is in Beleevers so dying, waant of faith, for apprehēding this
particular delivrance, this temporarie mercy: though they haue not lacked
faith, for their eternall iustification, and finall salvation, by vertue
whereof their flesh resteth in hope of an happy resurrection, and their spirit
is gone to God that gave it. So farre There. In them wordes is the former
question plainly resolved; namely, One may dy of the Pestilence, having
notwithstanding true faith in Christ, to their eternall Iustification, &
Salvation: but such a one so dying, wanteth that faith, whereby that particular
temporary deliverance might also haue been had. It is not said, that they haue
No Faith (for the contrary is affirmed, namely, that such a one may
haue true Iustifying Faith) but that in such a one, there was A want of
faith, for apprehending this Particular deliverāce, this temporary mercy:
the veritie whereof may appeare, by that which hath been said afore, but here
shalbe vrged further.
            Had such so dying, such faith, for apprehending, that temporary
deliuerance? If they had it, and yet so dyed, it were to make God a deceaver:
for such faith, so well as Iustifying Faith, is the gift of God. I graunt that
such a one, may haue som swimming conceipt, of deliverance, as a Reprobate may
haue, his vnrooted conceipt, of soules salvation) but virtually & truly,
such faith they had not: for God gives not faith, without the thing
faithed.Gen. 17. 1. 
               Walke before me
(saith he) and be thou vpright, I am EL-Shaddi, the strong God,
All-sufficient, 
                  
                     •
                  or Answering thy faith and
obedience. And this was it, which caused our Saviour in the Ghospell
still to say, According to thy faith be it. If God in his
Iustice,Ezek. 14▪ 3▪ &c. do
aunswere the wicked, according to the Idol-inventions in their own heart, even
to the brawning of them, in their witchery superstitions; what mravayle is it,
though the same God in his mercy, do answere his Children, according to his
owne grace, wrought in their hearts, by his owne spirit? But let vs heare, one
speake authorized from the Sea of London.
               H.
  Hollands spir preser. pag. 85. 86.
            
            In Psalme 91. it is thus: The Plague shall not come neere
thee. 
                It may be demaunded (saith he) how this can be true, for that
  we read both in Elder ages, and s
                     •
                  e
  dayly, that the Pestilence, where it is sent, doth not only come neare the
  Godly, but also smites dead, &c. The answer (saith he) is this, that
  either they fayle, in theThis ter
                        •
                      was flouted, and yet not in myne but in Ma. Hollands
 book
                        •
                     
                   
                  Particular
  faith in Gods providence, so much commēded, and Required in this
  Psalme, 91. or they keepe not within the boundes of their callings. So
farre He with authoritie, but in me, it must be a Heresie. He saith such faith
for deliverance, is required in Psalme 91. And many of our Cleargie haue deried
it in me. If faith, for deliuerance from Pestilence, bee not in every
Christian, Required, why is our Church [in the Collect on Trinitie
Sunday] inioyned to pray against All adversitie; as also in the
Letany to pray directly thus: From the Pestilence good Lord
deliuer vs? Al true prayer, is to be made in Faith; (for what is
not of faith, is sinne) and as Saint Iames vrgeth, in chap. 1. 6. to
bee made without wavering, as we would haue assurance, to obtayne our request.
This doctrine so, s
                  •
                is the
doctrine of the Heads of our Church, enioyned vnder the payne of
Excommunication; and may not Clapham teach it without inprisonment? As
also in ferre necessarily therevpon, that in the lacke of such faith, the very
Elect, may iustly perish of the Pestilence? Yea, that the lacke of such sayth,
is cause of any Adversitie inflicted vpon vs? Vnfold this Riddle that can, for
I can not.
            
               Augustine is bold (and the scriptures so teach him) to
impute the correctorie cutting off of Moses his lyfe before he came into the
promised lande,Augustin on psa. 106. to
Titubatio Fides, the stumbling of fayth. And no marvayle that lacke of
such fayth, should put away temporarie favoures, when as it is said of our
Savior (in whom wantes neither Habilitie nor Will) that he
did not many great workes, in his owne coū
               trey
                  •
                
               for their vnbeliefes sake, Math. 13. 58. What
doth all this doctrine tend vnto, but to the humbling of vs in our wantes, who
haue  made our selues vnworthy of, and vnsufficient to
apprehend promise temporarie, so well as that is of an eternall nature; as
also, to the iustifying of God in all his proceedings? The contrary doctrine
causeth man to arrogate to much to him selfe, and to giue vnto God to
little.
            But let vs heare how another Divine writt last Pest time:T. C. on psal. 91. He having said there be two
sortes of death, the one after theNum. 16. 29.
comon course of nature; the other before the time (stumble not at the
latter phrase, for theEccles. 7. 19. scriptures
approve it) of this latter he thus saith: Another way, death may happen to a
man before the tyme, by reason of his great and grievous sinnes, as the Lord
hath threatned by Moses, that If his commaundements be not
kept,
               Psal
                     •
                  
  55. 23. 
               he will cause Pestilence to raigne:
               Luke 13. 5. Whereout it is certayne, that when they be
kept, the Plague bydeth out. 
Likewise saith the Lord in the Commandements, Honor thy
  Father and Mother, &c. out of the which it is certayne, that his
  life, which doth them not, shalbe shortned. Afterwards, the same Writer
  speaking of the promise in the 91. Psalme, he addes thus: Of this vntimely
  Death only speaketh this Psalme, and promiseth the faith full Christian men,
  that they shalbe free from it. For frō the right appointed death, into
  the which we haue consented in Baptisme, we neither can nor shalbe deliuered.
  Wherefore if a vertuous Christian man dy of the plague, it is certainly his
  very houre appointed him of God, which he cannot prevent. But doubtles,
  there dy of it many sinners also beside, which might well live longer if they
  repented. So farre He. From whose wordes the collection is evident,
  namely, that none dy of the plague sent out from God, but vpon their
  disobedience, be they Believers or Sinners. And then every Divine must
graunt, that Error in Fact proceedeth from error in Faith; as
from want of faith exhibited in his threatnings or promises.
            Let this my Iudgement then remayne good by Authoritie from
Scripture, from Writers, and the imposed Obedience of the Church of England,
how so ever poo
                  •
               e I, must therefore
be derided, slaundered, oppressed.
         
         
            
            Quere
                  •
                Haue the
wicked then at any time such a Faith, as whereby they be delivered from the
Pestil
                  •
               nce?
            CHAP. IX.
            Answ. THis d
                  •
               maund
hath his Answere, before in the seaventh Chapter, namely, that the wicked may
bee possessed of any kinde of Faith, saving that which we call the Iustifying
Faith, the Faith whereby the eternall saving promisses are apprehended. 
Ma
                     ••
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                The wicked may cast out Devills, worke miracles, and what
not, that bringes with it onlie som temporarie blessing? but all this not to be
so reioyced in, as to haue the Name writtē in Heavē. Here I could
note (which is not much observed) that Pharaoh. Nech
                     •
                  
                the vncircū
               cised King of Aegypt, was
countenanced of God by faith in a temporarie; what time the godly
Iosiah King of Iudah, was checked by vnexpected death for
not believing, Pharaoh-Necho, though he no Prophet nor Prophets
sonne; nor we heare not by what meanes hee had such skill; but I passe by it:
only let it check all sortes of infidelitie in vs. And because this position is
vniversally graunted of all sortes of Divines (be their Sect what it shall) it
shall not neede heere any discourse.
            In my traduced Epistle and Section 4. I say of
the wicked escaping in middest of strongest Pestilence, First, it is not
because they have any promise, but because it pleaseth God both to them and vs,
to be in many things, many times better then his promise. So I speake of
the wicked in generall for their escape, as also of any promise in scripture,
as vnto them not belonging, that is properly and blessedly. Afterwardes in the
same Section I adde. Secondly, the wicked so escaping are
ordinarily such as haue walked boldly thorough the Sicknes, bragging of their
faith in God, touching deliuerance frō the Pestilence; shewing plainly, that
they had of faith in God for apprehending promise of deliuerance, though they
have not had faith for apprehending things spirituall and eternall. So
far. And herein appeareth, that the conclusion is inferred, not in respect of
all wicked escaping in middest of the pests-heat, but of some certaine wicked,
namely, such as gloried first in their hope and trust, walking thorough it
without feare. Now their speach &  behaviour compared
with the Event (& the 91. psalme propounding a tempo
                  •
               rarie cover, to such as had hope in God) what shall let
(seeing I can iudge but by externalls) that I may not thinke such to haue had
that faith, which apprehendeth that temporarie.
            True it is, that all promises in proprietie and blessedly, are
made to the children of God (whither we respect Christ the sonne of God by
nature, or the sanctified mankind, the sonnes of God by Adoption) but yet it
followeth not, that therefore; God cōmunicateh none of the things so promised
to the wicked. God hath commaunded both sortes of Faith to goe
togither (the one for the good of the body, the other for the soule, and sinne
it is to parte them) but yet, as he is called 
1. Tim
                     •
                  . 4. 10. the Saviour of all men, specially of the
belieuers: so, hee saueth the wicked in somti
                  •
               es of affliction, and vouchsaffeth his temporarie Sunne
and rayne to pleasure and profit them. For there is no grace that can be
seuered from sanctification (as may be seene in Balaam, Saul, Iehu,
Iscariot, &c.) but it may be found with the wicked, be it corporeall
or spirituall.
            If we say; that the Lords disposing of Temporaries, are
Then There, and To whome, he will I answere,

                  •
               uen so is the disposing of
Eternals, Then, There and To whome hee will: for as the wind
bloweth so the Spirit worketh at his pleasure, as our Sauiour teacheth
the vnlearned Rabbin Nichodemus in Saint Iohus 3. chapter. How soeuer
then my Adversaries wish it. This their wind shakes no Hauour.
            
         
         
            Quere. Is it lawfull for Inhabitants to fly the place of their
Habitation, during such time, as the Pestilence there raignet
                  •
               ?
            CHAP. X.
            Answ. SOm look that I should say yea, such as haue at such times
giuen them selues voluntarily to Flight. But would they haue me graunt
that
                  •
                
               Absurdum Pecus pecc
                     •
                  tor, There is no beast to the
sinner. Graunt that liberty and then (to the exposing of all, to
Rogues-ruine, housses, townes, cities, and at this time, the greatest
parte of this kingdom) must be dispeopled and left as cursed Ierush
                     ••
                  
                  lem, desolate. Consider then the
Absurditie of that concession. No common wealths
                  •
                man will euer graunt that; nor any desire it, that be
not madde.
            
                May none then departe? To hold That (it may
be) would prooue an Errour of the right hand, as the other of the left.
Salomon forbids vs to beEccle. 7. 18,
  19. 
               ouer-iust & ouer-wise; so well as ouer-wicked
& ouer-foolish. Least I should seeme partiall, let vs heare som
others speake. And first to aunticnt Eusebius, who handled the
Churches historie 13. hundred yeares since. Hee giues vs an Epistle,
written by Dionisius the Episcop of Alexandria in
Aegipt,Merideth Hanmers translat. of Euseb & in chap 22
  after
                     •
                  Y Greke. running
thus, as a Doctor of our owne hath turned the Greek. 
Many of our Brethren (saith Dionisius) by, reason of
  their great loue and brotherly charitie, spared not them selues, cleaued one to
  another, visited the sicke, without wearines or head-taking, attended vpon them
  diligently cured them in Christ which cost them their liues; and being full of
  other mens maladies, tooke the infection of their neighbours; translated (of
  their own accord) the sorowes of others vpon them selues, cured and confirmed
  other sick persons, and dyed most willingly themselues, fulfilling in deed the
  common saying, only friendship is always to beretained: and departing
  this life, they seemed the of-scourings of others. In this sorte, the best of
  our Bretheren departed this life (whereof som were Ministers and som
  Deacons) in great reuerence among the common people: so that this kind
  of death, for the Piety & strength of Faith, may seeme to
  differ nothing from Martyrdome. for they tooke the dead bodyes of the
  Saintes, whose brestes, and hands, and faces layd vpwardes, and closed their
  eyes, shut their mouthes, and ioyntly with one accord, being like affectioned,
  Embraced them, washed them, & prepared their Funeralls.
  In a little while after, they enioyed the like them selues. For that the living
  continually traced the steppes of the dead. But among the Heathen, all fell out
  the contrarie. For scarse had the Pestilence taken place amongest them, but
  they contraried them selues, and fledde from their most friendly and dearest
  friendes. They threw them halfe dead into the streetes; the dead they left
  vnburied, to be devoured of dogges; to the end they might avoyde the partaking
  and felowship of death; which for all that they could devise, They could
  not escape.
                So farre Eusebius.
            
            From this recorde of Eusebi
                     ••
                  , besides other thinges, I wish these pointes to be observed:
First, it was helde piety, a worke of faith, charitie, glorious as
Martyrdome, to stand by it, doing service one to another, even to the
death and buriall. Secondly, that the persons  so
holily imployde, were Ministers, Deacons and others. As for the
Heathen set in an Antithesis; First, they fly one from another, euen
from their dearest friends, exposing the dead to prophane violation.
Secondly, for all their flying so, Gods hande did overtake them: Such
being the iudgment and practise of the Church in them purer tymes: and such was
the behaviour of the Heathen; iudge nowe, who last pest-tyme walked as the
Christians, and who as the Heathen.
            But let vs heare some what out of a Sermon printed last
pest-time. His wordes are these:T. C.
  
                     〈◊〉
                   Psal
                     •
                   91. 
               Vnwisely, and vnchristianly they doe, that out of inordinate
  feare of this plague, leaue their calling and office, malitiously withdrawing
  the loue, helpe, & faithfulnes, which they out of Gods Commaundement, are
  bound to shew vnto their neighbours; and so do sinne greevously against the
  Commaundement of God. For certainly they do but stirre vp the wrath of God more
  earnestly against them selues, that he may the sooner take holde vppon them,
  and pluck them away with this plague. For men may heare on every side, that som
  do shunne and fly, not only the sicke, but also the whole. Yea, that which is
  more foolishnes, even the platters and Candlestickes which
  came out of straunge houses, as though death did surely sticke therein. And out
  of such fo
                     •
                  de childish feare it
  cometh, that not only som sick persons be suffered to dy without any keeping,
  help and comfort; but that Women also great with childe, are forsaken
  in their most neede; for at such tymes, few or none will come vnto them. Yea, a
  man may heare also, that the Children forsake their Fathers, & Mothers;
  and one houshold body keepeth him selfe from another, and sheweth no loue vnto
  him; whiche nevertheles he would be glad to be shewed vnto him selfe, if he
  lay in like necessitie. 
               So farre He. Vnto the trueth of whose
complainte, the very Poets them selues haue subscribed, in variable Pamphlets
published amongst vs at this day.
            To these let me adde a Doctor of Physicke his testimonie; printed
after the former:Doctor Her. Epist. before his Def.
  printed 1604. 
               It remayneth (saith he) that acknowledging the Pestes
  contagion, we notwithstanding (who are Christians) carefully avoyd that
  Faithles and Paganish fearefulnes, whereby wee are made to
  breake all the bondes of Religion, Consanguinitie, aliance, Friendship, and
  Policie: the Husbande forsaking and abandoning his  deare Wife; The Parentes their Children: to sincke, or swimme; the
  Pastor exposing his flocke to euery devouring Wolfe; and the Magistrate his
  people vnder his charge, to all confusion and disorder. We are apt to rushe
  into extremities. This were Incidere in Scillam, whilst we would
  vitare charibdim, to avoyd one evill, and commit as great or greater.
  He is to be reputed a grounded & discreet Christian, who as he
  will not rush rashly into every infected and visited house, without iust
  cause, warrant or calling; so, when he is called, or tyed by any bonde of
  Pietie, nature, or Policy, he will not forsake his Station, or detract
  and fore
                     •
                   slow any dutie or office;
  though the performance thereof be with Evident danger of health, goods, or
  lyfe it selfe.
                So farre He.
            What haue I taught more in this matter, that I must bee made A
Gazing-stocke to Angells and men? Looke into the last Section of
my traduced Epistle, and if (eyther by exhorting to dutie, or
dehorting from breach of datie) I haue said more (yea, but so much) then
Lett man haue no mercy on me. From the Lords loue and lenitie, I there
exhort to coniunct and mutuall humiliation; in checking some others for
abusing the scripture in Levitic. 13. touching Leprosie, for
vpholding their Irregular Flight: and if an Authori
                  •
               ed Divine may not doe this, Actum
erit 
                     •
                   Ministerio, our
Ministerie will bee of small reckoning.
            For my doctrine there of the Leprosie, I leaue it to be tryed by
Gods worde, for already it is vnder the tryall of the Bishops sworde. Only
heere thus much.
            1. The Leper was not put off;Leuit. 13.
till his disease were throughly seene, tryed and censured. But our sicknes are
shaken off without tryall: & often tymes vpon false suppositiôn.
            2. The Priest then was tyed by dutie, to take such tryall. But the
Priest ordinarily with vs, is of the rest, furthest from that; shaking off not
only the sicke, but the sound also.
            3. The Priest and people got the Leper conveyed to some place
apart, providing sufficiently for him, that so his lothsom body might 
 bring no grievance to the Congregation. But the most of
our Priestes and people haue beene so farre from convaying forth the sick so
provided; as they rather haue put out them selues, providing for themselues,
and leaving the sick behinde them.
            4. The Leprous house and garment came also vnder the Priestes
tryall and censure: will our Priestes do the like? I will hardly beleeue it,
till I see it.
            5. The Leprous garmentes were to be burnt, and the houses pulled
downe: will they deale so with pestilenced houses and garmentes? Then downe
with all England. Haue I not (these circumstances remembred) had iust cause to
complayne of abuse committed against the Ceremoniall law of Leprosie? Sub
Iudice lis sit, Let the Church of God all abroad iudge it.
            As for any Rules of Politicall decency, or safetie to be
drawen frō Levit. 13. or any other scripture, nether haue I (nor I think any
scholler) ever excepted against. And as farre from my thought it was
Contemptuously herein to oppose vnto the doctrine of Leprosie
published in the booke of Orders for the Wednesdayes Fast: besides
that my said Epistle was published before that book, som dayes, if not weeks,
at least in my iudgement (as they haue vnder my hand and oth) nor could I euer
from Pawles Church-yard, or otherwise learne the contrarie. But inough of that
Parenthesis.
            
            When men be vnwilling Tolay downe their liues for their
Brethren, to giue their liues for their flocke; to preferre bodies to soules,
& eternall life to temporarie, what Law of God & man will bind
them? What evasions will not be devised? And what transgression will not of
such be iustified; euen somtymes to the harming of such, as haue beene
conscionable obseruers of the Law? This chapter then I will finish with other
mens wordes.Doct. He
                     •
                  . in his rules, pag. 4. * One saith
thus: Let not Gentlemen and rich Citizens by flying (vnlesse they fly
likewise frō their sinnes) thinke to escape scot-free. Another writes
thus:
               T. Con Psal. 91. It is a great shame
for a Christian man to be afrayde of the plague of pestilence, as to fly from
them that he is bound to serue by Gods commaundement. Another writes
thus:
               Wil. Cup. per on 2 Sa. 24. pa
                     •
                   368. They that fly for meare
feare, ought to acknowledge their want of faith, and to bewayle it, as those
that consider neither  of them selues, nor of the hand of
God that stricketh; perswading them selues, that staying is the only daunger,
and that flyinge is the only meane to escape. Such men do as litle Children,
that flye from the Fathers Rodde, and so make him more angrie. Againe
another writes so: They must summon them selues vnto the iudgement
feate of God,H. Hollād
                     •
                   pr. preser. pag. 173. and looke on the plague, as on the
messenger of Gods wrath, which can not be avoyded with change of place, but by
repentance and amendment of life. So farre they.
            From such authorised sentences, let the Reader collect, that
howso ever all departure be not gayn-sayed, yet no such departure is
graū
               ted, as whereby Relatiue duties be omitted and cast aside, or
Barbanitie may ensue: for the least (euill may not be done, to the
ende that good may come thereby) for to such (saith the Apostle)Rom. 3. 
                     •
                  . 
               Damnation is iust.
               Act;
  15. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                From the beginning
of the world God knoweth all his workes: and therefore neither needeth nor
craueth, nor alloweth, the helpe of our false finger. Let vs striue in all
estates to be helpefull one to another, and blessed is that servant, who when
his maister Christ cometh, is found so doing. Dixi.
            
         
      
      
         
            Epilogue.
            EQuall is that Pentameter, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Euery forced
busines, is grievous. Almost a yeare is passed, at the penning hereof. So
long forbearance, was much and onerous; specially in so even a cause. If my
Aduersaries scorpions, haue by lashing enforced this Cry, and thou thereby
bettered, Deo gratias, giue God the prayse, who out of a flint can
fetch fier; and of stones, rayse vp children to Abraham. Meane tyme, be
assured, it had beene more ease for me, not to haue beene so vrged. But though
I were slaine, I must (with Iob) hold fast myne innocencie.
            
                Innocency; By how much the more it is
innoeencie, by so much the more I should (by silence) haue borne false witnes
against God, his Church, and myne owne soule. But if it bee remembred, what
horride reportes, were scattered abroad of me, both touching Fact, and
matter of Faith, notwithstanding all orderly suites, and
protestations, subscriptorie, and iuramentall; yea, against the tendering
Royal purpose, of our Soueraigne: to the possessing of Magistrates eares with
vntruthes, to the perverting of Ministers, and people; for bending all against
me, and so the sword of Gods holy Angell (Never raged
  this sick nes so mightily and vniversally in England, as now it doth
yet vn-sheathed) gainst all; damming vp the course of my Ministerie, cutting of
my bodies liberty; propounding my life to daunger; breaking the heart of my
family, consumed the substance I had paynefully earned: to the gladding of
fooes, sadding of friends, procuring murmurations, &c. and al for praying,
preaching, visiting, and gooddoing, to all sortes, pestilenced: when almost
none els would; if all this be layd to heart, am I Iron, that I should not
feele; or am I lead, that I should not sound? Nay is it reasonable (though I
bee therefore cōmitted close prisoner, yea, should dy the death) but I should
speak, and write, for clearing of myne innocencie?
            Wherein I haue fayled (and who is it, that in nothing sinneth not)
thou that art stronger, helpe to sustayne me: at least, simpathize so my
estate, as I may be helped, by thy feeling and harty prayers. And so with
reference of my cause to the iudgement of God, his Church in England, Scotland,
France, Ireland, and wheresoeuer, I end. This 18. of September, 1604.
            
               The Lord most vnworthy HENOCH
  CLAPHAM.
            
         
         
            
            A Letter to a friend.
            YOu desire to heare by what Law, I was committed, and so am still
continued in prison? I protest, in the presence of God, I know not, by what
Law, all this is done, There is a Law, that toucheth som, concerning iudgement
and doctrine of the Pestilence. It is layd downe in the booke called the
Queenes Orders for the Pestilence: I speake of our late sweet
Soveraigne, now gone vnto God. The same booke since (as I take it) was
published last pest-tyme, in his Maiesties name, and this is it
verbatim.
            
             
               
                  Order 16. Item if there be any person, Ecclesiasticall or
Lay, that should hold, and publish any opinions, (as in som places report is
made) that it is a vayne thing, to forbeare, to resorte to the infected: or
that it is not charitable, to forbid the same; pretending that no person shall
dy, but at their time prefixed, such persons shall not only be reprehended, but
by order of the Bishop, (If they bee Ecclesiasticall,) shalbe forbidden to
preach: and being Lay, shalbe also enioyned to forbeare, to vtter such
daungerous opinions, vpon payne of imprisonment; which shalbe executed, if
they shall perseuere in that errour. And yet it shall appeare manifestly, by
these Orders, that according to Christian charitie, no persons of the meanest
degree, shalbe left without succour and relief.
            
            Admitt now, I had bene coulpable, of such doctrine: my punishment
should not haue bene imprisonment, but som inhibition, 
               to preach. But, as may appeare, by all my writings, I am cleared from
all such imputation: and so no Law (that yet I can heare of) in this matter,
violated of me. His Maiestie commaunded, I should be proceeded withall; By
the Law, intending, that there was a Law to cleare me, or condemne me:
and yet (as you heare) I am kept still in bondes, only vpon my L. of London
commaund, (not vpon any Law Civill, or Ecclesiasticall, once spoken of) others
of the Hy-Commission vnited with him therein, who (I suppose) dare
not, easilie, be in any thing, vnto him, repugnant: and he having imprisoned
me, before he truely vnderstood the cause, doeth thus goe about to make good
his imprisonmēt, by wincking at the truth of the cause, seeming to plague me
for the contrary.
            This may suffice, for your question; wherewith I end, desiring
Your harty prayers vnto God, for my good: To whose saving mercies also, I
referre you and your Studies.
            
               Yours HE. CL.
            
         
         
            
            Another Letter.
            BEloued; I haue maruailed, what may be the cause of your walking
thus those. If because of my daily repaire vnto the Lords visited people, som
moneths since you fear to com near me, you must vnderstand, that I haue bene
ayred in prison these ten moneths. But in your iudgement (it may be) a man may
travatle of the plague, beyond a womans 4
                  •
                weekes. In deed the old womans fable is, that the plague will lye 7
years in a mouse hole, and then come out. That Aphorisme (it is like)
was cause (as hath eftsoones bene reported) that a neare preacher, newly
beneficed, did plaister the walles faire, tempering the morter with vinger,
[In Amo
                     •
                  di
  Villanovani exegefi super Schol. Sale
                     •
                  n. 
                     •
                  . 4
                     •
                  , 
               Eamque ob rem, Medici
peste grassante, cum in cibo, tum in potu, acc
                     •
                  ivsum mirificè commendant] but for all that, his hourse
was scarfe fimished, before he with plentie of Gods tokens vpon him, so well as
his predecessour, was buried.
            But if I may coniecture by your pulse, you feare to bee knowen my
friend, whil
                  •
                I am in bonds. An
vngodly feare, to bee ashamed of well doing. Such irregular walking, may cause
me to call in question, whether ever you were a true friend, seeing one of
Gods Canons runns thus:Prover.
  
                     〈◊〉
                   17. 
               A friend loueth
at all times, and a brother is borne for adversite. Besides, that such
keeping aloof (worse then that of Nicodemus, for he came by night) it
weakens Neophyts, and str
                  •
               ngthens
the hands of the adversarie. Would you, in like case, be so walked with? Do
as you would be done to.
            
            In the beginning, you kept of, for som such cause, but now you are
impeded about Episcopall Canons, concluded by the Province of
Canterburie: for though Yorkes prouince be by Proclamation,
enioyned to vndergoe the sameCanon
  
                     •
                   the Greeke: Rule is the
  English. 
               Rules, yet (I vnderstand not) that that Provinces
voyce was called for; and so vsed, as to the making of that Coū.

                  •
               ell Nationall, and one of
the Canons, concludeth (as I remēber) that

                  〈◊〉
                be the voyce of the Church of
England, which hath bene vttered in 
               
                  •
                Councell Nationall, not
Provintiall. E
                  •
               en as the
Parliament 
                  〈◊〉
                Nationall, for that
euery part of the Nation, hath his Speaker in it.
            If that be your Case, God and the King helpe you, for I
can not. I am here for another gates testimonie, almost for sakē of you all as
Singular: but if you would have first vnderstood me, and secondly
your selues; all that I did, was but a bringing of that doctrine, into distinct
methode, which (for the most part) was taught over-confusedly. In so much as
sundry that heard you teach two tymes, vpon that argument, could not conceaue,
but that in the second Sermon, you were opposite to the first.
            If you had bene more comfortable to others, in their affliction,
then doubtles you should not be so long destitute of comfort in any your
afflictions, for faithfull is he that saith, The mercifull shall finde
mercy. Make vpright steppes to your feet, and feare not an happy issue out
of all tentations. And so with my hearty prayers to God for your good, I leaue
you to his guidance, that neuer for sakes the faithfull.
            
               Your friend He. Cl.
            
         
         
            Courteous Reader let me craue in kindnes, That what faultes thou
findest, may not bee imputed to the Authour: but meere ignorance and oversight
in th
                  •
                Publisher.
            Fare well.
            
                Pere Re
                     •
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The Publisher and his Friend.
            
               Question.
            
            Is the Plague infectious, or no?
            
               Answer.
            
            That is intricate, more then I know. 
            
               To satisfie som-thing, I will not gr
                     •
                  dge,
               With some experimentes, then be thou iudg
                     •
                  .
            
            
               I.
               A sucking childe, suckt his mothers breast,
               Hauing a filter, 2. or 3. yeares elder at the least,
               The mother absented, the eldest out of thrall,
               Not car
                     •
                  ing for the
  yongest, any thing at all:
               The yongest liued, and survived,
               The eldest with the mother greeved and died.
            
            
               II.
               A man being marked with Gods tokens,
               Looking euery hour, when his heart would be broke
                     •
                  
               
               Hauing one child, loth to leaue behind him,
               Layed it 3. dayes and 3. nights in bed by him:
               The Father dyed, the child survived,
               And hath euer since prospered and thriued.
            
            
               III.
               A plague fore, within a spanne of a womans dugge,
               Whereat the little child, night and day did lugge,
               Som fortnight sick and sore, shee was all that while,
               The child in midst of mothers grief, at her did smile
               The mothers sore made whole, & so she mended,
               The child since neuer sick, nor with grief offended.
               Now my friend, if not my fo,
               Tell me, is the plague infectious, or no?
            
            
               Qu. Is there any place in the Scripture, that vrgeth men
to bee fo
                  •
               
               ward in perfection, and
striving to be perfect:
            
               Answer. Yes: Ye shall therfore be perfect, as your Father
which is in heauen is perfect, Mat. 5. 48. Also the great commandement doth
say: Loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, & with all thy soule,
and with all thy minde, and with all thy strength. This is the first and the
great commandement. And the second is like vnto this: Thou shalt loue thy
neighbour as thy selfe.
            
            
                On these two commandements hangeth the whole Law and
the Prophetes.
            The whole Scripture is giuen by inspiration of God, and is
profitatable to teach, to improue, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousnes: That the Man of God may be absolute, being made perfect vnto
all good workes, 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17.
            This is a straight gate, yet we are commaunded to striue to enter
in at the straite gate, Luke 13. 24.
            Now he that despiseth the Teacher & vrger of this Doctrine,
despiseth the Authour of the doctrine even Christ him selfe.
            Although no man can be perfect in this life, yet it is no reason
that the mouth of the Oxe should be moozled, for treadinge out the corne before
them: and telling men what they ought to bee, althogh he knoweth, that none
can be perfect in this life, no more then a Cammell can goe through the eye of
a needle, and though this be vnpossible to man, yet nothing is vnpossible to
God.
            
               When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren.
            
            The God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Iesus
the great shepheard of the sheepe▪ through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make you perfect in all good workes, to do his will, working in you
that which is pleasant in his sight, through Iesus Christ, to whom be praise
for euer. AMEN.
            
               P. R.
            
            
         
      
   