
      
         
            
            
            
            
            THE
HISTORIE OF
Great Britannie
            
            Declaring the successe of times and
affaires in that Iland, from the Romans
first entrance, vntill the raigne of EGBERT,
the West-Saxon Prince; who reduced the severall
Principalities of the Saxons and English,
into a Monarchie, and changed the
name of Britannie into
England.
            
            AT LONDON,
Printed by Valentine Simmes.
1606.
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        The Race and Succession of the Roman Emperors from Iulius Caesar to Domitius Nero.
                        
                        Sextus Caesar.
                        1 Iulius Caesar
Dict. Perp.
3. yeares.
                        Accius
Balbus
                        Iulia.
                        C: Octa:
Presid: of
Maced:
                        Accia
                        
                           Scribonia,
the sister of L:
Scribonius Libo:
the first wife
of Aug:
                        
                        2 Oct: Augustus
Emperour
56.
yeares.
                        Livia,
the relict of
Nero (father of
Tiberius) the 2
wife of Aug
                        
                           Iulia, the
wife of Vipsanius
Agrippa.
                        
                        3
Tiberius
Nero, Emperour
23.
yeares.
                        Drusus
                        Agrippina.
                        Germanicus.
                        5
Claudius
Nero, Emp:
13. years and
9. months.
                        Valeria
Messalian.
                        4
C: Ca
                                 •
                              igula
Emperour 3.
yeares and 10
months.
                        Agrippina,
the wife of
Dom: Nero.
                        6 Nero,
Emperor 14
yeares.
                        Britannicus.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧Lieutenants in Britannie vnder
the first five Emperors of
Rome.
            During the severall raignes of Iulius Caesar, Augustus,
Tiberius, and Caius, the Romans had no setled forme
of government in any part of the Ile.
            
               Lievtenants vnder Claudius
the Emperor.
               Aulus Plautius, (the first Lieutenant in Britannie.)
               Ostorius Scapula.
               Didius Gallus Auitus.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧The Princes, and men of speciall
note among the Britans.
            
               
                  
                     In the time of Iulius
Caesar.
                     
                     Cassibelin Prince of the Trinobantes.

                           Pettie Rulers in Kent.
                           Cingetorix.
                           Carvilius.
                           Taximagulus.
                           Segonax.
                        
                     
                     Mandubratius the Traitor, whose father
Imanentins preceeded Cassibelin
in the government of the Trinobantes.
                  
               
               Cuno-belin, Prince of the Trinobantes, in the time of Augustus
               
                  
                     Sonnes of Cunobelin, in the time of Caius.
                     Admimus
                     Cataracacus.
                  
               
               Togodumnus, a sonne of Cuno-belin, in the time of Aul.
               Plautius government, vnder Claudius the Emperor.
               
               
                  
                     
                        In the time of Ostorius Scapulaes
government vnder
Claudius the Emperor.
                     
                     Cogidunus (aduanced by
the Romans)
                     Caractacus, the renowmed
Prince of the Silures.
                     Cartismandua, Princesse
of the Brigantes.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            THese two Parts of the Historie, may seeme not improperly to
beare the name of Great Britannie, in that (for the most part)
they containe certaine generall reports of the affaires of the whole
Iland, which was afterwards divided into the two Kingdomes of
England and Scotland: Howbeit in the Second Part, the accidents
and occurrents in the state of Scotland, (then called North-Britannie)
are either purposely omitted, or touched very briefely,
both to avoide confusion, by entermingling them with the imperfect
relations of the dismembred governments of the Saxons and English,
in the South parts of the Ile: and also (for that England and
Scotland, having bin (many hundred yeares) two distinct Monarchies,
and that of Scotland the more antient) it may be thought,
perhaps, most meete, that there should be severall Histories of the
English and Scottish Nation, from the first erection of either Kingdome,
vntill the vnion of them both: (the title of Britannie in the
meane time remaining indifferent, as well to the one, as to the other.)
         
         
            
            The first Part is divided into
three Bookes.
            
               The first Booke.
               Declaring the state of Britannie vnder the Romans,
from Iulius Caesar, his first entrance into the Ile, vntill
the death of Claudius the Emperor; in whose time, the
East part of the Ile was subdued, and brought into the
forme of a Province.
            
            
               The second Booke.
               Declaring the state of Britannie vnder the Romans,
from the death of Claudius the Emperour, vntill the
raigne of Domitian; in whose time, the vtmost limits of
the Ile were discovered, and the greatest part thereof
reduced into a setled Provinciall government.
            
            
               The third Booke.
               Declaring the state of Britannie vnder the Romans,
from the death of Domitian the Emperour, vntill the
raigne of Honorius; in whose time the Ile of Britannie
was abandoned by the Romans, and the inhabitants
thereof left wholly to their owne government.
            
         
         
            
            The second Part is divided into
two Bookes.
            
               The first Booke.
               Declaring the state of affaires in Britannie after the
Romans had given over the government there, vntill
such time as the Saxons and English obteined it.
            
            
               The second Booke.
               Containing an Epitome, or a short (imperfect) relation
of the chiefe occurrents in everie one of the seven
Principalities of the Saxons, and English, vntill Egbert
the West-Saxon Prince reduced them into a Monarchie.
               The beginning of the Raigne of Egbert the first
English Monarch.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
FIRST PART OF
the Historie of Great
Britannie.
            
               The first Booke.

                     C. IVL. CAESAR DICT. PERP.
                     portrait  of Julius Caesar
                  
               
               
                  The first CHAPTER.
                  
                     The Originall of the Britans. C. Iulius Caesar making
warre in Gallia, intendeth a voyage into Britannie.
C. Volusenus is sent to discover the Sea Coasts of the
Ile. The Nature, and customes of the Britans.
                  
                  
                     IT is recorded by the most true, and
antient of al Histories, that the Iles of
the Gentiles, and north partes of the
world, were first divided and inhabited,
by the posteritie of Iaphet; from
whose eldest sonne called Goneer, the
Cimbrians (as Writers report) deriv'd
their name and discent, imparting the same to the Gauls
and Germans, and consequently to the Inhabitants of
this Ile, as being originally discended from the Gauls,
that came over hither at the first, either vpon a naturall

desire (which men commonly have to discover places
vnknowne, or to avoid the assaults of other Nations encroching
vpon them; or happly to disburden their native
soil, by seeking new habitations abroad. And this opinion
of the Britans first comming out of G
                           •
                        llia, seemes
the more probable, in regard both of the situation of
this Iland, in neernesse to that continent, and also of the
vniformitie of language, religion and policy, betweene
the most ancient Gauls, and Britans.
                  
                  Touching the name of Britannie, with the Gouernors
and state thereof before the Romans arrivall, as they are
things not to have been neglected, if any certain knowledge
of them had been left vs, by approved testimonies
of former ages: so I thinke it not now requisite, either
to recite the different conjectures of other men, or of
my self, constantly to affirme any thing concerning the
same; aswell for that those matters have been alreadie
handled at large by our modern Writers, as also for that
I suppose, in ayming at such antique Originals (there
being but one truth amidst many errors) a man may
much more easily shoote wide, then hit the marke. I
purpose therefore (omitting Etymologies of words, and
varietie of opinions concerning the first inhabitants and
their doings) to take the name and affaires of this Ile, in
such sort, as they were first known to the Romans, in the
time of Iulius Caesar, when the Roman state, (which had
tried all kinds of government, as namely that of Kings,
then of Consuls, Tribunes, & Decemvirs) began to be vsurped
by a few, & soone after submitted it self to one. For
about the foure and fiftieth yeare before the birth of
our Saviour Christ, Caesar being then governor of Gallia
for the Senat and people of Rome, and having brought
some part of that Countrey vnder obedience, intended
a voyage with an armie into Britannie, partly, vpon pretence

of revenge (for that the Britans had diuers times
ayded the Gauls in their warres against the Romans) and
partly, to satisfie himselfe with sight of the Iland, and
knowledge of the Inhabitants, and their customs; wherto
he might perhaps be the more readily induced, by
reason of his owne naturall inclination to vndertake
great and difficult attempts, and with the increase of his
owne glorie, to inlarge the limits of the Roman Empire,
vnto which at that time the soveraigntie of the whole
world was, by divine providence, allotted. And to this
end he thought good to be first informed of the nature
of the people, and of such havens in the Ile, as were most
commodious to receive any shipping, that should come
thither; whch things were in a maner vnknowne to the
Gauls, by reason the Ilanders suffred none to haue accesse
to them, but marchants onely; neither knew, even
they, any other places, then the sea coasts, & those parts
of the Ile, that confronted the continent of Gallia. Whervpon,
Caesar supposing it necessarie to make some discoverie,
before he adventured himselfe in the action, sent
Caius Volusenus in a long Boat, with instructions to inquire
of the quantitie of the Iland, of the conditions of
the Inhabitants, of their maner of making war, of their
government in peace, & what places were fittest for landing.
After which dispatch made, himselfe with all his
forces (which were newly returned from making warre
beyond the Rhene) marched into the Countrey of the
The ancient inhabitants of the Counties of Guines and Bolonois in Picardie.
                     Morini, from whence was the shortest cut into Britannie:
for there he had appointed his shipping to meete
him.
                  In the meane time, his purpose being known to the
Britans, by report of the Merchants (that traded with
them,) divers States of the Ile, (either fearing the greatnesse
of the Roman power, or affecting innovation for

some private respects) sent over Ambassadors, who promised,
in their names, to deliver hostages, for assurance
of their obedience to the people of Rome: But Caesar,
though he was fully resolved to enter the Iland, yet
curteously entertained their offer, exhorting them to
continue in that good mind, as a meane to draw on the
rest, in following the example of their submission. For
the better effecting whereof, he appointed Comius the
chiefe Governour of theThe people of Artois. 
                     Atrebates (as a man, whose
wisdom and faith he had tryed, and whom he knew to
be respected of the Britans) to accompanie the Ambassadors
in their returne, giving him in charge to go to as
many Cities, as would permit him accesse; and to perswade
the Rulers to submit themselves, as some of their
Nation had alreadie done: and further, to let them
know, that himselfe with all convenient speed, would
come thither.
                  The Princes of the Ile, being as yet vnacquainted
with any civill kinds of government, maintained quarrels
and factions amongst themselves, whereby, while
one sought to offend another, and to enlarge his owne
part, by encroching vpon his neighbours (not observing,
that what they gained in particular one of another,
they lost all togither in the generall reckoning)
they made an open passage in the end, for the Romans to
conquer the whole, (a thing common to them with other
Nations, who have found the like effects to proceed
from the like causes.) For, the most part of the
Britans, in those daies, delighted in warre, neglecting
husbandrie, or perhaps not then knowing the vse of it.
Their manner of living, and customes, were much like
to those of the inhabitants of Gallia. Their dyet was
such as Nature yeelded of her selfe, without the industrie
of man: for though they had great store of cattell,

yet they lived (especially in the in-land Countries) with
milke. It was held among them, as a thing vnlawfull,
to eate of a hare, a hen, or a goose, and yet they nourished
them all for recreations sake. Their apparrell was
made of the skinnes of beasts, though their bodies were
(for the most part) naked and stained with woad, which
gave them a blewish colour, and (as they supposed)
made their aspect terrible to their enemies in battaile.
Their houses were compact of stakes, reeds, and boughs
of trees, fastned together in a round circle. They had
ten or twelve wives apeece common among them,
though the issue were alwayes accounted his, that first
married the mother, being a mayden. They were, in stature,
taller than the Gauls, in wit, more simple, as being
lesse civill.
                  By this time, Volusenus, (who durst not set foot on
land to hazard himself amongst the barbarous Ilanders)
returned to Caesar, (namely, the fift day after his setting
forth) and made relation of such things as he had seen,
and heard, by report, in roving vp and downe the coast
in view of the Iland.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     Caesar sayleth towards Britannie. The Britans empeach
his Landing. The great courage of Cassius
Scoeva, one of Caesars souldiers.
                  
                  Caesar having composed some tumults in the hither
part of Gallia, that he might leave no enemy behind
his back to annoy him in his absence, pursued the enterprise
of Britannie, having, to that end, prepared a Navie,
which consisted of about foure score ships of burden (a
number sufficient, as he thought, for the transportation

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
of two Legions) besides his long boats, wherein the Quaestor,
the Lievtenants, and other officers of the Camp
were to be imbarqued. There were also eighteen ships
of burden (that lay wind-bound about eight miles from
the Port) appoynted to waft over the horsemen. P. Sulpitius
Rufus, a Lievtenant of a Legion, was commanded
to keep the haven it selfe with such power, as was
thought sufficient. These things being thus ordered,
and a good part of the summer now spent, Caesar put
out to sea about the third watch of the night, having
given direction, that the horsemen should embarke in
the vpper haven, and follow him; wherein, while they
weresomewhat slack, Caesar with his shipping, about the
fourth houre of the day, arrived vpon the coast of Britannie,
where he beheld the Cliffs possessed with a multitude
of barbarous people, rudely armed, and ready to
make resistance.
                  The nature of the place was such, as by reason of the
steepe hills (enclosing the sea on each side in a narrow
strait) it gave great advantage to the Britans, in casting
downe their darts vpon their enemies vnderneth them.
Caesar finding this place vnfit for landing his forces, put
off from the shore, and cast anchor, expecting the rest of
his Fleet; and in the meane time, calling a counsell of
the Lievtenants, and Tribuns of the souldiers, he declar'd
vnto them, what he had vnderstood by Volusenus, and
directed what he would have done; warning them, that
(as the state of the warre, and specially the sea-service required)
they would be ready to weigh anchor, and to
remove, to, and fro (vpon occasions) at a beck, and in an
instant.
                  This done, having advantage both of wind, and tide,
he set forward with his Navy, about foure Leagues from
that place, and then lay at anchor in view of the open,

and plain shore. But the Ilanders, vpon intelligence of
the Romans purpose, had sent thither (before Caesars comming)
a company of horsemen and chariots called Esseda,
(which they then vsed in their warres) and following
afterwards with the rest of their forces, empeached
their enemies from landing, whoseships, by reason of
their huge bulks, (drawing much water) could not
come neer to the shore: so as the Roman souldiers were
thereby enforcedin places vnknown (their bodies being
charged with their armour) to leap into the water,
and encounter the Britans, who assayled them nimbly
with their darts, and drave their horses and chariots,
with main force vpon them: The Romans being therewith
terrifyed, as men vnacquainted with that kind of
fight, fayled much of the wonted courage, which they
had shewed in their former land-services; and Caesar perceiving
it, caused the long boats (which seemed more
strange to the barbarous people, and were more serviceable,
by reason of their swiftnesse in motion) to put
off, by little and little, from the greater ships, and to
row towards the shore, from whence they might more
easily charge the Britans, with their arrowes, slings, and
other warlike engines, which (being then vnknowne to
the Ilanders, as also the fashion of the ships, and motion
of the oares in the long boats, having stricken them
with feare and amazement) caused them to make a
stand, and afterwards to draw backe a litle.
                  But the Roman souldiers making no haste to pursue
them, by reason of the water, which they suspected in
some places to be deep and dangerous: the Standardbearer
of the Eagle of the Tenth Legion, praying, that
his attempt might prove successefull to the Legion, cryed
out with a lowd voyce in this manner. Fellow Souldiers,
leape out of your boates and followe mee, except

you meane to betray your Standard to the enemie: For
mine owne part, I meane to discharge the duetie I owe
to the Common wealth, and to my Generall. This
said, he cast himselfe into the water, and carryed the
Standard boldly against the Britans. Whereupon, the
souldiers exhorting one another to follow the Ensigne,
what fortune soever might befall) with common
consent, leapt out of their long boats, one seconding
another; and so, wading through the water, at length
got to shore, where began a sharp and bloody fight on
both sides: The Romans were much incumbred, by reason
that they could neither keepe their ranks, nor fight
vpon firm ground, nor follow their owne standards; for
every one as he came on land, ran confusedly to that
which was next him.
                  Some of the Britans (who knew the flats, and shallow
places, espying the Romans, as they came single out of
their ships) pricked forward their horses, and set vpon
them, overlaying them with number, and finding them
vnwealdy and vnready to make any great resistance, by
reason of the depth of the water, and weight of their
armour, while the greater part of the barbarous people
with their darts assailed them fiercely vpon the shore:
which Caesar perceiving, commanded the Cock-boates
and Skowts, to be manned with souldiers, whom hee
sent in all haste to rescue their fellowes.
                  There was a souldier of Caesars company, called Cassius
Scaeva, who, with some other of the same band, was
carried in a small boat, vnto a rocke, which the ebbing
sea, in that place, had made accessible. The Britans espying
them, made thitherward: the rest of the Romans
escaping, Scaeva alone was left vpon the rocke, to withstand
the fury of the enraged multitude, that assailed
him with their darts, which he received vpon his shield,

and thrust at them with his speare, till it was broken,
and his helmet and shield lost: then being tired with
extreame toyle, and dangerously wounded, he betooke
himselfe to flight, and, (carrying two light harnesses on
his backe) with much difficulty recovered Caesars Tent,
where hee craved pardon for making so bold an attempt,
without commandement of his Generall. Caesar
did both remit the offence, and reward the offender,
by bestowing vpon him the office of a Centurion.
                  
                  This was the Scaeva, who afterwards gave good cause
to have his name remembred in the Roman story, for

                        〈◊〉
                      memorable service he did to Caesar, in the time of
the civill warres betweene him and Pompey, at the battaile
neere Dyrrachium.
                  
                  The Romans having at length, got footing on drie
land, gave a fresh charge vpon the Britans, and in the
end, enforced them to turne their backs, and leave the
shore, though they could not pursue them farre into
the Land, for want of horsemen, (Caesars accustomed
fortune failing him in this one accident.)
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     Some of the Britans submit themselves to Caesar. The Romans
Ships are scattered by tempest. The Britans
secretly reuolt.
                  
                  THe Britans, after this overthrow, assembling themselves
together, (vpon consultation had amongst
them) sent Ambassadors to Caesar, promising to deliver
in pledges, or to doe whatsoever else he would command
them. With these Ambassadors, came Comius of
Arras, whom Caesar had sent before out of Gallia, into

                     Britannie; where, having delivered the Message he had
then in charge, he was apprehended, committed to prison,
and now after the battaile, released. The cheefe
States of the Britans, seeking to excuse their attempts,
laid the blame vpon the multitude, who being the greater
number, and wilfully bent to take armes, could neither
by perswasion, nor authority, be restrained: and
they pretended their owne ignorance, as being a free
people, and not experienced in the customes of other
Nations. Caesar, although he reprooved them for making
warre in that manner, (considering that of their
owne accord, they had sent Ambassadors to him (before
his arrivall in Britannie) to desire peace: yet was
content to pardon them, vpon delivery of pledges,
whereof some he received presently, and the rest being
to come from remote places, he appointed to be sent
in by a certaine day; So the Britans were dismissed to
returne into their Countries, and in the meane time
there came divers Princes from other parts of the Ile,
to submit themselves and their Cities to Caesar.
                  
                  The fourth day, after the Romans landing, the ships
before mentioned, appointed for transportation of Caesars
horsemen, having a favourable gale of wind, put out
to the sea, from the vpper haven, and approaching
neere the Iland, in view of the Roman Campe, asodaine
storme arose, and scattered them, driving some of them
backe againe to the Port, from whence they came, and
some others vpon the lower part of the Iland westward,
where, after they had cast anchor, (their keeles being
almost overwhelmed with the waves,) they were carryed,
by violence of the storme in the night, into the
maine, and with very great perill, recovered a harbor in
the continent.
                  The same night, the Moone was at the full, at which

time commonly, the Sea in those parts, is much troubled,
and overfloweth the banks, by reason of the high
tides, (a matter vnknowne to the Romans) insomuch, as
the long boates, which transported the armie, then lying
vpon the shore, were filled with the flood; and the
ships of burden; that lay at anchor, were beaten with the
storme, and split in peeces, the greater number of them
perishing in the water, and the rest being made altogether
vnserviceable, (their anchors lost, and tacklings
broken:) Wherewith the Romans were much perplexed,
for that they neither had any other ships to transport
them backe againe, nor any meanes to repaire
what the tempest had ruined: and Caesar had formerly
resolved to winter in Gallia, by reason he was vnfurnished
of vittaile to maintaine his army during the winter
season. Which being knowne to the cheefe States
of the Britans, (who had met together about the accomplishment
of such things, as Caesar had commanded
them) they supposed a fit opportunity was offered
them to revolt, while the Romans wanted horsemen,
shipping, and all manner of provisions; the number of
their forces seeming also the lesse, in respect of the small
circuit of their Campe, (Caesar having transported his
Legions without any carriages, or such like warlike necessaries.)
Whereupon they concluded to keepe them
from vittaile, and to prolong the warre till winter; assuring
themselves, that if they could eyther vanquish the
Romans, or barre them from returning thence, there
would no forraigne Nation after them, adventure to
set foote againe in Britannie. And heereupon they conveyed
themselves by stealth, out of the Roman Campe,
and gathered companie to them privily from diverse
parts, to make head against their enemies.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     Caesar repaireth his Navie. A skirmish by land between the
Britans and Romans. The Britans retire, and with new
forces assaile the Romans, but in the end are put to flight.
Caesar returneth into France.
                  
                  
                     CAEsar, albeit he were ignorant of the Britans purpose,
yet supposing that the state of his armie, and
the losse of his ships were knowne to them, and
considering that they had broken day with him, in detaining
the pledges contrary to the contract, he suspected
that which afterwards proved true. And therfore to
provide remedies against all chances, he caused Corne
to be brought dayly out of the fields into his Campe,
and such ships as could not be made fit for service, were
vsed to repaire the rest, and such other things as were
wanting therto, he appointed to be brought out of the
continent; by which meanes, and the diligence of his
Souldiers, with the losse of twelve Ships, the rest of his
Navie was made able to beare saile, and brooke the
Seas againe.
                  While these things were in dooing, the Seventh Legion,
(according to custom) was sent forth a forraging;
till which time, the Britans revolt was not certainly
knowne, for that some of them remained abroad in the
fields, & others came ordinarily into the Roman Camp.
The Warders in the Station before the Campe, gave
notice to Caesar, that the same way which the Legion
went, there appeared a greater dust, then was woont to
be seene. Caesar mistrusting some new practise of the
Britans, commanded the Companies (that kept ward)
to march thither, appointing two others to supply their

roomes, and the rest of his forces to arme themselves
with speed and follow him. When he approched neer
the place discried, he perceived his souldiers to be overcharged
with the Britans, who assailed them on all sides
with their darts. For the Britans having conveyed their
Corne from all other parts (this only excepted) and suspecting
that the Romans would come thither, lay in the
woods all night, to intercept them: and finding them
dispersed, and vnreadie, they sodainly set vppon them,
(as they were reaping) killing a few of them, and disordering
the rest, with their horses and chariots.
                  The maner of their fighting in Chariots was thus;
First, they vsed to ride round about their enemies forces,
casting their darts where they saw advauntage, and
oftentimes with the fiercenesse of their horses, & whirling
of their Chariot wheeles, they broke their enemies
ranks: and being gotten in among the troopes of horsmen,
they would leape out of their Chariots, and fight
on foot. The Chariot-drivers in the meane time withdrew
themselves by litle and litle out of the battell, and
placed themselves in such sort, as their maisters (being
over-matched by their enemies) might readily recover
their Chariots, so that in their fighting they performed
the offices, both of horsmen in swiftnesse of motion, and
also of footmen in keeping their ground; and by dayly
vse, and exercise, they were growne so expert in managing
their horses, as, driving them forcibly downe a
steepe hill, they were able to stay or turne them in the
mid way, yea, to run along the beame, to stand firme
vpon the yoke, and to return thence speedily into their
Chariots again.
                  The Romans being much troubled with this new
kind of fight, Caesar came in good time to the rescue.
For vpon his approach, the Britans gave over the skirmish,

yet keeping still their ground as maisters of the
field, and the Romans for fear, retired themselves to their
Generall, who thought it no point of wisdome, to hazard
his forces in a place vnknowne: but having staied
there awhile, conducted the Legions backe againe to his
Campe, and in the meane time, the Britans that were
in the field, dispersed themselves, and shrunke away.
                  After this there were for many dayes togither, continual
tempests, which kept the Romans in their campe,
and hindred the Britans from making any open attempt,
though they sent messengers secretly into diverse
parts of the Ile, publishing abroad, what a small
number of their enemies was left, what great hope
there was of a rich bootie, & what apparant likelihood
of recovering their libertie, if they could drive the Romans
from their Campe: And hereupon in short time
they assembled a great number of horse and foot-men,
to put their purpose in execution. Against which, Caesar
(vnderstanding thereof) made preparation for defence,
having gotten also about thirtie hors-men (which Comius
of Arras brought over with him) whose seruice he
supposed verie necessarie, if the Britans (according to
their woonted maner) should seeke to save themselves
by flight. The Legions were placed in battaile array before
his Camp. Then the Britans began the fight, which
had not long continued, when they gave back, and fled,
the Romans pursuing them as farre as they durst, killing
many whom they overtooke, and burning houses and
townes as they returned to their Campe.
                  The same day the Britans sent Ambassadors to Caesar,
desiring peace, which after long sute, was granted,
vpon condition, that the number of the pledges (which
was before required) should be now doubled, and speedily
sent over into Gallia. For the Aequinoctial drawing

neere, Caesar made haste thither, doubting his crazed
ships would not be well able to brooke the Seas in winter:
whereupon taking advauntage of the next faire
wind, he embarqued his forces about midnight, and
with the greatest part of his Fleete, arrived in the continent.
The Roman Senat (vpon relation of these his services)
decreed a Supplication for him, for the space of
twentie daies.
               
               
                  CHAP. V.
                  
                     Caesars second expedition into Britannie. The Britans fortifie
themselves in a wood, from whence they are chased
by the Romans. Caesars Navie distressed by tempest.
                  
                  IN the spring of the yeare following, Caesar having pacified
some tumults in Gallia, prosecuted the enterprise
of Britannie, and to that end he had prepared a
Fleet of new ships, well appointed, and commodiously
built for landing his forces (the want whereof he had
found before, to his great losse) and a sufficient armie
consisting of five Legions, and a proportionall number
of horse, which he embarqued atCallice. 
                     Portus Iccius about
the Sun-setting, having a faire Southern wind to set
them forward; which failing them about midnight, the
tide diverted their course, so as in the morning he discovered
the Iland on his left hand: and then following
the turning of the tide, he commanded his souldiers to
vse their Oares that they might reach that part of the
Ile, where they had found best landing the Summer before;
wherein they tooke such paines, as their shipps of
burden kept way with their long boats and lighter vessels.
About noone they landed on the shore, where
there appeared no man to make resistance: the cause

wherof was (as Caesar afterwards learned by such prisoners,
as he tooke) for that the Britans having assembled
themselves togither in armes at the Sea side, were so terrified
with the sight of the ships (which of all sorts were
esteemed above eight hundred saile) that they left the
shore, and ran to hide themselves in the vpland Country.
Caesar (vpon intelligence by fugitives, where the
Brittish forces lay) leaving at the Sea side, ten Cohorts,
and three hundred horse to grade the ships then lying
at Anchor, (whereof Quintus Atrius had the charge)
marched forward with the rest of his army in the night,
about twelve miles into the land, where he espi'd a multitude
of Britans flocked togither neere a river, having
gotten the vpper ground, from whence they began to
charge the Romans with their horse and Chariots; but
being repulsed by Caesars hors-men, they fled, and hid
themselves in the woods, in a place which being notably
strengthned both by Nature and Art, they had vsed
as a fortresse in their civill warres among themselves.
For by reason there were many great trees cut downe,
and laid overthwart the passages round about, there
could hardly any entrance be found into the wood;
howbeit the Britans themselves would oft times sally
forth vpon advantage, and empeach the Romans, where
they attempted to enter. Hereupon Caesar commanded
the Souldiers of the Seventh Legion to make aA warlike engin made of boords, covered over with raw hides, to serve for defence against fire, or stones in scaling a wall. 
                     Testudo,
and to raise a Mount against the place; by which means,
after losse of men on both sides, the Romans in the end
got the Fort, & chased the Britans out of the wood; but
Caesar would not suffer his Souldiers to pursue them far,
in regard the place was vnknown, and a great part of the
day being then spent, he thought it fit to bestow the
rest in fortifying his Campe.
                  The next day in the morning, he sent out hors-men

and foot-men three severall wayes to pursue them
that fled; but, before they had gotten sight of the Britans,
certain hors-men sent from Quintus Atrius (who
had charge of the shipping) brought newes, that a great
tempest the night before had distressed his ships, and
beaten them vpon the shore, their Anchors and Cables
being not able to hold them, nor the mariners to guide
them, or to endure the force of the storme. Wherupon
Caesar caused the Legions, and hors-men to be sent for
backe againe, and marched with speede towards the sea
side, where he found his Navy in ill plight; fortie of his
ships being cleane cast away, and the rest with great difficultie
seeming likely to be recovered. For effecting
wherof, he tooke some Shipwrights out of the Legions,
and sent for others out of the continent; writing to Labienus
(who had the charge of certaine Legions there,
and the gard of Portus Iccius) that he should prepare as
many ships as he could, to be sent over vnto him with
expedition. And though it were a worke of great toile;
yet hee thought it necessarie to have all the ships haled
on shore, and to be brought into the campe, where his
land-forces lay, that one place might be a safegard to
them both. In the accomplishment hereof he spent ten
dayes (the souldiers scarce intermitting their labour in
the night time, till all was finished.
               
               
                  CHAP. VI.
                  
                     Cassibelin is chosen by the Britans to be their Leader. The
Britans assaile the Romans, but with ill successe. Caesar
with his armie wadeth over the river of Thames.
                  
                  
                     CAEsar having fortified his Campe, and left there
the same forces (which were before appointed to

keepe the harbour) returned to the place, whence he
dislodged vpon Atrius his advertisement, where he
found the number of the Britans much increased by
confluence of people from sundry parts within the
Iland. The chiefe commandement & direction for the
warre, was by publike consent of the States of th'Ile, assigned
to Cassibelin; the bounds of whose territorie were
divided from the maritime Cities, by the river Thamisis,
& were distant from the Sea about four-score miles.
There had beene of long time continuall warre betweene
him, and some other Princes of the Countries
neer adioyning: but now (both parts fearing to be overrun
by a forrain enemie) neglected private respects,
and joyned their forces togither, appointing him to be
their leader, as a man of whose valor, and sufficiencie in
militare affaires they had good experience.
                  The Roman army being come in view of their enemies
Campe, the Britans pressed forward to begin the
fight with their hors-men and Chariots, and Caesar sent
out his hors-men to encounter them, so as the battaile
was maintained with great resolution on both parts,
and the event thereof seemed doubtfull, till in the end,
the Britans gave ground, and fled through the woods to
the hills, many of them being slaine in the chase, and
some of the Romans also, who adventerously pursued
them too farre.
                  Not long after, while the Romans (suspecting no danger)
were occupied in fortefying their campe, the Britans
sallyed sodainly out of the woods, and made an assault
vpon the Warders, that kept station before the
Campe, to whose aide Caesar sent out two Cohorts (the
chiefe of two Legions) which making a lane through
the midst of the British forces, joyned themselves with
their distressed fellowes, and rescued them from the

perill, though Quintus Laberius Durus, a Tribune of the
Souldiers was slain in that enterprise. But new Cohorts
comming to supply the former, the Britans were repulsed,
and sought to save themselves by flight. By the maner
of this skirmish, (which was fought in view of
the Roman Campe) the Romans perceived the advauntage,
which the Britans had of them, and how ill themselves
were appointed for such a kind of fight, when by
reason of the weight of their armor, they could neither
pursue such as fled, nor durst leave their Ensignes, nor
were able (without great disadvantage) to encounter
the British hors-men, which oft times gave ground of
purpose; and having withdrawne themselves by litle
and litle from the Legions, would leap out of their chariots
and fight on foot; the maner of their fighting with
horses and Chariots, being alike dangerous to those
that retired, and those that pursued. Besides, they divided
their forces into companies (when they fought)
and had severall stations, with great distances betweene
them, one troope seconding an other, and the sound
and fresh men yeelding supplies to the wounded and
wearie.
                  The day following the Britans were descried vpon
the hils a farre off, scattred here and there in great numbers
togither, being not verie forward to begin a new
fight, till Caesar having sent out three Legions, and all his
hors-men, vnder the conduct of C. Trebonius the Lievtenant,
to go a forraging, they flocked sodainly togither
from all parts, and set vpon the forragers, not sparing to
assaile the Ensigns and Legions themselves, who strongly
resisted them, and made them turn their backs, when
the Roman hors-men also eagerly pursued them, never
giving over the chase (as being confident in the ayde of
the Legions that followed them) vntill they had driven

them headlong before them, killing all those they overtooke,
and giving the rest no time, either to gather
themselves togither, or to make a stand, or once to forsake
their Chariots. After this overthrow, many of the
barbarous people (who had come from diverse parts to
aide their Countri-men) shrunke away; and Caesar vnderstanding,
what course the rest of the Britans meant
to hold in prosecuting the warre, led his armie to the
bounds of Cassibelins Countrey, vpon the River of
Thames, which was passable on foot, in one place onely
and that with some difficultie. When he came thither,
he perceived that the Britans had great forces in readinesse
on the further side of the River, the banks whereof
were fortified with sharpe pointed stakes, or piles, (about
the bignesse of a mans thigh, and bound about
with lead,) pitched neere the shore, to empeach their
passage; and some others of the same kind (the remnants
whereof are to be seene at this day) were planted
covertly vnder water in the maine River. Whereof Caesar
having intelligence (by some Fugitives, and prisoners
that he had taken) commaunded the hors-men,
first, to enter the River, and the Legions to follow, so
as (the dangerous places being discovered) the Romans
waded through (their heads onely appearing above
water) and charged the Britans with such violence, as
they forced them to forsake the shore, and betake themselves
to flight.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. VII.
                  
                     The Britans surprise the Roman horsemen. The treacherie
of Mandubratius the Britan, whom Caesar protecteth.
Cassibelin wearied with ill successe of the warre, submitteth
himselfe to Caesar. Tribute imposed vpon the Britans.
Caesar saileth into France.
                  
                  
                     CAssibelin seeing no likeli-hood to maintaine the
warre any longer by force, dismissed the greater
part of his power, and keeping with him about
foure thousand Chariots only, retired into the woods,
and places of most safetie, driving men and cattell before
him out of the fields, all that way, by which he
knew the Romans should passe with their armie, whose
hors-men (as they roved vp and down to take booties)
he surprized with his Chariots, and distressed them in
such sort, as they durst not march forward, but keeping
themselves in their strength, gave over their former
purpose, and from thence-foorth sought onely to
annoy the Britans, by spoiling and burning their houses
and townes.
                  In the meane time theThe ancient Inhabitants of Middlesex and Essex. 
                     Trinobantes, one of the chief
States in those parts, sent Ambassadors to Caesar, promising
to submit themselves, and to be at his commaundement.
There was also one Mandubratius, who had fled
over to Caesar, when he was in Gallia, and was now become
a follower of his fortune, while preferring the satisfaction
of his owne discontented humor, before the
advancement of the common cause, he served as an instrument,
to betray his native Country, abusing the credit
which he had with his Countrie-men, by working
their submission, to his owne dishonor, and the advantage

of a forraine enemie. His father Imanentius, (having
bin sometimes chiefe ruler of the Citie of the Trinobantes,
and well esteemed among them) was slaine by
Cassibelin the present Governor, against whom the Citizens
desired Caesar to protect Mandubratius, and to
commit vnto him the government of their City; which
Caesar granted vpon deliverie of a certaine number of
pledges, and a sufficient proportion of vittaile for provision
of his Armie. Hereupon diverse pettie States
there about, sent Ambassadors, and yeelded themselves
to Caesar, who vnderstood by them, that Cassibelin his
Towne (being well stored with men, and cattell,) was
not farre from thence. This towne (as all others so called
of the Britans in those dayes) was onely a circuit of
ground enclosed with woods, and marishes, or else entrenched
with a rampire of earth about it. Caesar comming
with his Legio
                           •
                        
                      to this place, (which he found verie
strong, as being fortified, both naturally, and also by
the industrie of man) began to assaile it on both sides.
The Britans having expected a while the event of the
enterprise, and perceiving themselves vnable to withstand
the assault, issued out at a backe way, where many
of them being slaine, and some taken (as they fled,) the
towne it selfe, and all the provisions within it, were left
as a spoile to the Romans.
                  
                  While these things were in doing among the Trinobantes,
Cassibelin dispatched messengers into the country
ofKent. 
                     Cantium, that lies vpon the sea. The inhabitants of
those parts were then more civill, and better furnished
to make warre than any other of the Ile. The country at
that time was governed by foure Kings, (as Caesar himselfe
calleth them) either for that they had among them
a kind of absolute government in several, or else, for that
being the Register of his owne acts, he supposed it

would be more for his glorie to be reputed a conqueror
of Kings. Their names were Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus,
and Segonax, whom Gassibelin then required to
raise all the power they could make, and on the sodaine
to assaile the Roman forces, that garded their ships at the
sea side. This was attempted accordingly, but with ill
successe, for that the Romans having timely advertisement
of their purpose, prevented the execution therof,
by setting vpon them as they drew neere the Roman
armie; and so, after a great slaughter made of the Britans
(Cingetorix a noble captaine, and one of their Princes
being taken prisoner) the Romans returned in safetie
to their Campe.
                  
                     Cassibelin, hearing of the vnhappie issue of this enterprise,
after so many losses sustained on his part, (his
Country being wasted with warre) and himselfe in a
maner forsaken, by the revolt of the cities round about,
(which most of all discouraged him) sent Ambassadors
to Caesar by Comius of Arras, offering to submit himselfe
vpon reasonable conditions.
                  
                     Caesar determining to winter in Gallia (the state of his
affaires there requiring it) and the summer being almost
spent, commanded that he should deliver certaine pledges
for assurance of his obedience, and that he should
offer no wrong, nor give cause of offence to Mandubratius,
or the Trinobantes, whom he had taken into speciall
protection. And then having imposed a Tribute, to be
payed yearly by the Britans, to the people of Rome, he
marched towards the seaside, where he embarqued his
forces, and arrived with them safely in the continent.
                  Thus Caesar having rather shewed some part of Britannie
to the Romans, then made a conquest of the
whole: supposed he had done sufficiently for his owne
glorie, in vndertaking a matter so rare and difficult in

those times. At his comming to Rome, he presented
there certaine captives (which he had taken in the British
warres) whose strangenesse of shape and behaviour
filled the peoples eyes, both with wonder, and delight.
He offered also in the Temple of Venus genetrix a surcote
embrodered with British Pearle, as a Trophy, and
spoyle of the Ocean, leaving to posteritie a perpetuall
remembrance of his enterprise in this Iland, to the honor,
both of his owne name, and of the Roman nation.
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     Augustus succeedeth Iulius Caesar in the Empire. The
state of the Britans in his time vnder Cuno-belin their
Governor. The first British coyne. The birth of our
Saviour Christ. Tiberius the Emperour forbeareth to
attempt any thing in Britannie.
                  
                  AFter the death of Iulius Caesar (by reason of the civill
warres among the Romans) the Ile of Britannie
was for a time neglected, and Augustus Caesar
being setled in the Empire (which was then growne to
such greatnesse, as it seemed even cumbred therewith)
accounted it good policie to containe the same within
his knowne bounds: Besides, the attempt was like to
prove dangerous, and a matter of verie great expence,
to send an armie so farre off, to make warre with a Barbarous
Nation, for desire of glorie onely (no speciall
cause besides mooving therto.) Howbeit (as some writers
report) about twentie yeares after Iulius Caesars first
entrance, Augustus intended a voyage hither in person,
alledging for pretence of the warre, the wrong offred to
the Roman state, by such princes of the Ile as had for
certain years with-held the tribute, which Caesar his predecessor

had imposed. Vpon intelligence whereof, the
Britans sent over Ambassadors, who meeting the Emperour
inThe Countries between the rivers Garonne, and Seine in France. 
                     Gallia Celtica, declared their submission, and
desired pardon: And the better to win favour, they had
caried over certaine gifts of good value, to be presented,
as offrings in the Roman Capitoll (having alreadie
learned the Art to flatter for advantage, and to appease
Princes by rewards.) Hereupon, a conditionall peace
was granted them, and the Emperor having pacified
some troubles in Gallia, returned to Rome. Then began
the Ilanders to pay Tribute, and custome for all kinde
of wares which they exchanged with the Gauls, as
namely Ivorie boxes, Iron chaines, and other trinkets
of Amber, and glasse, which were transported to and
fro both out of Gallia, and Britannie.
                  
                  They are following, the Britans having failed in performance
of conditions, he prepared for another expedition;
but being set forward on his voyage, the revolt
of theThe Biscayans. 
                     Cantabrians, andThe ancient inhabitants betweene Gallicia and Portugall. 
                     Asturians, stayed him from
proceeding any further therein. After which time the
Britans were left to themselves, to enioy their libertie,
and vse their owne lawes without empeachment by
forreigne invaders; for that the Romans (having found
the sweetnesse of peace, after long civill warres) sought
rather to keepe in obedience such Provinces as had bin
before time brought vnder subjection, then by attempting
new conquests, to hazard the losse of that they
had alreadie gotten.
                  In those dayes the Country of the Trinobantes in
Britannie, was governed by Cuno-belin, who kept his residence
atMalden in Essex. 
                     Camalodunum. He began first to reclaime the
Britans from their rude behavior: and to make his estate
more respected, he afterwards caused his owne Image
to be stamped on his Coine after the maner of the Romans,

mans (a custome never vsed among the Britans before
his dayes, and but then newly received by the Romans
themselves; for before that time the Britans vsed Rings
of Iron, and little plates of brasse of a certaine weight in
stead of coine. During the time of his government, the
divine mysterie of humane redemption was accomplished
by the birth of our Saviour Christ, (Augustus Caesar
then possessing the Roman Empire, which he afterwards
left to Tiberius his adopted son, a warie and politike
Prince, who following the advise and example of
Augustus, did never attempt any thing in Britannie, nor
maintaine any garrison there: howbeit the Britans at
that time were well affected to the Romans, as appeared
by the entertainment, which their pettie Princes gave
to some Souldiers of the Roman army in Germanie, who
in crossing the seas, were by force of weather cast vpon
the coast of Britannie, and from thence in curteous maner
sent backe to Germanicus their Generall.
               
               
                  CHAP. IX.
                  
                     The ridiculous expedition of Caius Caligula the Emperor,
intending a voyage into Britannie. His vaineglorie
and crueltie.
                  
                  
                     CAius Caligula succeeding Tiberius in the Empire,
had a meaning doubtlesse to have invaded the Ile
of Britannie, had not his rash entrance into the
action, and his ill successe in the German warre, overthrowne
the enterprise; by reason whereof he brought
nothing to effect, but onely made a ridiculous expedition,
(answerable to the vanitie of his humor) bringing
an army into the hither parts of Belgia, and there having

received into protection Adminus (whom Cuno-belin
his father had banished) and certaine other British Fugitives,
that came with him) he writ vaunting Letters to
the Senate, as though the whole Iland had yeelded it
selfe, having given speciall charge to the Messenger,
that his letters should be carried in a Chariot to the Forum,
and not delivered to the Consuls, but in a full Senat,
and in the Temple of Mars. Afterwards drawing
his forces downe to the sea coasts of Belgia (whence
with wonder he beheld the high Cliffes of the Ile possessed
with barbarous people) he placed his Souldiers
in battaile array vpon the shore, and himselfe entring into
a long Boat, was rowed a little way vpon the Sea. But
not daring to adventure further, he returned speedily
to land, and then commanding a charge to be founded,
as though he would have begun a fight, he appointed
his Souldiers to gather Cockles, and Muskles in their
Helmets, tearming them spoyles of the Ocean, and meet
to be preserved, as offerings due to the Capitoll. For this
exploit, he afterwards at his comming to Rome, was not
ashamed to demaund a Triumph, and divine honors to
be assigned him; but finding the Senators, for the most
part, vnwilling to give their assent, he burst out into
threats, and had slaine some of them in the place, if
they had not speedily avoyded his furie. After this,
himselfe in open assembly made a declaration of his
journey, and what adventures he had passed in the conquest
of the Ocean (as himselfe vainly termed it) whereat
the common people, either for fear, or flatterie, gave
a generall applause; which he (taking it as a testimonie
of their desire to have him placed among their gods) rewarded
in this shameful maner: He caused a great quantitie
of gold and silver to be scattered on the ground,
and certaine poysoned Caltrops of Iron to be cast among

them, whereby many were killed, partly with
those envenomed engines, and partly with the presse
one of another (each man being earnest in gathering,
and supposing another mans gaine his owne losse:) So
naturally was he inclined to all kinds of mischiefe, as he
spared not the lives even of those, whom he thought to
deserve best at his hands.
               
               
                  CHAP. X.
                  
                     Claudius succeeding Caius in the Empire, sendeth Aulus
Plautius with an armie out of France into Britannie.
The Roman souldiers are vnwilling to be transported
thither: and entring into mutinie, are appeased by Narcissus
the Emperours favourite. Plautius chargeth the
Britans, and taketh Cataratacus their captain prisoner,
for which he afterwards triumpheth.
                  
                  
                     CLaudius the Emperour, with better advise then
Caius his predecessor, and with much better fortune,
vndertooke the action in the third yeare of
his reigne; and first, by perswasion of Bericus a British fugitive,
and others, whom the Romans had received into
their protection (a matter that much discontented the
Britans, & stirred them vp to revolt) he sent Aulus Plautius
a Roman Senator, a man well experienced in militare
affaires, to take charge of the Armie then remaining
in Gallia, and to transport it into the Iland, whereat
the Souldiers grudged, complaining, that they
should now make warre out of the world, and by protracting
time with vnnecessary delaies, they discovered
openly their vnwillingnes to enter into the service, till
Narcissus a favorite of Claudius, being sent to appease

them, went vp into Plautius his Tribunal seat, and there
in an Oration, declared to the Souldiers the causes of
his comming, & exhorted them not to shrink, for feare
of vncertain dangers: That the enterprise it self, the more
perillons it seemed, the more honorable it would be to atchieve
it: that themselves were the men whom the heavens had ordained
to enlarge the bounds of the Roman Empire, and to
make their owne names famous in the vtmost parts of the
earth. But the Souldiers at the first being moved with
disdaine, cried out in seditious maner (Io. Saturnalia,) as
though they had been then ready to solemnize a feast,
at which the Custome was, that servants should weare
their Maisters apparell, and represent their persons.
Howbeit Narcissus giving way to their furie for the
present, did afterwards prevaile so farre with them, as
partly for shame, and partly for hope of reward, they
seemed content to follow Plautius, whither soever he
would conduct them.
                  Then were theSouldiers that were Citizens of Rome. andSouldiers of forreigne nations in league with the Romans. 
                     Auxiliarie souldiers
divided into three parts, so to be embarqned, to the
end, that if they should be empeached in one place,
they might land in another. In crossing the Sea, their
ships were shaken, and beaten backe with a contrarie
wind; albeit their courage failed not, but rather encreased,
by reason of a firie leame shooting from the East
towards the West (the self same way that they directed
their course) which they interpreted as a token of good
successe. And thereupon hoising saile, they set forward
againe, and with some difficultie (through the contrarietie
of wind and tide,) arrived in the Iland without any
resistance, by reason that the Britans doubted not
their comming; but then finding themselves surprized
on the sodaine, they ran dispersedly to hide themselves
in Woods and Marishes, holding it their best course, rather

to prolong the warre, and wearie their enemies by
delayes, then to encounter them in the open field. But
Plautius with much labour and hazard found out at
length, their chiefe place of retreite, where he killd many
of them, and tooke prisoner Cataratacus their Captaine,
one of the Sonnes of Cuno-belin, (not long before
deceased.) For this exploit the Roman Senate did afterwards
grant him a Triumph, which the Emperor Claudius
honoured with his owne person, accompanying
him as he went vp into the Capitoll.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XI.
                  
                     Plautius the Lievtenant pursueth the service in Britannie.
Vespasian (serving vnder him) was in danger to have
beene slaine, or taken, by the Britans, if he had not beene
rescued by Titus his sonne. The Britans passe over the
river of Thames, and assaile the Romans that follow
them. Togodumnus a British Prince is slaine in the
fight. Plautius being in distresse, desisteth for a time
from further prosecution of the warre.
                  
                  THeThe ancient inhabitants of the Counties of Glocester and Oxford. 
                     Boduni (then living vnder the government of
theThe ancient iuhabitants of the Counties of Buckingham, Bedford, and Hartford. 
                     Cattieuchlani) betooke themselves to the protection
of Plautius, who leaving garrisons in those
parts, marched towardes a river, over which the Britans
supposed that the Romans could not passe without
a Bridge, and therefore imagined themselves safe, having
pitched their Campe on the other side of the water.
But Plautius sent over certain Germans (who being
accustomed to swim over rivers with swift currents even
in their armor) found an easie passage to the further
bank, and there set vpon the Britans, wounding the

horses which drew their Chariots, and by that meanes
overthrowing their riders, and disordering their whole
power. 
                        •
                     hen was Flauius Vespasian (who had the leading
of the Second Legion, and Sabinus his brother, appointed
to passe over, and to charge them on a sodaine as they
were dispersed. Some of the Britans being slaine, and
some taken prisoners, the night made an end of the skirmish.
The next morning the rest of the dispersed rout
shewed themselves vpon the shore, and gave occasion of
a new fight, which continued a long time, with equall
advantage, till C. Sydius Geta being in danger to have
beene taken, recovered himself, and at the last enforced
the Britans to retire; For which service he had afterwards
Triumphall honours assigned him, although he
were no Consull. In this conflict Vespasian (being beset
round about by the barbarous people) was in great
danger, either to have beene slaine, or taken, if he had
not beene timely rescued by Titus his sonne, who then
exercised the office of a Tribune of the Souldiers, and began
in his tender yeares to give some proofe of his valour.
After this battell, the Britans withdrew themselves
to the mouth of the river Thamisis, neer the place
where it falles into the sea, and being skilfull in the shallowes
and firme grounds, passed over in safetie, whenas
the Romans that pursued them, (not knowing the dangerous
places) were oft times in great hazard. Some of
the Germans that were most forward to adventure (by
reason of their skill in swimming) assoone as they had
got to the further shore, were compassed about and killed
by the barbarous people, and the rest of the Roman
army that folowed, was much distressed in the passage,
and sharply assailed at their comming on land; where
began a bloodie fight, in the which Togodumnus a British
Prince, one of Cunobelins sonnes was slaine; whose

death did nothing abate the courage of the Britans, but
rather enflamed them with desire of revenge: for the effecting
whereof, they gathered togither new forces,
from diverse parts of the Ile. Plautius fearing the greatnesse
of their power, and being straitned in a place of
disadvantage, and danger, proceeded no further at that
time, but fortifying onely such townes as he had alreadie
taken, advertised Claudius of the doubtfull state of
his affaires.
               
               
                  CHAP. XII.
                  
                     The valor and fortune of Vespasian in the British warre.
He subdueth the Ile of Wight. The Expedition of
Claudius the Emperour into Britannie. He defeateth
the Britans, and planteth a Colonie of old souldiers
at Maldon in Essex. His sonne is surnamed Britannicus.
At his returne to Rome, he is honoured with a
Triumph. The Christian faith first received in Britannie,
in the reigne of Claudius.
                  
                  IN the meane time, Vespasian was imploied in other
places of the Ile, where fortune seemed to lay the
foundation of that greatnesse, vnto which he afterwards
attained; For in a short space, he fought thirtie
times with the Britans, overcomming two warlike nations,
and taming the fierceThe ancient Inhabitants of the counties of Somerset, Wilton, and Southhampton. 
                     Belgae, whose ancestors,
comming hither at the first out of Gallia Belgica, either
to take booties, or to make war, gave the name of their
owne Countrey to such places as they had subdued:
(a custom commonly vsed among the Gauls, when they
seated themselves in any part of this Iland.)
                  With like fortunate successe Vespasian proceeded in
attempting, and conquering the IleThe Ile of Wight. 
                     Vectis, that lieth on

the South side of Britannie, when Claudius the Emperor
being now furnished of all things necessarie for the
British expedition, set forward with a mightie armie,
consisting of horsemen, footmen, and Elephants. He
marched first to Ostia: from thence to Massilia: the rest
of the voyage he made by land toBolein in Picardie. 
                     Gessoriacum in Gallia,
where he embarqued. His forces being safely transported
into the Ile, were led towards the river Thamisis,
where Plautius and Vespasian with their power attended
his comming; so the two armies being ioyn'd togither,
crossed the river againe. The Britans that were assembled
to encounter them, began the fight, which was
sharply maintained on both sides, till in the end, a great
number of the Ilanders being slaine, the rest fled into
the woods, through which the Romans pursued them,
even to the towne ofMaldon in Essex. 
                     Camalodunum, which had bin the
royall seate of Cunobelm, and was then one of the most
defensible places in the dominions of the Trinobantes.
This towne they surprised, and afterwards fortified,
planting therin a Colonie of old souldiers, to strengthen
those parts and to keepe the inhabitants there in obedience.
Then were the Britans disarmed, howbeit Claudius
remitted the confiscation of their goods; for which
favour the barbarous people erected a Temple and an
Altar vnto him, honouring him as a god. Now the
States of the countrey round about, being so weakned
by the losse of their neighbours, and their owne civill
dissentions, as they were vnable to resist the Roman
power any longer, began to offer their submission, promising
to obey, and live peaceably vnder the Roman
government; and so, by little, and little, the hither part
of the Ile was reduced into the forme of a Province.
                  In honour of this victorie, Claudius was divers times
saluted by the name of Imperator, contrarie to the Roman
                     
custome, which permitted it but once for one Expedition.
The Senate of Rome also, vpon advertisement
of his successe, decreed, that he should be called Britannicus,
and that his sonne should have the same title, as a
surname proper and hereditarie to the Claudian familie.
M
                           •
                        ssalma his wife (the monster of her sex for impudencie
and lascivious life) had the first place in counsell assigned
her, (as Livia the wife of Augustus sometimes
had) & was also licenced to ride in a Chariot. At his returne
to Rome (which was the sixt month after his departure
thence, having continued but sixteene dayes
only in the Ile, he entred the citie in a Triumph) performed
with more then vsuall ceremonies of state, wherat
certaine Presidents of Provinces, and banished men
were permitted to be present. On the top of his pallace
was placed a Crowne set with stems, and foreparts
of ships, which the Romans called (Corona navalis) as a
signe of the conquest of the Ocean. Diverse Captaines
that had served vnder him in Britannie, were honoured
with Triumphal ornaments; Yearly playes were appointed
for him, and two Arches of Triumph adorned with
Trophies were erected, the one at Rome, the other at
Gessoriaoum, (where he embarqued for Britannie) to remaine
to succeeding ages, as perpetuall records of his
victorie; So great a matter was it then accounted, and a
worke of such merit, to have subdued so small a part of
the Iland.
                  About this time (as it may be probably conjectured
Christian Religion being yet greene, and of small
growth, began to cast forth some small sparkles of her
brightnesse in the Ile of Britannie: whither Christians
of Rome, and other Countries (then flying persecution)
resorted for safetie, and quietnesse, as to a place remote,
and by reason of the warres, and troubles there, not

much subiect to Inquisition: whenas also diverse Britans
remaining at Rome (where Christianitie then increased)
either for hostages, or detained as prisoners,
or happly for some private respects of profite, and pleasure,
had oportunitie and libertie to converse with the
Roman Christians, and to be by them instructed, and
confirmed in the faith of Christ.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     Ostorius Scapula is sent by Claudius the Emperour to succeed
Plautius in the office of Lievtenancie. The Britans
in diverse parts of the Ile take armes, but are speedily
suppressed. The Roman Generall seeketh by lenitie
to purchase the good opinion of the Britans.
                  
                  IN these termes stood the state of Britannie, when
Plautius the Lievtenant was revoked, and the prosecution
of the warre committed to P. Ostorius Scapula,
who at his landing found all in an vprore, the Britans
(that were yet vnconquered,) raunging the Confederates
country, and vsing the greater violence, for that
they supposed the new Captaine, as vnacquainted with
his armie (the winter also being then begun) would not
come forth to encounter them; but he knowing well,
that in such cases, the first successe breedeth, either feare,
or confidence, drew together with speed his readiest
Cohorts, and made towards them, slaying such as resisted,
and pursuing the residue, (whom he found stragled
abroad) lest they should make head againe. And,
that a faithlesse and cloaked peace might not give, either
the Captaine, or souldier any time of idle repose, he
disarmed all those whom he suspected, and hemmed

them in with Garisons betweeneNen, the river on which Northampton is seated (as it is cōiectured.) 
                     Antona, and
I he river of Severne.
                     Sabrina.
                  
                  The first that began to stirre, were theThe ancient Inhabitants of Norffolke, Suffo
                           •
                        k, Cambridgeshire, and Huntingtonshire. 
                     Icenians, a strong people, and vnshaken with warres, as having of
their owne accord in former times, sought the Romans
alliance and amitie. The Countries also adioyning neer
vnto them, following their example, prepared themselves
to fight, choosing a place that was compassed about
with a rude trench, which had a narrow entrance
to empeach the comming in of horsemen. That fence
the Roman Captaine, (although he wanted the strength
of the Legions) went about to force with the ayd of the
Confederates alone; and having placed his Cohorts in
rankes, he set his Troopes of horsemen also in like readinesse:
Then giving the signe of battell, he assailed the
Rampire, and brake it, disordering the Britans, who being
stricking with a kind of remorse for their rebellious
attempts, and seeing the passages stopped vp on al sides,
shewed verie great courage and valour in defending
themselves (as it falleth out oft times, where extremitie
of danger it selfe takes away all feare of danger.) In this
fight M. Ostorius the Lievtenants sonne was crowned
with an Oken Garland, as an honourable reward for saving
a Roman Citizen.
                  Now by the slaughter of the Icenians, the rest of the
Britans (who stood vpon doubtfull termes, as wavering
betweene warre and peace) were well quieted, and Ostorius
led his armie against theThe Inhabitants of a part of Chessh
                           ••
                        e (as it is coniectured.) 
                     Cangi, whose country
he spoyled and wasted while the inhabitants durst not
come into the field, but privily surprised such as they
found stragling behind the Roman armie, which was
now come neere the sea coast, that lookes toward Ireland,
whenas certaine tumults stirred among theThe Inhabitants of Yorkeshire, Lancashire, Durham, Westmerland and Cumberland. 
                     Brigantes,
brought backe the General, who thought it best,

not to enter into any new action, before he had made
all sure in those parts; howbeit, vpon his comming
thither, some few of the Brigantes (that first began to
take armes) being taken and put to death, the residue
were pardoned, and the Countrey quieted. For the
Generall wisely considering, that in such cases, lenitie
sometimes prevaileth, where force and rigor cannot,
did seeke to win favour of the Britans by curteous vsage
of such, as either fled vnto him for protection, or
else, by the fortune of warre fell into his hands, sometimes
pardoning them, sometimes rewarding them,
and sometimes vsing them in service against their owne
nation, as he did Cogidunus a British Prince, vpon whom
he had bestowed certaine Cities in free gift, according
to an ancient custome among the Romans, who vsed
even Kings themselves for instruments of bondage.
But theThe ancient Inhabitants of South-wales. 
                     Silures could neither by crueltie, nor faire
meanes be held in, so as the Generall saw there was no
way to keepe them vnder, but with a garrison of Legionarie
Souldiers; and to that end the Colonie at Camalodunum
(consisting of a strong companie of old Souldiers)
was brought into the subdued Country, to defend it against
such as should rebell, and to make the confederates
more willing to live in obedience.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     Ostorious the Roman Generall maketh warre vpon the
Silures and Ordovices, the ancient Inhabitants of
South-wales, and North-wales. Caractacus their
captaine being overthrowne in battaile, flieth for succor
to Cartismandua the Princesse of the Brigantes, who
then inhabited that part of the Ile which now conteyneth
the counties of Yorke, Lancaster, Durham,
Westmerland, and Cumberland. He is betraied and
delivered to Ostorius.
                  
                  THen the armie marched against the Silures, who besides
their naturall boldnes, relied much vpon the
strength of Caractacus their leader, a man that had
waded through great dangers, and had bin fortunate in
many adventures, having gotten thereby such reputation,
as he was preferred before all the British captaines.
But as in policie and knowledge of the country, he had
an advantage of the Romans: so perceiving himselfe to
be vnequally matched in strength, he removed the
warre to theThe ancient Inhabitants of North-wales. 
                     Ordovices, who entring into the action
with him, (as fearing alike the Roman power) resolved
ioyntly to hazard the chaunce of warre. And hereupon
they prepared for battell, having chosen a place verie
commodious for themselves, and disadvantageable for
their enemies. Then they went to the top of an hill,
and where they found any easy passage vp, they stopped
the way with heapes of stones, in maner of a rampire.
Not farre off, ran a River with an vncertaine foord,
where, vpon the banke, a company of the best souldiers
were placed, for a defence in the fore-ward. The leaders
went about, exhorting, and encouraging the common

souldiers, vsing such perswasions as might best fit their
humors, and the present occasion; and Caractacus himselfe,
coursing vp and downe, protested, that that day,
and that battel, should be either the beginning of recoverie
of libertie, or of perpetuall servitude. Then he called
vpon the names of his auncesters, that had chased
Caesar the Dictator out of the Ile, and had delivered
them from hatchets, and Tributes, and protected their
wives and children from shame and violence. While he
vttered these, or the like speeches, the people round about
him made a noyse, and euerie man sware, according
to the religion of his Country, that neither their
enemies weapons, nor their owne wounds, should
make them to give over. That cheerfull crie, terrified
and astonied the Roman Generall, and the rather, when
he considered how he was couped in, having the river
beneath him, the fort before him, the high hils hanging
over it, and all things on euerie side threatning daunger
and destruction to the assailers. Howbeit his souldiers
demaunded the battell, crying, That there was nothing
which valour could not overcome. The Prefects
and Tribunes, vsing the like speeches, added courage to
the rest.
                  Then Ostorius having viewed the places of difficult
accesse, led his Souldiers (being hot and eagre of the
fight) vnto the further side of the river, and from thence
to the Rampire, where while they fought with their
Darts, they had the woorst, but having broken downe
the rude compacted heape of stones with a Testudo, and
both armies comming to handie strokes vpon equal advauntage,
the Britans turned their backs, and ran to the
hill top, the Romans pursuing them, both with their
light and heauie armed souldiers, the one assailing with
darts, and the other (as they marched thicke togither)

breaking the ranks, and beating downe the barbarous
people, who had neither head-peece, nor armor to defend
themselves, so that being hedged in betweene the
Legionarie souldiers, and the Auxiliaries, the greatest part
of them were slaine in the place.
                  At this assault Caractacus his wife, and daughter
were taken prisoners, and his brethren yeelded to the
enemies; but himselfe driven to extremitie, escaped by
flight into the Countrie of the Brigantes, hoping to receive
some aide of Cartismandua the soveraigne Lady
there. But, as it falleth out commonly with men in adversitie,
to be forsaken and left succorlesse: so insteed of
finding the reliefe which he expected, he fell into the
danger which he little doubted. For Cartismandua, either
fearing her owne estate, or thinking to win favour
of the Conqueror (as Princes oft times make vse of one
anothers misfortunes to serve their own turnes) detained
him in prison a while, and afterward delivered him
to Ostorius, who was exceeding glad that he had gotten
him, and forthwith sent him to Rome, as a prize of great
worth, and the happie fruits of nine yeares service in the
warres.
               
               
                  CHAP. XV.
                  
                     Caractacus the British Prince is sent to Rome, and presented
there before Claudius the Emperour. His habite,
speech, and behaviour. He is pardoned, and dismissed.
                  
                  THe report of Caractacus misfortune was soone
spred throughout the Iles and Provinces adioyning,
for his name was renowmed in most parts of
Italie, and each man desired to see him, who had so long
time withstood, and contemned that power, which

held all the world in awe, and obedience. The Citty of
Rome for many dayes togither was filled only with talke
of him, and expectation of his comming; and the Emperour
himselfe as a Conqueror, by extolling his owne
worthinesse, covertly added more glory to the conquered.
The people assembled togither, as it were to see
some notable and rare spectacle. The Emperors guard in
armes were orderly placed in the field before the camp.
After this preparation made, the prisoners, and Trophies
were presented in this maner; First the vassals of Caractacus
going formost, bowed their bodies to the people,
as they passed, and seemed by their rufull countenances
to discover their feare. The caparisons, chaines, and other
spoiles taken in the warre, were carried after them.
Then Caractacus his Brethren, his Wife, and Daughters
followed; and last of all came Caractacus himselfe. His
bodie was naked, for the most part, and painted with the
figures of diverse beasts. He ware a chain of yron about
his necke, and another about his middle. The haire of
his head hanging downe in long locks (curled by nature)
covered his backe and shoulders, and the haire of
his vpper lip being parted on both sides, lay vpon his
breast. The rest of his body was shaven all over. Neither
was his behaviour lesse noted, then the strangenes of
his habite: For he neither hung down his head, nor craved
mercie (as the rest did) but went on boldly with a
setled and sterne countenance, till he came before the
Emperors Tribunall seat, and there standing stil a while,
he after spake these, or the like wordes.
                  
                     If either my vertues in prosperitie, had beene answerable
to the greatnesse of my estate, or the successe
of my late attempts to the resolution of my mind, I
might have come to this Citie, to have beene entertained,
rather as a Friend, than as a captive to be gazed

vpon; For it should have beene no disgrace for the
Romans, to have admitted into societie with them, a
man royally discended, and a commaunder of manie
warlike Nations. But what cloud soever Fortune hath
cast over my estate, she is not able to take from me
those things, which the heavens and Nature have given
me: (that is,) the dignitie of my Birth, and the
courage of my Mind, which never failed me: I know
it is a custome among you, to make your Triumphs,
the spectacles of other mens miseries, and in this my
Calamitie, as in a Mirror, you do now behold your
owne glorie. Yet know, that I was sometimes a
Prince, furnished with strength of men, and abiliments
of warre; and what marvaile is it, that I have
now lost them, since your owne experience hath
taught you, that the events of warre are variable, and
vncertaine? I thought that the deepe Waters, which
like a Wall enclose vs, (whom the heavens seeme to
have placed farre off, in another world by it selfe,)
might have bin a sufficient defence for vs against forraigne
invasion: But I see now, that your Desire of
soveraigntie admits no limitation, since neither the
danger of an vnknown Sea, nor the distance of place,
can any longer warrant our safetie and libertie. If you
will needs command the whole world, then must all
men become your vassals, and live vnder a forced obedience.
For mine owne part, so long as I was able,
I made resistance, being vnwilling to submit my neck
to a forraine Yoke. The law of naturall reason alloweth
everie man to defend himselfe, being assailed,
and to withstand force, by force. Had I yeelded at
the first, thy glorie, and my mis-hap had not bin so
renowned, but both of them would soone have been
forgotten. Fortune hath done her woorst, and we

have now nothing left vs, but our lives, which if thou
spare (having power to spill) thou shalt doe that
which best beseemeth a great Mind, and a noble
Nature.
                  
                  The Emperor hearing this speech, and wondering
to see such boldnesse and constancie of mind in a dejected
estate, pardoned both him, and the rest of his companie,
commaunding them to be vnbound, and so dismissed
them.
               
               
                  CHAP. XVI.
                  
                     What opinion the Romans held of Caractacus. Triumphal
honors assigned to Ostorius for taking him. The Britans
assaile the Roman campe in the Countrie of the
Silures. The principalitie of South-wales. The death
of Ostorius the Generall.
                  
                  FOr many dayes togither, Caractacus his Fortune
ministred matter of discourse to the Lords of the
Senate, who affirmed the spectacle of his captivitie
to be no lesse honorable, then that of Syphax the Numidian
King, over whom P. Scipio triumphed, or that of
Perses, whom Paulus Aemilius vanquished, or of any other
Kings, that had in former times beene taken in
warre, and shewed to the people. Then publike honors
of triumph were decreed for Ostorius, whose fortunes
being now at the highest, began afterwards to decline,
by reason, that either Caractacus (the obiect of his valour)
being removed, he supposed he had made a full
conquest, and therfore followed the service more carelesly:
or else, for that the residue of the Britans, having
compassion of the misfortune of so mightie a Prince,
and being eagre of revenge, renued the warre; for they

assayled the Legionary Cohorts which were left behind to
build fortresses in the Silures Country, killed the camp-Maister,
and eight Centurions, besides some of the forwardest
souldiers, and they had put all the rest to the
sword, if speedy rescue had not come from the villages
and Forts adioining. Diuerse other sallies they made, as
time and place gave them advantage, prevailing sometimes
by strength, sometimes by pollicie, and somtimes
by chance. The Principal motive, that enduced the rest
to take armes, was the example of the Silures, who were
most resolutely bent, as being exasperated, by reason of
as peech that the Roman Emperor had vsed, which was:
That he would root out the name of the Silures, as the
Sicambrians had beene in former time. This made them
bold and desperate to adventure, as men knowing their
destinie before hand. Many skirmishes they had, in surprising
the scattered troupes of the Roman souldiers, and
often times with good successe, in taking rich booties,
and prisoners, and distributing the spoiles among their
neighbours, by which meanes they drew them also to
revolt. In the meane time, Ostorius wearied with care
and travaile, ended his life.
               
               
                  CHAP. XVII.
                  
                     Aulus Didius is sent by Claudius the Emperour to take
charge of the armie in Britannie. Venutius the husband
of Cartismandua Princesse of the Brigantes, vpō
private discontentment taketh armes against the Romans.
The death of Claudius the Emperor.
                  
                  
                     CLaudius the Emperour being advertised of the
death of Ostorius, sent Aulus Didius to take charge
of the armie in Britannie, where notwithstanding

all the haste he made, he found all out of frame: Manlius
Valens with his Legion having encountred the Britans
with ill successe, which by report of the Ilanders,
was made greater then indeed it was, to terrifie the new
Governour, who also made vse of the same policie to
serve his owne turne; for, by encreasing the fame of that
which he heard reported, he supposed, either to win
greater praise, if he prevailed, or to purchase a more favourable
censure of his actions, if he miscarried. The
Silures had made many roades into the subdued Countrie,
wasting, and spoyling round about, when Didius
the Lievtenant, vpon his first arrivall, entering into the
field, restrained their outrage, and for a while kept
them in some awe.
                  After Caractacus was taken, Venutius, a Prince faithfull
to the Romans, and protected by them (so long as
Cartismandua his wife and he agreed togither) vpon
private discontentment began a new rebellion. For
Cartismandua (whom the Romans specially favored for
the deliverie of Caractacus) abounding now in peace,
wealth, and plentie (which are commonly the nurses
of licencious living) fell in love with Velocatus one of
her husbands servants, and forgetting in the end her
owne honour, preferred him before Venutius, who being
deeply touched with such an open iniurie, and disgrace,
raised a power, to expell her and her Paramour
out of the Kingdome. The warre seemed at the first, to
have beene maintained betweene themselves, and their
private followers onely, till Cartismandua, by pollicie,
had taken Venutius his brother, and certaine of his kinsmen:
and then the Inhabitants round about, fearing
the event, and disdaining to be brought vnder the servile
yoke of a woman, declared themselves for Venutius,
and with a choise number of youthfull and well experienced

Souldiers, invaded the Country: whereof Didius
having timely intelligence, sent certaine Cohorts to
encounter them. Hereupon insued a sharpe Conflict,
the successe whereof was much doubted in the beginning,
but in the end the Romans prevailed. The like
fortune also had Caesius Nasica with his Legion; For Didius
himselfe, as a man striken in yeares, and fitter to direct,
then execute, vsed (for the most part) the ministerie
of other men, keeping that which his Predecessors
had gotten, and building onely some few Castles, and
places of Defence within the land, to win thereby, a
fame of augmenting the office.
                  The yeare following, Claudius the Emperour, (by
the trecherie of Agrippina his wife, who practised to
prevent Britannicus, and to preferre her owne sonne
Nero to the Empire) died of poyson: leaving to posteritie
no greater fame of any thing by him attempted
during his government, then of his
fortunate Expedition into
Britannie.
                  
               
               The end of the first Booke, of the first part of
the Historie of Great Britan.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        The succession of the
Roman Emperours
from Nero, vnto
Domitian.
                        6
Nero
Emperour
14. yeares.
                        7
Galba
Emperour
7. moneths
                        8
Otho
Emperour
4. moneths
                        9
Vitellius
Emperour
8. moneths.
                        10
Vespasian.
Emperour 9.
years and 11.
men.
                        11

                              
                                 Titus
Emperour
2. yeares.
                              12
Domitian
Emperour
15. yeares.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Lievtenants in Britannie from the
beginning of Neroes raigne, vntill
the end of Domitians.
            
               ¶Lievtenants vnder
Nero.
               Veranius.
               Suetonius Paulinus.
               Petronins Turpilianus.
               Trebellius Maximus.
            
            
               ¶Lievt. vnder Galba.
               Trebellius Maximus.
            
            
               ¶Lievt. vnder Otho.
               Trebellius Maximus.
            
            
               ¶Lievt. vnder Vitellius.
               Vectius Bolanus.
            
            
               ¶Lievt. vnder Vespasian.
               Petilius Cerealis.
               Iulius Frontinus.
               Iulius Agricola.
            
            
               ¶Lievt. vnder Titus.
               Iulius Agricola.
            
            
               ¶Lievt. vnder Domitian.
               Iulius Agricola.
               Salustius Lucullus.
            
            
               The Princes, and men of
speciall note among
the Britans.
               In the time of Suetonius Paulinus
government vnder Nero the Emperor.
               Prasutagus, Prince of the
Icenians.
               Voadica (the warlike) his
wife.
               In the time of Iulius Agricolaes
government, vnder Domitian the
Emperour.
               Galgacus, Prince of the
Caledonians.
               In the time of Salustius Lucullus
government, vnder Domitian the
Emperour.
               Arviragus.
            
         
         
            
            THE FIRST PART:
            
               The second Booke.
               
                  
                     NERO CL: CAES: AVG: GER: P. M. TR. P. XI. P. P.
                     portrait of Nero
                  
               
               
                  The first CHAPTER.
                  
                     Nero succeedeth Claudius in the Empire. The Province
in Britannie is governed by Veranius, after whose death
the charge is committea to Suetonius Paulinus. The Ile
of Anglesey is subdued. The doctrine and maners of the
religious Druydes.
                  
                  
                     THis was the state of the affaires in
Britannie, when Claudius the Emperour
died, leaving the Roman Monarchie
to Nero his adopted sonne,
who (after his first five yeares
spent) being given over to all kinds
of vice, neglected the government
both at home and abroad, not daring to enter into any
militare action; and it was thought that he would have
revoked the armie out of Britannie, if verie shame in detracting

from his fathers glorie, and loosing that which
he had wonne, had not with-held him.
                  About that time Veranius was Governour in Britannie,
where the shortnesse of his continuance suffred
him not to effect any great matter; for he died in the
first yeare of his government, and then was the Province
assigned to Suetonius Paulinus, one of the most famous
men of that age for militare affaires. His good successe
at his first entrance, in subduing nations, and establishing
Garrisons (where need required) made him
bold to assaile the Ile ofAnglesey. 
                     Mona, (lying in the West part
of Britannie) as having beene a common receptacle of
Fugitives during the warre. In his passage thither, he
left the Country behind him (as he marched) vnfurnished
in diverse places, laying it therby open to all oportunities
of annoyance. At his arrivall, the barbarous
people rudely armed, standing vpon the shore, made
shew of their purpose to resist: The women in mourning
attire (their haire about their eares) shaking burning
fire-brands like Furies of hell, ran vp and downe,
and the Druydes lifting vp their hands toward heaven,
filled the ayre with cries and curses.
                  These Druydes were certain Priests, had in great reverence
among the Britans. They kept their residence,
for the most part, in shadie and darke groves (as fittest
places for devotion.) Among all trees, they most esteemed
the Oake, as halowed, and without the which,
they could not performe their superstitious rites. Their
sacrifices were both private & publike. They instructed
the youth of Britannie, and decided controversies, civil,
and criminall. If any man refused to stand to their award,
he was forbidden to be present at their sacrifices,
which was accounted the greatest punishment that
might be; for thereby he was reputed a notorious offender,

exempt from the ordinarie protection of the
lawes, vncapable of any preferment, and all men would
flie his companie. Amongst these Priests, there was alwayes
one that had the chiefe authoritie; and he being
dead, the worthiest of them that survived, succeeded in
his place. If there seemed to be an equalitie of worthinesse
among more then one, then the choise was made
by pluralitie of voyces. At one certaine time in the
yeare, they vsed to hold a Sessions in Gallia, in some
consecrated place, where they heard and determined
causes; For the superstition was first carried thither out
of Britannie. They had immunitie from all maner of
Tributes, and from service in the warres; by reason of
which priviledges, they drew to them many followers,
whom they taught a great number of verses by heart,
supposing it vnlawfull to commit those sacred things
to writing; whereas in other matters, as well publike,
as private, they vsed the Greeke letters. And this it is likely
they did, either for that they would not have the
knowledge of their superstitious rites laid open to the
common people, (in whom ignorance seemeth to ingender
a kind of devotion) or else, for that they would
have their schollers to trust the more to their memorie,
while they wanted the helpe of writing. They preached
that the soule was immortall, and that after the death
of one man, it went into another. By this perswasion,
they stirred vp men to vertue, and tooke away the feare
of death (the maine obstacle of glorious adventures.)
Other things they taught also concerning the motion
of the Starres, the situation of the earth, and the power
of their prophane gods.
                  The strange behavior of these religious Priests, and
the out-cries of the people of Mona, so amazed the Roman
souldiers, that like men inchaunted, they stood still

without motion, till the Captain spake vnto them, and
encouraged them to adventure, not fearing a flocke of
feelie women, or frantike people; and then boldly giving
the charge, he soone disordered & dispersed them,
making himselfe maister of the field: which done, the
Roman souldiers entred the Townes, and placed garrisons
there, felling the woods, which the Inhabitants
superstitiously reputed holy, by reason of the Altars,
whereupon they sacrificed the blood of captives, and
prophecied of the successe of their owne affaires, by
viewing the entralls of men, whom they had killed.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     The Britans oppressed by the crueltie and covetousnesse of the
Roman officers, discover their greevances one to another.
Prodigious signes foregoing the subversion of the
Roman Colonie. The Britans take armes vnder the
conduct of Voadica.
                  
                  IN the meane time Prasutagus Prince of the Icenians,
a man renowned for his riches, did by his last will,
make the Roman Emperour his heire, (joyntly with
two of his daughters,) supposing, that thereby his principalitie,
and family should have beene maintained in
good estate, and protected from violence after his
death: all which fell out contrarie to his hopes; for his
kingdome was made a prey to the Souldiers, Voadica
his wife whipped, his daughters deflowred, such as were
of his family made slaves, and the wealthiest men of his
Country, either by open force, or surmised pretences,
deprived of their goods, and dispossessed of their inheritance.
Besides that, Seneca one of Neroes counsailors,

having forced diverse of the better sort of the Britans,
to take great summes of money of him vpon vsurie, did
then, for his private gaine, exact the payment of the
principall vpon a sodaine; to the vtter vndoing of his
debtors: and Decianus Catus theReceiver of the revenues of the province. 
                     Procurator in Britannie,
renued the Confiscation of their goods, which
Claudius the Emperour had pardoned. The souldiers
placed in the Colonie at Camalodunum, had thrust the
owners and ancient Inhabitants out of their houses,
terming them slaves, and drudges, and abusing them in
all reprochfull maner. The Temple erected in the honour
of Claudius, was an eie-sore, and continuall burden
vnto them, while the Priests Augustales that attended
there, wasted the wealth of the inhabitants, vnder
the pretext of religion. To these common grievances
of the afflicted people, the present occasion seemed to
offer means of redresse, while the Roman Generall was
making warre in Mona. Whereupon they resolved to
take armes, inciting the Trinobantes and other Nations
(that were not wholy brought vnder subjection) to doe
the like. Then they began to discourse of the miseries
of bondage, to lay their injuries togither, aggravating
them by their owne Constructions, and complaining,
that their patience had profited them nothing, but to
draw heavier burdens vpon them, as men that would
gently beare: That whereas in former times they had
onely one Commander, now there was two thrust
vpon them, the Lievtenant to sucke their blood, and
the Procurator their substance, whose disagreement
was the vexation of the subject, and agreement, their
vtter vndoing, while the one burdened them with
Souldiers and Captaines, the other with wrongs, and
indignities: that the lust and covetousnesse of these
their enemies, laid hold vpon all persons, without exception:

that though in the field, he that spoyleth,
be commonly the stronger, yet themselves were, by
Cowards and weaklings (for the most part) dispossest
of their houses▪ bereft of their Children, enioyned
to yeeld Souldiers for other mens behoofe, as
though they were such a kind of people, as knew
how to do any thing else, save onely to die for their
owne Countrey; For otherwise there was but a
handfull of Souldiers come over, if they did but reckon
their owne number, considering withall, that
Germanie had alreadie shaken off the yoke, having no
Ocean Sea, but a river to defend it: that the causes
then moving them to take armes, were just, and honourable;
namely to recover their libertie, and to defend
their Parents, Wives, Children, and Countrey;
whereas the Romans had nothing to provoke
them to warre, but their owne covetousnesse, and
wanton lust, and were likely enough to depart (as Iulius
Caesar had done) if themselves would imitate the
vertues of their progenitors; and not be dismaid with
the doubtfull event of one skirmish, or two, seeing
that men in miserie have commonly more courage
(then at other times) and more constancie to continue:
and now the heavens themselves seemed to
pittie their poore estate, by sending the Roman Governour
out of the way, and confining the army (as it
were) into another Iland; by which meanes, oportunitie
of revenge, and hope of libertie was offred:
and finally, that being assembled, to devise, and deliberate
togither, they had obtained the hardest point
in an action of that nature, wherein it were more danger
to be taken consulting, then doing. With these
and the like speeches they stirred vp one another, each
man laying open his owne particular greevances, and

adding them to the common cause.
                  About this time, diverse prodigious signes were noted
to portend the subversion of the Roman Colonie, as
namely, an Image of Victorie falling downe reversed at
Camalodunum; Strange noyses sounding in the ayre:
Strange apparitions seene in the sea: The Ocean bloody
in shew: and the print of mens bodies vpon the sands.
Diverse constructions were made of these things as ominous,
whether that they proceed of some naturall
causes (though not alwayes observed,) or else, that they
do necessarily forego the ruine and change of great
States. Howbeit commonly in such cases, mens minds
do mis-give them, while they frame the future event of
things answerable to their owne fearefull imaginations;
and great alterations falling out sometimes after like accidents,
they superstitiously suppose them, to be alwayes
the certaine fore-runners of destruction. The apprehension
of these things, at the first, strooke the Romans
with greater feare, by reason of the absence of
their General, and thereupon they required the ayde of
Catus Decianus the Procurator, who sent a small companie
badly armed, to renforce the garrison. The old souldiers
that had beene left within the Towne, (although
few in number) yet trusting to the franchize of the
Temple, and not doubting the secret conspiracie of
their confederates, were in a maner carelesse, as in times
of peace, following their pleasures, and making no provision
for defence. The Britans, having in the meane
time, taken armes vnder the conduct of Voadica, a Ladie
of the blood of their kings (for in matter of government
they made no difference of sex) and being informed of
the state of the Colonie, determined first to assaile the
townes and forts in their passage thither, which they attempted
accordingly, & with no great difficulty surprised
the greatest number of them.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     The Britans take armes vnder the conduct of Voadica. Her
Oration to her Souldiers. The Roman Colonie is
surprised. Cerealis comming to succour it, hardly
escapeth with life. Catus the Procurator flieth into
France.
                  
                  THe good successe the Britans had in taking in some
places of defence, as they marched forward, made
them desirous and adventurous to invade the Colonie
it selfe: and Voadica as their leader, being a woman
of a great spirit, and comely personage, (apparelled in a
loose gowne of diverse colours, with a golden chaine about
her necke, and a light speare in her hand) standing
vpon a heape of Turves, the better to be seene (her
daughters on each side of her) with a shrill voice vttered
these, or the like words:
                  
                     It is no new custome for the Britans to make warre
vnder the leading of women, ennobled by their
birth and discent; the examples of former times can
well witnesse the experience thereof. Howbeit at this
present, I wil disclaime all titles of dignitie, and prerogatives
of blood: and what difference soever there
is in our estates, yet shall our fortune, in this action, be
indifferent and common to vs both. I shall not need
to repeate that, which you all know but too well;
namely, what miseries we have endured vnder the tyrannie
of this prowd Nation. You have had the triall
both of libertie and bondage, and I doubt not, but
you find now, how much the one is to be preferred
before the other; and howsoever some of you heretofore,
for private respects, have inclined to the Roman
governors, as favourers of their vsurped soveraigntie:

yet I suppose you will now confesse with
me, that freedome in a poore estate, is better then
golden fetters. For what abuse can there be named
so vile, or indignitie so disgracefull, that hath not bin
offered vs, without respect of degree, age, or sex? we
till our grounds, & sweat for other men, that reap the
sweat of our travells; the wealth that we gather to
maintaine our selves, and our families, is by other
men wastfully and riotously mis-spent; we have nothing
our owne, but what they leave vs, and nothing
left vs, but labour and vexation; our bodies
and estates being consumed, to satisfie their ambition
& covetousnes; We have not so much as our heads
toll-free: so narrowly are we sifted, from the highest
to the lowest. Other subdued Nations are yet by
death freed from bondage; but we, even after death
seeme to live still in thraldome, while we are enforced
to pay tribute, as wel for the dead, as the living. What!
are we a nation so contemptible, that we can serve to
no other vse, then to be slaves? or so vnhappie, that
death it self can not acquite vs from being miserable?
How long shall we give way to our owne wrongs?
Shall we hope for reformation of these abuses? Nay,
we have hoped too long, and by patient bearing of
one injurie, we have drawn on another. Why should
we not rather seeke to redresse them? for if we enter
into due consideration of our selves, what are the Romans
more then we? our bodies are as strong as theirs:
our numbers greater. We have agilitie of body, (our
women no lesse then our men) to run, to leape, to
swim, and to performe all warlike exercises; for
which (indeed) we are naturally more fit, then for the
spade, plough, or handy-crafts. And how soever the
Romans may seeme fortunate by the folly, or weaknes

of other Nations: yet are they not comparable vnto
vs, whom Nature hath framed to endure hunger,
cold, and labour, and to be content with things necessarie
onely. For to vs everie herbe and roote is
meate, each river, and spring yeeldeth vs drinke,
while we seeke no further, then to appease hunger,
and quench thirst; each tree serves for shelter against
storms in winter, & for shadow against the parching
heate of summer, we need no other beds then the
earth, nor covering then the heavens; whereas they
must have their joynts suppled with hot baths, sweet
oyntments, and soft couches, and their bodies pampered
with wine, daintie fare, and all kind of effeminate
nicenesse and delicacie. These be the properties,
wherein they imitate their master Nero, who hath
onely the shape of a man, being indeed a woman, or
rather, neither man nor woman, but a monster of nature,
a singer, a fidler, a stage-player, a murtherer, and
one that excelleth other men as farre in vice, as
he doth in preheminence of degree. Besides all
this, the cause of our warre is just, and the Divine
powers (that favour justice,) have made our first attempts
prosperous: and me thinketh, that the necessitie
of our case, were able to make, even Cowards, valiant.
Your ancesters could make head against Iulius
Caesar, and the Emperours Caligula, and Claudius. The
Germans have lately freed themselves by that memorable
overthrow of the Roman Legions, vnder the
conduct of Quintilius Varus; and shall not we, (who
scorne to be reputed inferiour to the Germans in valour)
be confident in our owne strength, and boldly
adventure? considering that if we prevaile, we recover
our lost libertie, if we be forced to retire, we have
woods, hills, and marishes for our refuge, and if we

die, we doe but sell those lives with honour, which
we cannot possesse with safetie. For mine owne
part, you shall find me no lesse readie to execute,
(when time serves,) then I am now to advise and exhort
you: my selfe having determined, either to vanquish,
or die; If any of you be otherwise minded, then
live, and be slaves still.
                  
                  With these and the like speeches, she inflamed the
hearts that were alreadie kindled, and perswading the
Britans to pursue their enemies, as Dogs and Woolves
doe fearefull Hares and Foxes, she let slip out of her lap
a quick Hare, at whose running through the campe, the
Britans showted, apprehending it as a matter ominous,
and fore-signifying the Romans flight. And thereupon
they cried, that they might be speedily led to the Colonie
it selfe, (as the seat of their slaverie) which at their first
comming they surprised, killing, spoyling, & consuming
all with sword and fire, except the Temple onely, into
which the Souldiers fled as a Sanctuarie, though it
could not long protect them from the violence of
the furious multitude. Petilius Cerealis the Lievtenant of
the Ninth Legion, comming to succour the Garrison,
had all his footmen slaine, and himself with a few horse
hardly escaped. Catus the Procurator, knowing himselfe
to be odious to the Britans, (by reason of the extortions
he had committed in his office,) fled secretly into
Gallia.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     Suetonius returneth with his armie out of Anglesey. The
Cities of London, and Verlam, are taken, and spoyled
by the Britans. The Romans and Britans make preparation
for a set battaile.
                  
                  
                     SVetonius, vpon intelligence of the revolt, returned
out of Mona, and led his armie with some difficultie
towards London, (a place not knowne at that time
by the name of a Colonie,) but famous onely for concourse
of Merchants and trafficke. There he staied a
while, as doubting what course to take: the small number
of his forces, and the ill successe of Cerealis making
him more warie; and he supposed it would be a worke
well worth his labor, if with the losse of one Towne, he
could preserve the rest, that were likely to revolt. Wherupon,
furnishing his defective Companies with such able
men as were then in the Towne, although the Londoners
with teares implored his aide, and desired his aboade
there for their defence: yet he marched forward,
leaving behind him all such, as either by reason of their
age, sex, or other infirmities could not folow, or else, for
love of the place, (as being bred and born there) would
not abandon it. The towne being thus weakly garded,
was taken by the Britans, and the people therein put all
to the sword. The like calamitie befell the free-towne
ofAn ancient Citie, with whose ruines saint Albans was built. 
                     Verulamium, by reason that diverse of the Britans
finding their owne strength, forsooke their forts, and assailed
the most notable and wealthie places, enriching
themselves with the spoil of their enemies, whom they
hanged, burned, and crucifyed, exercising all kinds of
crueltie that a mind enraged with desire of revenge,

could devise. They tooke no prisoners, either to preserve
for ransome, or to exchange, according to the
lawes of warre, but slue both Citizens and Confederates
to the number of about seuentie thousand. Suetonius
with the Fourteenth Legion, seconded by the Standard-bearers
of the Twentieth, and some Auxiliaries,
made haste to encounter the Britans, and resolved without
further delay, to trie the chance of a set battaile.
Then he pitched in a place that had a narrow entrance,
with a thicke wood for a defence behind him, and a
faire wide plaine before his Campe. The Legionarie
Souldiers were marshalled togither in thicke ranks, the
light harnessed inclosing them about, and the horsemen
making wings on each side. Poenius Posthumus
the Campe-Master of the Second Legion, was appoynted
to leade the fore-ward, but he contemptuously refused
the charge.
                  In the meane time the Britans ranged abroad in
great troopes, triumphing for their late good successe,
and being encouraged by the example of Voadica their
Generall, were fiercely bent to assaile the Roman campe,
supposing now, that no force was able to resist them.
And they had brought their wives with them, and placed
them in Waggons about the vtmost parts of the
Plaine, to be the beholders of their valiant acts, and witnesses
of their expected victorie.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. V.
                  
                     The Oration of Suetonius the Roman Generall vnto his
Souldiers. The fight betweene the Romans and Britans.
The Britans are overthrowne. Voadica poysoneth
her selfe. The death of Poenius Posthumus.
                  
                  
                     SVetonius being now readie to joyne battaile, though
he perceived that his Souldiers, were not much dismaied
with the sight of so great numbers scattered
vpon the Plaine; yet he supposed it not vnnecessarie to
vse some speech to them, by way of exhortation, and
therefore began in this maner:
                  
                     I can not now vse many words to exhort you; the
time permits it not, and the present occasion requireth
rather deeds then words. Yet let not our small
number discourage you, considering that your ancestors,
with a smaller number have vndertaken greater
matters; and that, where many Legions have beene in
the field, a few Souldiers have carried away the victorie;
What a glorie shall it be for you then, if with
so small a power, you can purchase the praise of a
whole army? There is no feare of Ambush; the
Woods gard you behind, and on the Plaine before
you lieth your enemies Campe, wherein you may
behold more women then men, and the men themselves
for the most part, vnarmed, and not likely to
endure the poynts and strokes of our weapons,
which they have so often felt to their smart. It stands
you now vpon, to approove your selves the same
men you are reputed to be. This is the time, either to
recover that you have lost, or, to loose that which
you shall never recover. You fight now, not for honour

onely, but for Honour and Life. Remember
that you are Romans, whose glorie it is to doe, and suffer
great things. The fortune of this battell wil either
give vs peaceable possession of that our forefathers
have wonne, or for ever deprive vs of it; What shall
become of you, if you be taken, the woful experience
of your Countrimen, most miserably massacred before
your eyes may sufficiently testifie. Revenge
therefore both their wrongs, and your owne, and no
doubt, but the gods themselves (who never leave
crueltie vnpunished) wil assist you. It is better for vs to
die in this Action, then by yeelding, or flying, to outlive
the praise of our owne worthinesse. But whether
we live or die, Britannie shall be ours; for if we live
and recover it, our posteritie ever after shall be able to
defend it; and though they should not, yet shall our
bones keepe continuall possession of it. Take courage
therefore, and feare not the lowd and vaine showts of
a disordered multitude, but boldly give the assault,
and keeping your selves close togither, pursue the
fight, without thinking of the spoile, till you have
made a ful end. For the victorie once gotten, al things
else will of themselves fall to your share.
                  
                  With these, or the like words, the old Souldiers were
pricked forward, and Suetonius perceiving it, gave the
signall of battell. The Legions kept the strait, as a place
of defence, till the Britans had spent their Darts: and
then they sallyed out into the Plaine, (the Auxiliaries,
and the horsemen making way) and pressed into the
thickest troopes of the barbarous people, who being
vnable to endure the fiercenesse of the assault, turned
their backs, thinking to save themselves by flight; But by
reason their waggons, placed about the Plain, had hedged
in the passages on all sides, few of them escaped.

The residue, as well women as men, were put to the
sword, and their dead bodies (mingled with the carcases
of their Horses and Chariots) were heaped one vpon
another. The number of the Britans slaine in that
battaile, was reported to be about fourescore thousand,
and of the Romans about foure hundred onely, and not
many mo wounded in the conflict. This dayes service
was renowmed among the Romans, as comparable to
those of auncient times in the free Common-wealth.
Voadica disdaining to fall into her enemies hands, ended
her life by poyson: and Poenius Posthumus seeing
the good successe of the Fourteenth and Twentieth Legions,
(for that by disobaying the Generall, contrarie to
the discipline of warre, he had defrauded his owne Legion
of their part of the glorie in the action) for verie
griefe slue himselfe.
               
               
                  CHAP. VI.
                  
                     Suetonius renforceth the Roman Garrisons. Variance betweene
him, and Classicianus the Procurator. Polycletus
is sent by Nero the Emperour to examine their
doings. Suetonius is discharged of the armie, which
he delivereth vp to Turpilianus.
                  
                  THen Suetonius having gathered togither his dispersed
troopes, certaine Legionarie souldiers and Cohorts
of Auxiliaries were sent him out of Germany,
to renforce the Garrisons, and to make an end of the
warre. Some of the Britans that either openly resisted,
or elsstood doubtfully affected, were put to the sword,
and some that escaped the sword, died of famine for
lacke of corne, (a calamitie incident to them, as to a
people given rather to warre then husbandrie:) The

rest found meanes to relieve themselves by the Romans
provision; And though some overtures were now and
then made for a treatie of peace, yet the Britans would
not verie readily hearken thereto, by reason they
much doubted their safetie, as imagining that their
guiltinesse of the rebellion, had excluded them from all
hope of pardon; and they feared also the private displeasure
of the Lievtenant, who (though otherwise a
singular man) yet seemed to shew too much hautie and
hard dealing towards them that yeelded themselves,
and in some sort, vnder pretext of the publike service, to
revenge his owne injuries.
                  Besides Iulius Classicianus (who was sent to succeed
Catus) being at variance with Suetonius, had given out,
that a new Lievtenant was comming, and that he was
such a one, as being void of malice, or the pride of a
Conquerour, would be readie to receive into favour
all such as would yeeld themselves. He wrote Letters
also to Rome, signifying to the Senate, that they should
looke for no end of the warre in Britannie, so long as
Suetonius continued the government there; and that the
ill successe which he had in the service, was to be attributed
to his owne ill cariage of himselfe; and the good,
to the fortune of the Common weale. Hereupon Nero
sent Polycletus a Libertine into Britannie, to examine, and
report the state of the affaires there, and to enterpose
his authoritie, as a meane to reconcile the Lievtenant,
& the procurator, & to win the Britans to embrace peace.
At his landing in the Ile, the Roman souldiers there seemed
to feare & reverence him; & the causes of his comming
were diversly reported at the first. But the Britans
derided him; for (as men being borne free) they knew
not till that time, the power of Libertines (men made
free) but rather marvailed, that a Captain, and an armie

which had atchieved so great an enterprise, could be
brought to obey, and yeeld an account of their actions
to a base bondslave, (as they termed him.)
                  These things, howsoever they were censured by others:
yet they were reported to Nero in such maner, as
the reporters thought might best content him: and
Suetonius, after the losse of some of his shipping, was
commanded (the warre being not yet finished) to deliver
vp the armie to Petronius Turpilianus, who had
(but even a little before) given over his Consulship.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. VII.
                  
                     Trebellius Maximus succeedeth Turpilianus in the government
of the Province. Discord in the armie betweene
Trebellius and Celius. The death of Nero
the Emperor, and succession of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius.
The valour and fortune of the Fourteenth
Legion.
                  
                  
                     TVrpilianus was a man of a soft spirit, and being a
stranger to the Britans faults, was the more tractable
and readie to remit them; by which meanes,
having composed the former troubles, he delivered vp
his charge to Trebellius Maximus, whose vnfitnesse for
action, and want of experience in militare matters, gave
the more boldnes to the Britans, that began now to discover
the defects of their Governours, having learned
both to flatter & dissemble, in conforming themselves
to the present times, and occasions for their advantage,
and for the most part, yeelding themselves to
those pleasures, which Securitie vseth to engender, even
in minds well disposed by Nature. For Trebellius,
                     
besides his insufficiencie, abused the authoritie of his
place, to enrich himself by polling the Common souldiers,
and Roscius Coelius Lievtenant of the Twentieth
Legion whetted them on against him, as against his ancient
enemie; so that in the end they brake out into
hainous termes, the one objecting matter of crime against
the other: Trebellius charged Coelius with factious
behauiour. Coelius againe Trebellius with beggering the
Legions; and the discord betwixt them grew so farre,
that Trebellius being despised, as well by the Aydes, as
the Legions (both of them sorting themselves to Coelius
his side) was in great feare of his life: the danger wherof
he sought to prevent, rather by flying away, then by
executing any exemplarie Iustice vpon offenders. In
the meane time, the Souldiers neglecting the ancient
discipline of warre, fell to mutinie, and all kind of riot,
as men that had rather be doing ill, then doing nothing.
And afterwards, Trebellius taking againe his former
place, as it were by capitulation, seemed to govern
onely at the discretion of his Souldiers, who finding his
weaknesse, and want of Iudgement to vse his authoritie,
tooke vpon them to do what they listed: and herewith
also the Lievtenant himselfe seemed contented, as
being now given over altogither to a slouthfull kind of
life (terming it peace and quietnesse
                        •
                     ) for which the
death of Nero the Emperour, and the civill discord at
that time between Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, contending
for the soveraigntie ministred some colour of excuse.
                  Not long before this time, the Fourteenth Legion (famous
for many great attempts, and growing now more
insolent then the rest,) was revoked out of the Ile, to
have beene sent to the Streights about the Caspian Sea,
though afterwards vpon intelligence of the revolt in
Gallia, and Spaine, (when Iulius Vindex tooke armes

against Nero) it was retained about the Citie of Rome
for a safegard to those parts. In the turbulent times that
ensued Neroes death, it tooke part with Otho against Vitellius,
at the battell neere Bebriacum, where Otho was
overthrowne; and Vitellius after the victorie, suspecting
the Souldiers of that Legion, (as knowing their great
stomacks, and ill affection towards him) thought it expedient
to joyne to them theBands of Hollanders. 
                     Batavian Cohorts, that by
reason of the inveterate hatred betweene them, they
might one oppose the other, and himselfe in the meane
time remaine more secure.
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     Vectius Bolanus is sent by Vitellius the Emperour, to take
charge of the Armie in Britannie. Vespasian succeedeth
Vitellius in the Empire. The government of the
Province assigned to Petilius Cerealis, who soone after
leaveth the same to Iulius Frontinus.
                  
                  
                     VEctius Bolanus, a man not much vnlike Trebellius
in some respects, was sent over by Vitellius; during
the time of whose Government, the like disorders
continued still in the Campe, saving that Bolanus,
by the mildnesse of his nature (being not touched otherwise
in his reputation) had purchased love, and
good will, in stead of feare and obedience. In his time
diverse choise men of warre taken out of the Legions in
Britannie, were conducted to Rome by Hordeonius Fla
                           •
                        
                        cus
in ayd of Vitellius. But when Vespasian made warre
for the Empire, Bolanus refused to send Vitellius any succour,
by reason that the Britans finding the Romans state
encumbred with civill dissention, began to revolt in

diverse places of the Ile, and some of them also shewed
themselves openly in favour of Vespasian, who had carried
himselfe honourably in Britannie, when Claudius
was there, and seemed now by many ominous predictions,
to be a man specially marked for the Empire.
                  The death of Vitellius quenching the flame of civill
broyles among the Romans, confirmed the possession of
the Empire to Vespasian, who shewed the care and respect
he had of the Ile of Britannie, by employing great
Captaines, and good souldiers there. The Lievtenantship
was then assigned to Petilius Cerealis, a man that had
given good proofe of his sufficiencie in former services.
Vpon his first entrance into office, he invaded the
Country of the Brigantes (the most populous state of
the whole Province) the greatest part whereof, (after
many bloodie battailes) was either conquered, or wasted,
and the hope of the Britans greatly abated, whenas
Iulius Frontinus (whose reputation was nothing impaired
by the fame of his predecessor) tooke vpon him
the charge, which he afterwards executed with great
commendation, in subduing the strong and warlike
Nation of the Silures, among whom he seemed to fight,
not onely with men (whose strength and valour was
able to make opposition against his attempts) but also
with Mountaines, streights, and places of verie difficult
accesse.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IX.
                  
                     Iulius Agricola assigned by Vespasian the Emperour to be
Lievtenant of the Armie in Britannie, subdueth the
Ordovices [the ancient Inhabitants of North-wales,]
and maketh a full conquest of the Ile of Anglesey. The
carriage of himselfe at his first entrance into government.
                  
                  IN this estate Iulius Agricola (having bin trained vp for
the most part in the British warre) did find the Province
at his first comming thither. He crossed the narrow
Seas about the midst of Summer; at which time, as
though the season of the yeare had bin past to begin a
new warre, the Roman soldiers attended an end of their
travel, & the Britans a beginning of annoyance to their
enemies. The Ordovices a little before he landed, had almost
cut in peeces a troope of horsemen that lay vpon
their borders. Vpon which attempt, the country being
awaked, as desirous of warre, allowed the example, and
some staied to see how the new Lievtenant would take
it. Agricola in the mean time, although the summer was
spent, and the Bands lay dispersed in the Province (his
souldiers having fully presumed of rest for that yeare, &
diverse officers of the armie being of opinion, that it
were better to keep, and assure the places suspected, then
to make any new attempt:) yet (all this notwithstanding)
he resolved directly to encounter the danger; and
gathering togither the Ensignes of the Legions, & some
few Auxiliaries (because the Ordovices, durst not discend
into indifferent ground) himselfe first of all, (to give others
like courage) marched vp to begin the assault. And
having in that conflict destroyed almost the whole Nation

of the Ordovices, & knowing right well, that Fame
must with Instance be followed, (for as the first should
fall out, so the rest would succeed:) he deliberated to
conquer the Iland of Mona; from the possession whereof,
Paulinus had beene formerly revoked by the general
rebellion of Britannie: But ships being then wanting (as
in an enterprise not intended before) the policy and resolutenesse
of the Captaine, devised a speedie passage.
For he commaunded the most choise of the Aids (to
whom al the shallows were knowne, and who (after the
vse of their Country) were able to swim in their armor
if need were) to lay aside their carriage, and putting ouer
at once, suddainly to invade it. Which thing so amazed
the Inhabitants (who supposed that the Romans
would have stayed a certain time for ships, and such like
provision by Sea,) that now beleeving, nothing could
be hard or invincible to men, which came so minded
to make warre, they humbly intreated for peace, and
yeelded the Iland. Thus Agricola at his first entrance into
office (which time others vsed to consume in vaine
oftentation, or ambitious seeking of Ceremonies) entring
withall into labors and dangers, became famous
indeed, and of great reputation. Howbeit he abused not
the prosperous proceeding of his affaires, to vanitie, or
braving in speeches; for he esteemed it an Action not
worthy the name of a Conquest, to keepe in order, onely
persons subdued before: neither decked he with
Laurel his letters of advertisement, but by stopping and
suppressing the fame of his doings, he greatly augmented
it, when men began to discourse vpon what great
presumptions offuture successe, he should make so light
an account of so great actions, alreadie performed.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. X.
                  
                     Agricola reformeth abuses in the Province. His courage,
industrie, and wisdome set forth as commendable qualities
in a Generall. The death of Vespasian the Emperour,
whom Titus his sonne succeedeth in the Empire.
                  
                  AS touching the civill government, Agricola knowing
how the province stood affected, and being
taught also by experience of others, that armes
availe little to settle a new conquered state, (if violence
and wrongs be permitted) determined at the first to cut
off all causes of warre and rebellion. And beginning at
home, he first of all reformed his owne house, (a point
of more hardnesse to some men, then to governe a Province.)
He committed no maner of publike affaires to
bondman or Libertine. He received no souldier neer his
person, vpon private affection of partiall suiters, nor vpon
commendation, or intreatie of Centurions, but elected
the best, and most serviceable. He would looke narrowly
into all things, yet not exact all things to the vtmost:
light faults he would pardon, and the great severely
correct, not alwayes punishing offenders, but oft
times satisfied with repentance, choosing rather, not to
preferre to office, such as were likely to offend, then after
the offence, to condemne them. The augmentation
of Tribute and corne, he tempered, with equal dividing
of burdens, cutting away those petie extortions, which
grieved the Britans more then the tribute it selfe. For
the poore people, in former times were constrained, in a
mockerie, to wait at the Barne doores, which were lockt
against them, and first to buy corne, and after sell at a
low price. Severall wayes also, and farre distant places

had beene assigned them by the Purveyors appointments,
for carrying provisions from the nearest standing
campes, to those which were farre off, and out of
the way, (pettie officers in the meane time, making
a gaine thereof, by sparing some, and charging
others at their pleasure) so as that which lay
open to all, and at hand, was turned onely to the private
profite of a few. By repressing these abuses in his first
yeare, a good opinion was conceived of the peace,
which either by the negligence, or partialitie of former
Lievtenants had beene no lesse feared, then warre. In
times of service he was verie painfull, and oft times
more adventurous in his owne person, then was fit for
a Generall; for himselfe would alwayes appoint his
ground for pitching the campe, and also be the first man
in prooving the Thickets, Bogges, or any other places
of danger, not suffring any corners or secret harbors vnsearched,
but wasting and spoiling everie where with
suddaine incursions and assaults. Howbeit, when by
these meanes he had terrified the Britans, then would he
againe spare and forbeare, as hoping thereby to allure
them to peace; whereupon many Cities (which before
that time stood vpon termes of equality) gave hostages,
and meekly submitted themselves, receiving garrisons,
and permitting the Romans to fortifie a worke performed,
with such foresight and judgement, as nothing
was ever attempted against them, while he continued
in office, whereas before that time, no new fortified
place in all Britannie escaped vnassailed. Thus farre had
Agricola proceeded, when the newes came that Vespasian
was dead, and Titus his sonne invested in the Empire.
               
               
                  
                  CHAH. XI.
                  
                     Agricolaes policie to plant civilitie among the Britans. He
leadeth his armie without resistance vnto Edenbourgh
Frith in Scotland.
                  
                  THe Winter ensuing was spent in a most profitable
and politike devise. For, whereas the Britans were
rude, and dispersed, and therefore prone vpon everie
occasion to warre, Agricola, that he might induce
them by pleasures to quietnesse and rest, exhorted them
in private, and commaunded his Souldiers to helpe
them to build Temples, Houses, and Places of publike
resort, commending such as were forward therein, and
checking the slow and idle persons, seeming thereby,
to impose a kind of necessitie vpon them, while everie
man contended to gaine the Lievtenants good will.
Moreover the Noble-mens sonnes, he tooke and caused
to be instructed in the Liberall Sciences, preferring
the wits of the Britans, before those of the students in
Gallia; the Britans also themselves being now curious to
attaine the eloquence of the Roman language, whereas
they lately rejected the speech. After that, the Roman
Attire grew to be in account, and the Gowne much vsed
among them: and so by little and little, they proceeded
to those common provocations of vices, namely
sumptuous Galleries, hote Baths, and exquisite
banquetings; which things the ignorant people termed
civilitie, though it were in deede a badge of their
bondage.
                  In the third yeare of his Government, he discovered
new Countries, wasting all before him, till he came
to the firth ofThe river T
                           •
                        eed. 
                     Taus. Which thing so terrified the Northern

                     Britans, that although the Roman Armie had bin
toyled and wearied with manie sharpe conflicts, yet
they durst not assaile it; whereby the Romans had the
more leysure to encampe themselves, and to fortifie:
wherein Agricola was either so skilfull, or so fortunate,
that no Castell planted by him, was either forced
by strength, or vpon Conditions surrendred, or (as not
defencible) forsaken. In all these Actions Agricola
never sought to draw to himselfe the glorie of any exploit
done by another, but were he Centurion, or of other
degree that had atchieved it, he would faithfully
witnesse the fact, and yeeld him alwayes his due commendation.
                  The fourth yeare of his office was spent in viewing
and ordering that, which he had over-run: and if the
valiant minds of his Souldiers, and the glorie of the
Roman name could have so permitted it, there should
have beene no need to have sought other limits of Britannie,
then were at that time discovered. ForThe Firth of Dunbretton in Scotland. 
                     Glota,
andEdenborough Firth. 
                     Bodotria, two armes of the two contrarie Seas,
shooting mightily into the land, are onely divided asunder
by a narrow partition of ground, which passage
was garded and fortifyed with Garrisons and Castels,
so that the Romans were now absolute Lords of all
on this side, having cast their enemies, as it were into
an other Iland.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XII.
                  
                     What opinion the Romans had of the conquest of Ireland.
Agricola setteth out a Navie to discover by Sea the
vtmost limits of the Iland, and marcheth himselfe by
land into the Country of the Caledonians, [the ancient
Inhabitants of the North part of Scotland.] The
Roman Campe is assailed, and delivered from danger
by the comming in of Agricola.
                  
                  THe fift yeare of the warre, Agricola subdued with
many and prosperous conflicts, strange nations, before
that time vnknowne, and furnished with forces
that part of Britannie, which lieth against Ireland:
And this he did, more for hope of advantage, then feare
of danger. For if Ireland might have beene wonne, (lying
(as it doth) betwene Britannie and Spaine, and commodious
also for Gallia) it would aptly have vnited to
the vse and profite one of the other, those strongest
members of the Empire. The Nature and fashions of
the Irish, did not then much differ from the British, but
the Ports and Haven Townes in Ireland were more
knowne and frequented, by reason of greater resort
thither of Merchants. Agricola having received a Prince
of that Countrey, (driven thence by civill dissention)
did vnder colour of curtesie and friendship retain him;
till occasion should serve to make vse of him. It was
afterwards reported, that with one Legion, and some
few Aydes, Ireland might then have beene wonne and
possessed, and that it would have beene also a meane to
have kept Britannie in obedience, if the Roman forces
had beene planted each where, and libertie (as it were)
cleane banished out of sight.
                  
                     
Now in the Summer following, because a Generall
rising in armes of the further Nations beyond Bodotria,
was feared, (the passages being all beset with the power
of the barbarous people,) he manned a fleet to search
the Creekes and harbours of the ample region beyond
it, backing them first of all with a navy, & with a goodly
shew bringing warre, both by land & sea. And ofttimes
it chanced that the horsmen, and footmen, and the Sea-souldier
met, & made merry in the same camp, ech man
extolling his owne prowesse and adventures, and making
their vaunts and comparisons souldier-like, some
of the woods and high mountaines that they had passed:
others of dangers of Rocks and Tempests that they
had endured: the one, of the land and the enemie defeated:
the other, of the Ocean assayed, and subdued.
The Britans, (as by the Prisoners it was vnderstood)
were much amazed at the sight of the Navie, supposing
that (the secrets of their Sea, being now disclosed) there
remained no refuge for them, if they were overcome.
Whereupon the Caledonians, arming with great preparation,
and greater Fame, (as the maner is of matters vnknowne)
began to assaile their enemies Castles; and
some of the Roman Captains (which would seeme to
be wise, being (indeed) but Cowards) counselled the
Generall to retire on this side Bodotria, and rather to depart
of his owne accord, then to be driven backe with
shame. In the meane season Agricola had knowledge,
that the Britans meant to divide themselves, and to give
the onset in severall companies: Whereupon lest he
should be enclosed about, and intrapped, either by their
multitude, or by their skill in the Passages, he marched
also with his army divided in three parts: which when
it was knowne to the Caledonians, they changed advise
on the sodaine, and vniting their forces togither, joyntly

assaulted, by night, the Ninth Legion, as being of weakest
resistance: & having slain the watch, (partly asleep,
& partly amazed with feare) they broke into the camp,
& were fighting within the trenches, when Agricola having
vnderstood by spies, what way the Britans had taken,
and following their footsteps, commanded the
lightest horsemen, and footmen to play vpon their
backs, and to maintaine the skirmish. When the day
drew neere, the glittering of the Ensignes dazeled the
eyes of the Britans, who being daunted with feare of
danger on each side, began to draw backe: and the Romans,
like men that were now out of perill of their
lives, did fight more cheerfully for their honour, freshly
assailing the Britans, and driving them to their owne
gates, where in the verie straits the Conflict was sharpe
and cruell, til in the end the Britans were forced to flie,
whilest the Roman forces severally pursued them, contending
with a kind of emulation, the one to have helped
the other, and the other to seeme to have needed
no helpe. Vpon the successe of this battell, the Roman
Souldiers presuming, that to their power al things were
easie, and open, cryed to the Generall to leade them into
Caledonia, that with a course of continuall Conquests,
they might find out the vtmost limits of Britannie.
Now such as before the battaile were so wa
                        •
                     ie and
wise in adventuring, waxed forward enough after the
event, and grew to speake gloriously of themselves,
[such is the hard condition of warre; if aught fall out
well, all challenge a part: misfortunes commonly are
imputed to one:] Contrariwise the Britans (presupposing,
that not true Valor, but the cunning of the General,
by vsing the occasion, had carried away the victorie,)
abated not much their wonted courage, but armed
their youth, transported their children and wives into

places of safetie, and sought by assemblies, and religious
rites, to establish an association of the Cities togither.
And so for that yeare, both parties as 
                        〈◊〉
                      departed
incensed away.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     The Northern Britans with common consent arme themselves
to repulse the Romans. The Oration of Galgacus
the chiefe of their Leaders.
                  
                  IN the beginning of the next summer, Agricola sending
his Navie before, (which by spoyling in sundry
places, should induce a greater, and more vncertaine
terror,) followed himselfe with his armie by land, having
drawne to his partie some of the valiantest Britans
(whom by long experience in peace, he had found
most faithfull) and so armed at the MountGrantz-ba
                           •
                        e in Scotland. 
                     Grampius,
where the Britans had lodged themselves before. For
they were not altogither dejected with the vnfortunate
event of former battel, but now, as men prepared for all
chances, they attended nothing else but revenge, death,
or servitude; & being taught at the length, that common
danger must be repelled with mutuall concord) by
leagues and ambassages they had assembled the power
of all the Cities togither, in number above thirtie thousand
armed men (the view being taken) besides a great
companie of youth (which dayly flocked to them) and
lustie old men renowmed in warre, and bearing the
badges due to their honour; at what time Galgacus, for
Vertue and Birth, the principall man of all the Leaders,
seeing the multitude hotly demaund the battell, is said
to have vsed this, or the like speech.
                  
                     
                     When I consider the cause of this warre, and out
present necessitie, I have reason (me seemes) to presume
that this day, and this our generall agreement,
will give a happie beginning to the freedome of the
whole Iland. For we have al hitherto lived in libertie,
and now no land remaineth beyond vs: no sea for
our safetie: the Roman Navy (as you see) surveying
and invironing our coasts; so that combat and armes
which men of vertue desire for honour, the dastard
must also vse for his securitie. The former battels
which have with diverse events bin fought with the
Romans, had their refuge & hope resting in our hands.
For we the flower of the British Nobilitie, & seated in
the furthest part of th'ile, did never yet see the borders
of those countries, which were brought vnder servile
subjection (our eies being still kept vnpolluted, & free
from al contagion of tyranny.) Beyond vs is no land:
besides vs none are free: vs onlie hitherto, this corner
and secret harbor hath defended; You see the vttermost
part of the land is laid open, and things the lesse
they have bin within knowledge, the greater is the
glorie to atchive them. But what nation is there now
beyond vs? what els but water and rocks? and the Romans
Lords of all within the land, whose intollerable
pride in vaine shall you seeke to avoid by service and
humble behavior. They are the robbers of the world,
that having now left no land to be spoiled, search also
the sea. If the enemie be rich, they seek to win wealth:
if poor, they are content to gain glory to themselves,
whom neither the East nor West can satisfie, as being
the only men of al memory, that seek out al places, be
they wealthy, or poore, with like greedy affection. To
take away by main force, to kil and spoile, falsely they
terme Empire & Government, when all is waste as a

wildernes, that they call peace. His children & blood
each man holds by nature most deare, & yet even they
are pressed for Souldiers, & carried away to be slaves,
we know not where. Our sisters and wives, though
they be not violently forced, as in open hostilitie, yet
are they vnder the colour & title of friends & guests,
shamefully abused. Our goods & substance they dayly
draw from vs, rewarding vs onely with stripes and
indignities. Slaves which are borne to bondage, are
sold but once, & after are fed at their owners expences:
But Britannie dayly buieth, dayly feedeth, and is
at charges with her own bondage. And as in a private
retinue, the fresh man and last commer is scoffed at by
his fellow servants: so in this old servitude of the
whole world, they seeke onely the destruction of vs,
as being the latest attempted, and of al others, in their
opinion, the most vile. We have no fields to manure,
no mines to be digged, no ports to trad
                           •
                         in; and to
what purpose then should they keepe vs alive, considering
that the manhood, and fierce courage of the
subject doth not much please the jelous Soveraigne?
and this corner (being so secret & out of the way) the
more securitie it yeeldeth to vs, the greater suspition
it worketh in them. Seeing therfore all hope of pardon
is past, it behooveth you at length to shew courage
in defending and maintaining both your safetie
and honor. The Icenians led by a woman, fired the Roman
Colonie, forced the castles, & had the prosecution
of the war bin answerable to so luckie a beginning, the
Southern Britans might then with ease have shaken
off the yoke, and prevented our perill. We, as yet, never
touched, never subdued, but borne to be free, not
slaves to the Romans: we (I say) are now to make proof
of our valor, & to shew in this encounter, what maner

of men Caledonia hath reserved in store for her selfe.
Do you think that the Romans be as valiant in warre
as they are wanton in peace? No, you are deceived.
For they are growne famous, not by their owne vertue,
but by our jarres and discord, while they make
vse of their enemies faults, to the glory of their owne
armie, composed of most diverse nations; and therefore,
as by present prosperitie it is holden togither: so
doubtlesse (if fortune frown on that side) it wil soone
be dissolved: vnlesse you suppose the Gauls and Germans,
and (to our shame be it spoken) many of ou
                           •
                        
owne nation (which now lend their lives to establish
a forrein vsurper) to be led with any true harted and
faithfull affection. No, it is rather with terror and distrust,
(weak workers of love:) which if you remove,
then those which have made an end to feare, wil soon
begin to hate. All things that may encourage, and
give hope of victory, are now for vs. The Romans have
no wives to harten them on, if they faint; no parents
to vpbraid them, if they flie. Most of them have no
Country at all, or, if they have, it is some other mens.
They stand like a sort of fearful persons trembling, &
gazing at the strangenesse of the heaven it self, at the
sea, and the woods. And now the heavens (favouring
our cause) have delivered them, mewed vp (as it
were) and fettered into our hands. Be not terrified,
or dismaid with the vain shew and glittering of their
gold and silver, which of themselves do neither offend,
nor defend. And thinke, that even amongst our
enemies, we shall find some on our side, when the
Britans shal acknowledge their owne cause, the Gauls
remember their old freedom, and the rest of the Germans
forsake them, as of late the Vsipians did. What
then should we feare? The castles are empty, the Colonies
                        
peopled with aged & impotent persons: the free
cities discontented, and distract with factions, whilest
they which are vnder, obey with ill will, and they
which do governe, rule against right. Here is the Roman
Generall, and the armie: there Tributes & Mines,
with other miseries, inseparably following such as
live vnder subjection of others; which, whether we
are to endure for ever, or speedily to revenge, it lieth
this day in this field to determine. Wherefore being
now to joyne battaile, beare in mind, I beseech you,
both your ancestors (which lived in the happy estate
of libertie) and your successors, who, (if you faile in
this enterprise) shall live hereafter in perpetuall servitude.
This speech (delivered with great vehemencie
of voice and action) was cheerfully received by the
Britans with a song (after their barbarous fashion) accompanied
with confused cries, and acclamations.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     The Romans prepare themselves to fight. The Oration of
Agricola the Generall vnto his Souldiers.
                  
                  AS the Roman Cohorts drew togither, and discovered
themselves, while some of the boldest pressed forward,
the rest put themselves in aray, and Agricola
(albeit his souldiers were glad of that day) and could
scarce with words have bin with-holden; yet supposing
it fit to say somwhat, he encouraged them in this wise:
                  
                     Fellow Souldiers, and Companions in Armes,
your faithfull diligence and service, these eight
yeares, so painfully performed, by the vertue and
fortune of the Roman Empire, hath at length conquered
Britannie. In so many journies, so many battailes
we were of necessity to shew our selves, either valiant

against the enemie, or patient and laborious, above,
and against Nature it selfe. In all which exploits, we
have both of vs so carried our selves hitherto, as neither
I desired better Souldiers, nor you other Captaine.
We have exceeded the limits, I, of my predecessors,
and you likewise of yours. The end of Britannie
is now found, not by fame and report, but we
are with our armes and pavillions, really invested
thereof. Britannie is found, and subdued. In your
marching heeretofore, when the passage of Bogges,
Mountaines, or Rivers troubled and tyred you, how
often have I heard the valiant Souldier say; When
will the Enemie present himselfe? When shall wee
fight? Loe, now they are put out of their holes, and
heere they are come. Loe now your wish: Loe heere
the place for tryall of your vertue, and all things
likely to follow, in a good and easie course, if you
win: contrarywise all against you, if you loose. For,
as to have gone so much ground, escaped the woods
and Bogs, and passed over so many armes of the sea,
are honourable testimonies of your forwardnesse: so,
if we flie, the advantages we have had, will become
our greatest disadvantage. For wee are not so skilfull
in the Country: we have not the like store of provision:
we have onely hands and weapons, wherein
our hopes, our fortune, and all things else are included.
For mine owne part, I have beene long since
resolved, that to shew our backes, is dishonourable,
both for Souldier and Generall, and therefore a commendable
death is better then life with reproach,
(Surety and Honor commonly dwelling together;)
Howbeit, if aught should mis-happen in this enterprize,
yet this will be a glory for vs, to have dyed even
in the vttermost end of the world, and of Nature.

If new Nations and Souldiers vnknowne, were
in the field, I would, by the example of other Armies,
incourage you: But now I require you, onely
to recount your owne victorious exploits, and to aske
counsell of your owne eyes. These are the same men,
which the last yeare assailed one Legion by stealth in
the night, and were sodainely, and (in a manner) by
the blasts of your mouthes, overthrowne. These, of
all the other Britans, have beene the most nimble in
running away, and by that meanes, have escaped the
longest alive. For, as in forrests and woods, the strongest
beasts are chased away by maine force, and the
cowardly and fearefull scared onely by the noyse of
the Hunters: so, the most valiant of the Brittish nation,
we have already dispatched; the rascall heird of
dastardly cowards onely remaineth. And loe, wee
have now at length found them, not as intending to
stay and make head against vs, but as last overtaken,
and by extreame passion of feare, standing like stocks,
and presenting occasion to vs in this place, of a worthy
and memorable victory. Now therefore, make a
short worke of our long warfare, and to almost fiftie
yeares travaile, let this day impose a glorious end. Let
each of you shew his valour, and approove to your
Country, that this army of ours could never justly
be charged, either with protracting the warre, for
feare, or vpon false pretences, for not accomplishing
the Conquest.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XV.
                  
                     Agricola marshalleth his forces. The battaile betweene the
Romans and the Northern Britans. Part of the British
Army is defeated.
                  
                  AS Agricola was yet speaking, the Souldiers gave
great tokens of their fervent desire to fight, and
when he had ended his speech, they joyfully applauded
it, running straitwaies to their weapons, and
rushing furiously forward: which the Roman Generall
perceiving, forthwith ordered his army in this manner.
With the Auxiliarie footemen, he fortifyed the
middle battell. The horsemen he placed in wings on
both sides. The Legions he commaunded to stand behind,
before the trench of the Camp, to the greater glory
of the victory, if it were obtained, without Roman
blood, or otherwise for assistance, if the foreward
should be distressed. The Britans were marshalled on
the higher ground fitly for shew, to terrifie their enemies:
the first troope standing on the plain, the rest on
the ascent of the hill, rising vp as it were by degrees, one
over another: the middle of the field was filled with
Chariots and horsemen, clattering and running round
about. Then Agricola finding them to exceed him in
number, and fearing lest he should be assailed on the
front and flanks, both at one instant, thought it best to
display his army in length, and although by that means
the battaile would become disproportionably long,
and many advised him to take in the Legions: yet hee
confidently rejected the counsell, & leaving his horse,
avanced himselfe before the Ensignes on foot. In the

first incounter before they joyned, both sides discharged,
and threw their darts. The Britans imploying both
Art and Valour, with their great swords and little targets,
defended themselves, and wounded their enemies,
till Agricola espying his vantage, appointed three
Companies of Hollanders
                     Batavian Cohorts, and two of theThe antient inhabitants of the Territorie of Liege, in the Low Countries. 
                     Tungrians, to presse
forward, and to bring the matter to handy strokes, and
dint of sword; which they, by reason of their long service,
were able readily to performe, to the prejudice of
the other side, in regard of their little bucklers, and
huge swords. For, the swords of the Britans being
weighty, and blunt pointed, were no way fit, either for
the close, or open fight. Now, as the Batavians began
to strike them on the faces with the pikes of their bucklers,
and (having over-borne such as resisted) to march
vp to the mountaines: the rest of the Cohorts (gathering
courage vpon emulation) violently beat downe all about
them, and running forward, left some of the Britans
halfe dead, some wholly vntouched, for haste, and
desire to have part of the glory in winning the field. In
the meane time, both the Chariots of the Britans, mingled
themselves with their enemies battell of footemen,
and also their troupes of horsemen, (albeit they
had lately terrifyed others:) yet now themselves (beginning
to flie) were distressed by the vn-evennesse of
the ground, and the thicke ranks of their enemies, who
continued the fight, till the Britans, by maine weight of
their owne horses and Chariots, were borne downe
one vpon an other; the masterlesse horses affrighted,
running vp and downe with the Chariots, and many
times over-bearing their friends, which either met
them, or thwarted their way.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XVI.
                  
                     The other part of the Brittish Army is overthrowne. The
Romans pursuing the Britans through the woods)
in danger to have beene intrapped. The lamentable estate
of the Britans.
                  
                  NOw the Britans (which stoode aloofe from the
battell, vpon the top of the hills, and did at the
first (in a manner) disdaine the small number of
their enemies) began to come downe by little and little,
and sought to fetch a compasse about the backs of
the Romans, which were then in traine of winning the
field. But Agricola suspecting as much, opposed them
with certaine wings of horsemen, purposely retained
about him for sodaine dispatches, vpon all chances, and
repulsed them as fiercely, as they ran to assaile. So the
counsell of the Britans turning to their owne hurt, the
Roman wings were commanded to forsake the battell,
and follow the flight. Then were there pittifull spectacles
to be seene; pursuing: wounding: taking prisoners:
and then killing such as were taken, as soone as others
came in the way. Then whole Regiments of the
Britans, (though armed, & moe in number) turnd their
backs to the fewer: others vnarmed sought their owne
death, offering themselves voluntarily to the slaughter.
The fields every where were imbrued with blood: Every
where weapons lay scattered: wounded bodies:
mangled limbs: some slaine outright: some halfe dead:
some yeelding vp the ghost: and yet, even at the last
gaspe, seeming by their countenances to discover both
anger and valour. Such of the Britans, as in flying, recovered

the woods, joyned themselves together againe,
and intrapped vnawares, some of the Roman Souldiers,
that vnadvisedly followed, not knowing the Country;
And if Agricola had not, by his presence and direction
assisted at neede, setting about them his most expert
footemen, (as it were in forme of a Toyle) and commanding
some of his horsemen to leave their horses,
(where the passage was narrow) and others to enter
single, on horseback, where the wood was thin, doubtlesse
the Romans had taken a blow, by their over much
boldnesse. But after that the Britans saw them againe
in good array, and orderly following the chase, they
fled, (not in troupes as before, when they attended
each other, but vtterly disbanded, shunning all compapany)
toward the desart and farre distant places. The
darkenesse of the night, and satiety of blood, made an
end of the chase. Of the Britans were then slaine about
ten thousand: of the Romans, three hundred and fortie;
amongst whom, the chiefe man of note was Aulus Atticus,
the Captaine of a Cohort, who vpon a youthfull
heate, and through the fiercenesse of his horse, was carryed
into the midst of his enemies. That night the winners
refreshed themselves, taking pleasure in talking of
the victorie, and dividing the spoyle. But the Britans
being vtterly discouraged, crying, and howling, (both
men and women together) tooke, and drew with them
their wounded persons: calling the not wounded: forsaking
their owne houses, and in despite, setting them
on fire: then seeking holes abroad to lurke in, and having
found them, straitwaies againe forsaking them:
sometimes communicating Counsells together, and
conceiving some little hope: and then by and by dejected
and desperate: sometimes mooved with pitty at
the sight of their kinsfolks and friends, and sometimes

stirred with rage and envie, in thinking and speaking of
their enemies, and (which was most lamentable) some
of them, by way of compassion and mercy, killing their
owne children and wives.
               
               
                  CHAP. XVII.
                  
                     The Britans are dispersed, and vnable to renew the warre.
Agricola commandeth the Admirall of his Fleete to saile
about Britannie. He planteth Garrisons vpon the Northerne
Borders, betweene the two armes of the Sea. Domitian
the Emperour, being advertised of his fortunate
successe in the British warre, is tormented with envie
and iealousie. Agricola yeeldeth vp the Province to Salustius
Lucullus.
                  
                  THe day following did more plainely discover the
greatnesse of the victory, by the calamitie of the
vanquished. Desolation and silence every where:
the smoke of the houses fired, appeared a farre off: no
sallies out of the woods: no stirring in the mountaines:
no man to make resistance, or to meete with the Roman
spies, who being sent abroad into all quarters, found by
the print of the Britans footesteps, that their flight was
vncertaine, and that they were no where in companies
together, but scattered in divers places, and altogether
vnable to make any new attempt vpon the sodaine.
Wherefore Agricola, the summer being now spent in
this journey, and the time past for imployment elsewhere,
brought his army into the borders of theThe antient inhabitants of Eskdale in Scotland, (as it is conjectured.) 
                     Horrestians
Country, where having received hostages of
the inhabitants, he commanded the Admirall of his
Navy, (being furnished with Souldiers, and sufficient

strength for that purpose) to saile about Britannie, whither
the fame and terror of the Roman name, was alreadie
gone before. Then he planted Garrisons vpon the
borders between Glota & Bodotria, and disposed of his
footemen and horsemen in the wintering places within
the Province.
                  Thus, after many conflicts, about the space of one
hundred thirtie sixe yeares from Iulius Caesars first entrance,
the vtmost limits of Britannie, and the Iles of
the Orchades lying on the North side of it, were by the
valour and industrie of Iulius Agricola, first discovered,
and made knowne to the Romans: and the South part
of the Ile, in the fourth yeare of the raigne of Domitian,
(being in the yeare of our Redemption 86.) reduced
into a full Province, the governement whereof, was
peculiar to the Roman Emperours themselves, and not
at the disposition of the Senate.
                  This state of affaires heere, Agricola signifyed by
letters (without any amplifying termes) to Domitian,
(the successor of Titus, his brother in the Empire) who
after his manner, with a cheerefull countenance, and
grieved heart, received the newes, being inwardly
pricked with anger and disdaine, to thinke, that his late
counterfeit Triumph of Germany (wherein a shew was
made of slaves, boght for mony, attired like captives of
that Country,) was had in derision, and justly scorned
abroad; whereas now a true and great victory (so many
thousands of enemies being slaine) was currant in every
mans mouth; Besides, he esteemed it as a most perillous
point in a State, that a private mans name should
be exalted above the name of a Prince; and he supposed,
that hee had in vaine suppressed the study of Oratory,
and all other politike Arts, if he should in military
glory, be excelled by another; for matters of other

kinds (as he supposed) might more easily be passed over:
but to be a good Commander of an Army, was to
be above a private estate, (that being a vertue peculiar
for a Prince.) Domitian beeing tormented with these
and the like conceits, and musing much in his closet alone,
(which was commonly noted, as a signe of some
mischiefe in working) thought it best for the present,
to cloake and dissemble his malice, till the heate of Agricolaes
glory, and the love of his souldiers were somewhat
abated (for as yet Agricola remained in office.)
Wherefore he commanded, that all the honours of
Triumphall ornaments, the image Triumphall, and what
else was vsually bestowed in lieu of Triumph, should in
most ample and honorable termes, be awarded him in
Senate: And then sending a successor, he caused a bruit
to be spread, that the Province of Syria, (which was
then void, and specially reserved for men of great qualitie)
should be assigned to Agricola. The common opinion
was, that Domitian, sending one of his most secret
and trustrie servants vnto him, sent withall, the commission
of Lievtenancie for Syria, with private instructions,
that if Agricola, at the time of his comming should
be still in Britannie, then it should be delivered: if otherwise,
it should be kept backe; and that the same man
meeting Agricola as he crossed the seas, without speaking
to him, or delivering his message, returned againe
to Domitian. Whether this were true, or fained vpon a
probable surmise, as agreeable to the Princes disposition,
it could not directly be affirmd; but in the mean season,
Agricola had yeelded vp the Province in good and
peaceable estate vnto Cneus Trebellius, or rather (as some
writers report) to Salustius Lucullus.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                     Agricola returneth to Rome, and is admitted to the presence
of Domitian the Emperour. He betaketh himselfe
to a retired life. He is poysoned. Salustius Lucullus
his successor in the Government of the Province,
protecteth Arviragus the British Prince. He is put to
d
                           •
                        ath by the commandement of Domitian.
                  
                  
                     AGricola, lest his comming to Rome should have bin
noted, by reason of the multitude, of people,
which would have gone out to see, and meete
him, did warily cut off the occasion of that curtesie,
entring the Citie by night; and by night, (as he was
commanded) came to the pallace, where being admitted
to the Princes presence, and received with a short
salutation, and no further speech, he sorted himselfe
with other Gentlemen of his ranke, carrying himselfe
ever after very temperately and warily in al his actions,
as knowing the present state of those times, and the dangerous
inclination of the Emperour himselfe, who being
(as all other Princes are commonly) more fearefull
and jealous of the good, then the bad, envied in him,
those vertues, and that honourable reputation, whereof
himselfe was not capable; Yet, as good deserts cannot
be hid, (true worthinesse shining even in darknesse
it selfe:) so the retired life which Agricola led, did nothing
diminish his glorie, but rather, like water sprinkled
vpon a burning fire, increased, and continued the
heate thereof. Diverse times was he accused in his
absence (which ministred to his ill willers oportunitie
of working his disgrace,) and as often in abse
                        •
                     ce was
he acquited, the opinion onely of his good deserts, and

no matter of crime giving the occasion, while such as
highly commended him to the Emperor, (seeming his
friends, but being (indeed) the most pestilent kind of
enemies) procured vnder-hand his perill and ruine in
the end. Howbeit, the ill successe of the Roman armies
in diverse Provinces at that time, serving as a foile
to set out his honourable actions, drew him perforce
into glorie: and Domitian made pretences of his purpose
to employ him, thinking thereby to satisfie the
people, who then complained of the want of good
Leaders. But Vertue, that never continueth long time
in prosperous estate, (as being the common object of
envie,) hastened the death of Agricola, who (as the constant
fame went,) was made away by poyson, and that
not without the Emperours knowledge, and consent.
These things concerning Agricolaes government in Britannie,
I have set downe particularly, as they are reported
by Cornelius Tacitus, who writ the storie of
his life, which remaineth to the world, as a perpetuall
monument of the doings of the one, and the writings
of the other.
                  
                     Salustius Lucullus succeeding Agricola, left little memorie
of himselfe, by doing any thing here, either for
that no occasion was then offred to shew himselfe in
action, or else, for that the fame of so worthie a predecessor
blemished his reputation. For having held
the office but a short time, he was by commaundement
of Domitian put to death, for suffering certaine
Speares of new fashion, to be called by his owne
name.
                  About this time Arviragus a Britan by birth, and
education, did governe (as King) part of the Ile of Britannie,
the Romans accounting it a poynt of policie to
permit the Britans sometimes to be ruled by Princes of

their owne Nation, whose ayde and counsaile, they
might vse (vpon occasions) to the pacifying of rebellions,
and the establishing of their owne greatnesse; For
the common people, (whose affection doth oft times
sway the fortunes of great Princes) are much
more easily brought vnder the obedience
of their own Country-men,
then of strangers.
               
               The end of the second Booke of the first Part of the
Historie of Great Britannie.
            
         
         
            
            
            The succession of the Roman Emperors,
from Nerva Cocceius vnto Honorius, in whose
time the Romans gave over the government
of Britannie.
            
               13 Nerva Cocceius, raigned one yeare, and foure Moneths.
               
               14 Vlpius Trajanus, (a Spaniard) nineteene yeares, and six
moneths.
               
               15 Aelius Adrianus, twentie yeares.
               
               16 Antoninus Pius, twentie three yeares.
               
               17 M. Aurel: Antoninus Philosophus, nineteene yeares.
L: Verus, his Collegue in the Empire.
               
               18 Aurel. Commodus, (the sonne of Antoninus Philosophus)
thirteene yeares.
               
               19 Aelius Pertinax, six moneths.
               
               20 Didius Iulianus, seven moneths.
               
               21 Septimius Severus Brit: eighteene yeares.
Pessenius Niger, Vsurpers.
Clodius Albinus.
               22 Anton: Bassianus Caracalla Brit: (the eldest sonne of
Sept: Severus) six yeares.
Geta, Caesar Brit. (the yonger sonne of Sept. Severus.)
               23 Opilius Macrinus, one yeare, and two moneths.
               
               24 Varius Heliogabalus (the base son of Caracalla 4. year.
               
               25 Alexander Severus (a kinsman of Heliogab.) 13. year.
               
               26 Iul: Maximinus, three yeares.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Caesars elected.
                     
                     Balbinus,
                     Pupienus,
                  
               
               27 Gordianus, (the father, with his two sonnes, and his Nephew)
six yeares.
                  
                     C. Valens Hostilianus Caesar.
                  
               
               28 Philippus the Arabian, five yeares.
               
               29 Decius Trajanus, two yeares.
               
               30 Vibius Pallus Hostilianus (with his sonne Volusianus)
two yeares.
               
               31 Aemilius (of Mauritania) three moneths.
               
               32 Licinius Valerianus, fifteene yeares.
               
               33 Gallienus (the sonne of Valerianus) nine yeares.
Valerianus (the brother of Gallienus Caesar.)
Cassus Labienus Posthumus, Caes.
               34 Flavius Claudius, two yeares.
               
               35 Aurelius Quintillus (the brother of Claudius. 17. daies.
               
               36 Valerius Aurelianus, five yeares, and six moneths.
               
               37 Tacitus, six moneths.
               
               38 Annius Florianus (the brother of Tacitus) sixtie dayes.
               
               39 Valerius Probus, six yeares, and foure moneths.
               
               40 Carus Narbonensis, two yeares.
                  
                     Caesars, the sonnes of Carus.
                     Numerianus,
                     Carinus,
                  
               
               41 Dioclesianus, twentie yeares.
Maximianus Herculeius Caesar.
               42 Constantius Chlorus, foure yeares.
               
               43 Galerius Maximus, eleven yeares.
                  
                     Caesars.
                     Severus,
                     Maximianus,
                  
               
               44 Maxentius, (the sonne of Maximian) six yeares.
               
               45 Licinius, fourteene yeares.
               
               46 Constantinus Magnus, thirtie yeares.
                  
                     
                     Magnentius Vsurper.
                        
                           The three sonnes of Constantine
the Great.
                           Constantinus,
                           Constans,
                        
                     
                  
               
               47 Costantius, 24. yeares,
               
               48 Iulianus Apostata, one yeare, six moneths.
               
               49 Iovinianus, eight moneths.
               
               50 Valentinianus, twelve yeares.
                  
                     Valens (his brother) Caesar.
                  
               
               51 Gratianus, six yeares.
                  
                     Valentinianus, Caesar.
                     Theodosius, Caesar.
                  
               
               52 Theodosius, three yeares.
               
               53 Arcadius, thirteene yeares.
               
               54 Honorius twentie eight yeares.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧Lievtenants in Britannie from
Nerva Cocceius his entrance into
the Government of the Empire, vntill
the raigne of Honorius
the Emperour.
            
               Lievtenants vnder the Emperours
Nerva and Traianus.
               ¶There is no mention of any Lievtenants in Britannie,
during the time of their government.
            
            
               Lievetenants vnder Adrian: Brit.
               ¶Iulius Severus.
               ¶Priscus Licinius.
            
            
               Lievtenants vnder Antoninus Pius.
               ¶Lollius Vrbicus. Brit.
               
            
            
               Lievtenants vnder Antoninus Philosophus.
               ¶Calphurnius Agricola.
            
            
               Lievtenants vnder Commodus.
               ¶Vlpius Marcellus.
               ¶Helvius Pertinax.
               ¶Clodius Albinus.
               ¶Iunius Severus.
            
            
               Lievtenants vnder Pertinax.
               ¶Clodius Albinus.
            
            
               
               Lievtenants vnder Did: Iulianus.
               ¶Clodius Albinus.
            
            
               Lievtenants vnder Sept. Severus Brit.
               ¶Heraclianus.
               ¶Virius Lupus.
            
            From the time of Bassianus Caracalla, the Successor of Severus,
vnto Constantine the great, there is no mention
in approoved Histories of any Lievtenants in
Britannie.
            
            
               Deputies vnder Constantine the Great.
               ¶Pacatianus.
            
            
               Deputies vnder Constantius the yongest sonne
of Constantine the Great.
               ¶Martinus.
               ¶Alipius.
            
            
               Deputies vnder Honorius.
               ¶Chrysanthus.
               ¶Victorinus.
            
            
               Princes and secular men of speciall note
among the Britans.
               In the time of Calphurnius Agricolaes government, vnder
M. Aur. Antoninus Philosophus.
               
            
            
               Lucius surnamed Lever-Maur, the first Christian Prince
in Britannie.
               In the raigne of Aurelianus.
               
            
            
               Bonosus, Vsurper of the Empire in Britannie.
               In the raigne of Constantius the yongest sonne of
Constantine the Great.
            
            
               Magnentius Taporus, vsurper of the Empire in Britannie.
                
            
         
         
            
            Archbishops of London from the
time of Lucius, vntill the
comming in of the
Saxons.
            
               1 Thean.
               2 Clavus.
               3 Cador.
               4 Obinns.
               5 Conanus.
               6 Paladius.
               7 Stephanus.
               8 Iltut.
               9 Dedwinus.
               10 Thedredus.
               11 Hillarius.
               12 Guidilinus.
               13 Vodinus, who lived, when the
Saxons first entred the land.
            
         
         
            
            THE FIRST PART:
            
               The third Booke.
               
                  
                     IMP: NERVA CAES: AVG: P. M. TR: P. P. P.
                     portrait of Nerva
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. I.
                  
                     Nerva Cocceius succeedeth Domitian in the Empire, leaving
the same soone after to Vlpius Trajanus. Adrianus,
the successour of Trajan, sendeth Iulius Severus
into Britannie, to defend the borders of the Province,
against the incursions of the Northern Britans. The
Emperour himselfe with an Army, entreth the Iland,
and buildeth there a wall of Turves, for defence of the
Province. Licinius Priscus is Governour of Britannie.
                  
                  
                     HItherto hath beene declared the successe of
times and affaires in Britannie, vnder the
first twelve Emperours of Rome; the same
being recorded by such Writers, as had
best meanes to vnderstand the truth thereof,
and were the principall Registrers of things done
by the Romans in those times. As for the occurrents ensuing
the death of Domitian, vntill the raigne of Honorius,
                     
(in whose time the Roman governement ceased)
they are imperfectly reported, or a great part of them
meerely omitted: so that I am forced, of many things
to make onely a bare and briefe relation, as vnwilling,
by adding or diminishing, to alter, in substance, what
Antiquitie hath left vs, or to fill vp blancks with conjectures
or projects of mine owne invention. And
therefore, howsoever this Booke following, (which
comprehendeth the acts of many more yeares then
the former) may seeme to carry with it, a kinde of disproportion
from the other two, and likewise in respect
of the stile and composition, to be somewhat differing
from them: yet, the cause thereof ought to be
imputed to the very matters themselves, (being, for the
most part, fragments, and naked memorialls, (the loose
ends of Time) without observation of circumstances,
or congruitie in substance,) which will hardly admit
any method fitting a continuate History: And I owe
so much love and reverence to Truth, as I would rather
expose her in the meanest and worst habit that Time
hath left her, then by disguising her, to abuse the
world, and make her seeme a counterfet.
                  
                     DOmitian the Emperour being slaine, Nerva Cocceius,
(a Prince much honored for his vertues) succeeded
in the Empire; But in what estate the affaires of
Britannie then stood, the histories of those times make
no mention, either for that the Emperour being a man
stricken in yeares, and disposed to ease and quietnesse,
employed himselfe, rather in reforming abuses at home,
then in maintaining warre abroad, or else, for that the
short continuance of his government, did not suffer
him to enter into any great actions in places so remote;
for having held the Empire little above a yeare, he left

the same, by death, to Vlpius Traianus, a Spaniard, whom
he had adopted, for his valour and wisedome, (beginning
even then the first president of electing strangers.
                  In his time, some of the Britans, desirous to free
themselves from the Roman tyranny, entred into rebellion,
but wanting meanes to effect what they had
begun, they soone gave over the enterprise. Howbeit
Aelius Adrianus, (who succeeded Traian in the Empire)
having intelligence, that the Northern Britans made incursions
into the Province, sent over Iulius Severus to
empeach their attempts; but before he could make an
end of the war, he was revoked & sent into Syria, to suppresse
the Iewish rebellion; & Adrian the Emperor himselfe
came with an Army into Britannie, where he encountred
those Northern riders, recovered such Forts
as they had taken, & forced them to retire to the Mountaines
and woods, whither the Roman horsemen, without
danger, could not pursue them. And then fortifying
the borders of the Province, by raising a wall of
Turves, about eightie miles in length, (betweene the
mouths of the riversThe river Eden in Cumberland.
                      
                     Ituna andThe river Tyne in Northumberland.
                      
                     Tina,) to defend the
inhabitants thereof, from the sodaine assaults of their
ill neighbours, he returned triumphantly to Rome. This
exploit wan much reputation to the Roman Army, and
no smal honor to the Emperor himselfe, who was then
called, The Restorer of Britannie, and had the same inscription
figured in the stamp of his Coyne.
                  Now the Britans dwelling within the Province, seemed,
for the most part; patiently to beare the yoke,
(which Custome had made lesse painefull, and they obeyed
the more willingly, as standing in neede of the
Romans helpe against their owne Country men, whose
crueltie was now as much feared, as in former times
the invasion of strangers. Whereupon they conformed

themselves to the Roman lawes, both in martiall
and civill affaires, which were then principally directed
by Licinius Priscus, who had beene (not long before)
employed by Adrian the Emperour, in the expedition
of Iurie, and was at that time Propraetor ofLievtenant. 
                     Britannie.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     Lollius Vrbicus is Lievtenant of Britannie vnder Antoninus
Pius, (the successor of Adrian the Emperour.)
He erecteth another wall of Turves, for defence of the
Province, and appeaseth the Brigantes, (the ancient inhabitants
of the Counties of Yorke, Lancaster, Durham,
Westmerland, and Cumberland,) beginning to
revolt. Seius Saturninus Admirall of the Brittish
Fleet, gardeth the Sea coasts. M: Aurelius Antoninus
surnamed Philosophus, succeedeth Antoninus Pius
in the Empire: and Calphurnius Agricola, Lollius
Vrbicus (Britannicus) in the Province.
                  
                  
                     A Ntoninus Pius succeeded Adrianus the Emperour,
when (Lollius Vrbicus being Lievtenant) the Northern
people made a road into the Province, but
were beaten backe by the Roman forces that lay vpon
the borders: and then was there another wal of Turves
built by commandement of the Lievtenant, to strengthen
those parts, with a double rampire. In the meane
time, a new warre was kindled among theThe antient inhabitants of the Counties of Yorke, Lancaster, Durham, Westmerland, and C
                              •
                           mberland.
                      
                     Brigantes,
that annoyed some of the Roman confederates: but by
the discretion of the Generall, it was quenched before
it came to a flame. For Lollius Vrbicus, vpon the first rumor
of the revolt, marched thither with part of the
army, leaving the rest behind to guard the borders:

and Seius Saturninus, Admirall of the Brittish Fleet, being
well appointed by Sea, lay vpon the North side
of the Ile, to defend the Coasts, and (vpon occasions)
to further the land-service; by this meanes the Brigantes
were easily reduced to obedience, even by the presence
onely of the Lievtenant, who for his good service
done in Britannie, during the short time of his imployment
there, obteined the surname of Britannicus.
                  
                  
                     Antoninus Pius being dead, and Marcus Aurelius surnamed
Philosophus, possessed of the Empire: Calphurnius
Agricola was made Lievtenant of the Province, who
at his first entrance into office, vnderstood of some
new tumults raised during the vacation; but partly, by
policie, in preventing occasions, and partly, by shew
of force, (his very name striking a terror in the inhabitants,
by reviving the memory of Iulius Agricola) he
in short time appeased them, deserving thereby great
commendation, though the glory of such exploits,
was, for the most part, attributed to the Emperors
themselves, (the labour and perill in attempting, and
commonly disgrace and envie after victory) remaining
onely, as rewards to their ministers.
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     Elutherius the Bishop of Rome, sendeth Preachers into
Britannie, to instruct the inhabitants there in the
Christian Faith. Lucius, the first Christian Prince in
Britannie. The planting and propagation of religion among
the Britans.
                  
                  NOw was the time come (namely, about one hundred
and fourscore yeares after the birth of our

Saviour) when Christian religion, which many yeares
together had beene (for the most part) shadowed with
the darke cloudes of heathenish superstition, began to
discover it selfe more openly in this Iland, by the
meanes of Lucius, surnamed Lever-Maur, who by permission
of the Roman Lievtenant, did governe, as King,
a great part of the Province. For it appeareth by the
testimonie of some antient Writers, that Britannie received
the Christian faith, even in the infancie of the
Church, immediately after the death of our Saviour
Christ, whose Apostles and Disciples, (according to
his commandement) published and dispersed the same
in divers Regions, partly by themselves in their owne
persons, and partly by their ministers; among whom
were sent into Britannie, Simon Chananaeus, that after his
peregrination in Mauritania, (as it is reported) was
slaine, and buried in the Iland: Aristobolus a Roman, of
whom Saint Paul in his Epistles maketh mention: and
Ioseph of Arimathia, a Nobleman of Iury, specially remembred
of posterity, for his charitable act in burying
the body of our Saviour. This man was appointed by
Philip the Apostle, (then preaching the Christian faith
in Gallia) to instruct the antient Britans, among whom
he began first, (as some write) to institute an Eremiticall
life, in a place then called Avalonia, and afterwards
Glastenbury, where himselfe, and his companions, imitating
the austerity and zeale of solitude, which they
had observed in Mary Magdalen, (with whom they travelled
out of Iury vnto Marsilia in France) sequestred
themselves from all worldly affaires, that they might
freely intend the exercise of pietie, which they professed.
Yea, some Writers of former ages have constantly
affirmed, that the Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul,
in their owne persons at severall times, came into Britannie:
                     
and that afterwards one Sueton, a Noblemans
sonne of that Country, being converted by such Christians
as first planted the faith there, and called (after
his baptisme) Beatus, was sent by them to Rome, vnto
Saint Peter, to be better instructed and confirmed in
Christianitie: and that in his returne homewards thorough
Switzerland, he found in the inhabitants there,
such a desire and readinesse to receive the Christian
faith, as he resolved to continue in that place, where
he erected an Oratorie to exercise a Monasticall life, and
departed the world about the yeare of Grace, 110. But,
who were the very first teachers, and at what time the
Christian faith was first of all received there, it is not
certainely knowne; howbeit it is likely, (as I have before
remembred) that in the expedition of Claudius the
Emperour, (which was about the third yeare of his
raigne, and twelve yeares after the assention of our Saviour)
some Christians of Rome, and schollers of the
Apostles themselves, (by occasion of those warres, and
by reason of the entercourse of affaires betweene both
Nations) became first knowne to the Britans: who in
processe of time, were drawne by the exhortations and
examples of their teachers, to imbrace the truth: the vnblameable
life of those religious men, mooving sometimes
even their Princes (though yet vnbeleeving) to
protect and regard them, as Lucius then began to doe.
Besides that, the Roman Lievtenants also, as well in Britannie
as other Provinces, did sometimes tolerate
the exercise of Christian Religion, as not altogether
disliking it, howsoever for worldly respects, they
forbare to shew themselves openly in favour of it.
But Lucius declared his inclination thereto after another
manner; For inwardly disliking the profane superstitions
then vsed among the Romans, and being informed

of the great constancy, vertue, and patience of the
Christians at Rome, and other places, in suffering persecution
and Martyrdome for the faith of Christ, whereby
the number of Christians (whom many men esteemed
for the miracles which they wrought) was (contrary
to common expectation) daily increased: that
Pertinax and Tre
                           •
                        ellius, two worthy Senators of Rome,
had beene lately converted from Paganisme, to Christianitie:
that Marcus Aurelius, (the Roman Emperour
then raigning) began to conceive a better opinion of
them, then himselfe and his predecessors had done:
and so much the rather, by reason he had (not long before)
obtained a famous victory against his enemies; the
prosperous event whereof, he attributed to the prayers
of the Christians at Rome: Vpon these considerations,
Lucius determined to be instructed in the Religion
which they professed: and first of all, he commanded
Elvanus and Meduinus, (two learned men of the Brittish
Nation) to goe to Rome, (where Elutherius was then Bishop)
to require some meete persons to be sent into
Britannie, to instruct him and his people: for which
purpose, Fugatius and Damianus, were specially appointed
by Elutherius, with all speede to repaire thither;
where they afterwards (not without some danger by
tempest vpon the seas) arrived, and applied themselves
both by doctrine and example, to performe the charge
committed vnto them: the successe therein proving answerable
to their endevors. For the Prince and his familie
was by them baptised: some of the inhabitants
that had formerly received the faith, were confirmed
therein, and others that remained yet in their infidelitie,
were converted to Christianity.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     Lucius Sendeth to Rome for the Lawes of the Empire. The
The counsell of Elutherius Bishop of Rome touching
same. Idolatrie suppressed in Lucius his dominions,
and Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction established there. The
first Archbishop of London.
                  
                  BVt Lucius the Prince (having received instructions
from the Sea of Rome, for the direction of himselfe,
and his people, in the profession and exercise
of Christian Religion) was desirous also to order his
temporall estate, according to the Roman policie, and to
that end solicited Elutherius the Bishop, to send vnto
him the lawes of the Empire, out of which he might
collect, and compose some certaine ordinances for the
administration of civill Iustice; whereupon Elutherius
sent Letters to the Prince, commending therein his
former zealous disposition in embracing the Truth:
then exhorting him to reade, with humilitie and reverence,
the holy Scripture (the divine law) which he had
lately received in his dominions, and out of that (by
Gods grace and advise of faithfull Counsellors) to collect
meet observations for the framing of lawes necessarie
for the preservation of his estate: which observations
so collected, and lawes so framed, he did affirme to be
much better, then the Imperiall Constitutions of the
Romans, or any other whatsoever: that, to make lawes,
and execute Iustice, was the proper office of a Prince,
who was vpon earth the Vicar of God himselfe, and received
from him that title and authoritie, to the end he
should vse the same to the good of the Catholike Church,
and of the people living vnder his obedience. Hereupon

                     Lucius began first of all to provide for establishment
of that Religion, whereof he was become at the selfe
same time, both a professor and practiser. Then was the
worshipping of Images forbidden. The seates of the
Arch-Flamins at London, Yorke, and Chester, were changed
into the Seas of three Arch-bishops in the same places,
and those of the Flamins, into so many Bishoprikes,
whereby the Temples vowed by Idolatrous Priests to
prophane gods, were consecrated to the service of the
onely true God. His temporall estate also he adorned
with good & profitable lawes, comformable to the rule
of Christian Religion; whereupon ensued the blessings
of Plentie and Peace in his dayes.
                  It is reported, that he was founder of a Church at
Cornhill in London, which he dedicated to Saint Peter,
placing therein one Thean, an Arch-bishop, to have a
superintendence over the other Bishops within his
principalitie: and that the Metropolitan seat continued
there in the succession of 13. Archbishops (about the space
of 400. years) vntil the comming of Augustine the Monk,
who translated the Archbishoprike from London to Canterburie.
                  
                  And now Christianitie (being thus generally received
among the Britans) kept on her course vntainted,
and without opposition, till the time of Dioclesian the
Emperour, who kindled the fire of that raging persecution
(the last and longest in the Primitive Church)
which consumed the lives of many Christian Martyrs,
as well in Britannie, as other places. But returning
to the raigne of Lucius, and considering the state
of Britannie vnder his government: we may justly admire
the felicitie of those times, ascribing to the Britans
for their greatest glory, that among all other nations,
they had the happinesse to see and enjoy the first Christian
Prince.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. V.
                  
                     The Northern Britans breaking downe Adrians wall vpon
the borders, enter and annoy the Province. Vlpius
Marcellus, being sent by Commodus the Emperor to
take charge of the armie in Britannie, beateth them
backe. The rare vertues of Vlpius Marcellus the Governor.
He is dimissed of his office.
                  
                  THis was the state of the Church in Britannie, when
new troubles began to the disturbance of the Province.
For the Northern Britans making a breach
in the wall, which Adrian the Emperour had built, and
finding the borders but weakly garded, entred the Province,
and surprising the Roman General, killed many of
his Souldiers, then ranging the countries: they wasted
and spoyled everie where without resistance, till Vlpius
Marcellus being sent over by Commodus the Emperour,
stayed their furie, and with great difficultie, forced them
to retire within the Wall. By which meanes the Province
being quieted, he applied himselfe to reforme
abuses in his Camp, reviving the ancient discipline of
warre, which had beene for a time discontinued among
the Roman souldiers, whom long service, and
many victories had made bold to say, and do oft times
more then became them. For Marcellus indeed was a
man somewhat austere, in reprooving and punishing:
otherwise verie temperate: diligent in time of warre:
not idle in peace: his diet was the same which the
common Souldier vsed: in quantitie more sparing:
for he would eate no bread, but such as was brought
from Rome: which he did, to the end he might avoid

excesse, and take no more then sufficed Nature (the
stalenesse of the bread having taken away all taste, that
might either please the sense, or provoke the appetite.)
The day time, for the most part, he spent in viewing
his Camp, in training young Souldiers, and giving direction
to Officers. In the night he wrote Letters, and
made his dispatches into diverse parts of the Province,
(as occasion required.) He slept verie little, by reason
of his thin diet, and much businesse (wherewith
he was continually occupied;) for he thought [that
he which slept a whole night togither, was no meete
man, to be either a Counseller to a Prince, or the
Commander of an Armie.] Everie Evening he vsed
to write instructions vpon twelve Tables made of Linden
tree, which Tables he delivered to one of his servants,
appointing him to carrie them at sundrie houres
of the night, to certaine of his Souldiers, who thereby
supposing that their Generall was still waking, and not
gone to his bed) were the more carefull in keeping the
watch, and preventing sodaine attempts in the night
season. He was severe in execution of justice: not to
be led by fauour: nor to be corrupted by bribes. He
levied money, onely as necessarie for the warre, not to
enrich himself, or his friends, as other governors in former
times had done; for he never preferred his owne
private, before the publike; nor a wealthie estate before
an honourable reputation. The fame of these vertues
as they made him much respected, both of his owne
Souldiers, and of the Britans: so they procured Envie,
which alwayes followeth Vertue inseparably, as a shadow
doth the bodie. For Commodus the Emperour vnderstanding,
how Marcellus had carried himselfe in Britannie,
was much displeased therewith; and doubting
lest he should grow too great, he thought it best to cut

him off. But some accidents happening in the meane
time, to make him change that purpose, he onely sent
Letters of discharge, and so dismissed him of the
Office.
               
               
                  CHAP. VI.
                  
                     A Mutinie in the Roman armie. Perennius vndertaketh
to appease it. He is accused, and put to death. Helvius
Pertinax being sent by Commodus to pacifie the tumults
in the armie, is in danger to be slaine. He maketh
sute to be discharged of the Lievtenancie.
                  
                  AFter departure of Marcellus, the armie having
beene kept in by hard hand, and finding now the
reine let loose, vpon asuddaine began to be mutinous,
and refused openly to acknowledge Commodus
for their Emperour. These disorders, Perennius, one of
his favorites tooke vpon him to redresse, by displacing
such persons as he suspected, and committing their offices
to men of meaner qualitie: wherewith the Legions
were much discontented, disdaining, that in steed
of Senators, and men of Consular degree, they should now
be governed by vpstarts, and base Companions. In the
heate of these broyles, about fifteene hundred Souldiers
forsooke the armie, and went to Rome, where they
exhibited to the Emperour, a Bill of Complaint against
Perennius, whom they charged as the chiefe Authour
of the dissention in the Armie, by bringing in new customs,
by exceeding his commission, & doing things derogatory
to the maiestie of the Roman Empire. These, &
other things, (as wel false as true) were objected against
him by the multitude, who for the most part, dislike
such as exercise authoritie over them, and keepe no

measure in their affections, either of love, or hatred.
But, (that which touched to the quicke) was an accusation
of treason put vp against him, for conspiring against
the life of the Emperour, and in seeking to advance
his sonne to the Empire. This point was quickly
apprehended by Commodus, who thought that the
suspition of the fact, or the report onely to have intended
it, was a sufficient cause of condemnation, howsoever
the partie accused was indeed, either guiltie, or innocent.
Hereupon Perennius was declared Traitor, and
delivered to the Souldiers, who stripped him of his apparrell,
whipped him with rods, and in the end, cruelly
murdered him.
                  Then Helvius Pertinax (a man of meane fortune by
birth, as having risen from the state of a common Souldier
to the dignitie of a Commaunder) was sent into
Britannie to appease the tumults there. He was one of
them that Perennius had before discharged from bearing
office, and sent into Liguria, where he was borne.
At his first entrance, he attempted by force to suppresse
the rebellion of the armie, adventuring so farre in a skirmish,
that though he escaped with life, yet was he left
among the dead, and supposed to be slaine. Afterwards
proceeding with better advise, and successe, he compo
                     
                        •
                     ed
the troubles, severely punishing the principall offen
                     
                        ••••
                     ,
and vsing some rigor in revenging his owne inju
                     
                        ••
                     es;
by which meanes growing odious to the Souldier,
and distrusting his owne safetie, he made sute to be discharged
of the Lievtenantship.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. VII.
                  
                     Clodius Albinus succeedeth Pertinax in the governement
of the Province. He is honoured with the title of Caesar.
Being suspected of Commodus the Emperor, he retireth
himselfe from affaires. Helvius Pertinax, and Didius
Iulianus are elected Emperours successively after the
death of Commodus. Severus succeedeth Iulianus in
the Empire. Heraclianus is Governor of the Province,
which he afterwards resigneth to Virius Lupus. Warre
betweene Severus the Emperour, and Clodius Albinus.
The death of Albinus.
                  
                  THen was the governement of the Province assigned
to Clodius Albinus, a man of noble birth, very
forward, and for the most part, fortunate in his
attempts: for which the Emperor Commodus, either
vpon feare, or favour, did honour him with the title of
a Caesar, though Albinus seemed vnwilling to accept it;
and afterwards discovered his disposition more openly,
in affecting the antient free state. For, vpon a false report
of the death of Commodus, he made an oration to
the Legions in Britannie, in favour of the Senate, whose
governement he had commended, and preferred the
same before that of the Emperours. But Commodus being
advertised thereof, sent Iunius Severus with all speed,
to take charge of the Army. In the meane time, Albinus
retired himselfe from affaires, till Commodus was dead,
and Pertinax elected Emperour. Then he combined
himselfe with Didius Iulianus, whom the souldiers (that
then made open sale of the Empire,) had elected after
the death of Pertinax. But Iulianus being infamous for

his vices, and failing to performe his promise made to
the Souldiers, was in a short time forsaken of them, and
afterwards murdered. Vpon report of Iulianus his
death, Septimius Severus (a man adorned with excellent
gifts of nature) was declared Emperour; and for that
he feared Clodius Albinus, (who then had recovered
the governement of Britannie) he made him his associate
in the Empire, and sent Heraclianus to be Lievtenant
of the Province, which, Heraclianus soone after resigned
to Virius Lupus. But desire of Soverainty, (that cannot
long indure equality of degree) made the one jealous
of the other, and the fire of ambition (that had
beene smothered for a time) burst out at length into a
flame. For Severus having pacified some tumults in the
West part of the world, and after many conflicts subdued,
Pescenius Niger, (who vsurped the Empire in the
East) pretended the breach of Association, as a colour
to make warre vpon Albinus, who vnderstanding thereof,
transported over the seas, a mighty Army, furnished
with abundance of vittaile out of the Ile it selfe, which
then (through the industry of the inhabitants, applying
themselves to tillage and husbandry,) yeelded
plenty of graine, and served the Romans as the Garner
of the West Empire, out of which they carried yearely
great quantities of corne, to maintaine their Armies in
Gallia and Germany. NeereLyons in France. 
                     Lugdunum in Gallia, Severus
encountred with Albinus, whose forces were there
defeated, and himselfe slaine.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     Severus the Emperor, maketh preparation for a voyage into
Britannie. The civill governement of the Province,
committed to Geta his younger sonne, whom Papinianus
the famous Lawyer assisteth in the administration
of Iustice there. Severus with Bassianus his elder
sonne, marcheth towards Caledonia. Mortalitie in
the Roman Camp. The Caledonians obtaine peace
vpon conditions. Bassianus taketh the charge of the
armie, and Severus his father returnes into the Province.
                  
                  THen Severus made preparation for his voyage into
Britannie, which by reason of the often change of
Governours, was growne much out of order; and
although the Britans, vpon intelligence of his purpose,
did send over Ambassadors, to offer their voluntarie
submission: yet the Emperour (in whom neither age
nor sicknesse had abated the heate of ambition) would
not directly accept thereof, but entertained them with
delaies, till all things were in readinesse for his expedition:
[So earnest a desire he had to passe into the furthest
part of Britannie, and to purchase the surname of
Britannicus, as an honourable addition to his other titles.]
His two sonnes Bassianus (commonly called Caracalla)
and Geta, he tooke with him, as doubting their
agreement in his absence. To Geta his younger sonne,
after his arrivall in Britannie, he committed the government
of the Province there for civill causes, wherein
Aemilius Paulus Papinianus the famous Lawyer, (who
as cheefe minister of Iustice vnder him, had his Tribunall
                     
seate atYorke. 
                     Eboracum) was appointed to assist and direct
him.
                  
                     Severus himselfe, and Bassianus with the Army, marched
Northward against theThe antient inhabitants of the hither part of Scotland.
                      
                     Meatae, a people bordering
vpon the Caledonians, and in league with them. Virius
Lupus (but a little before) had assaied to enter the
Country by force, when the Meatae (standing vpon
their owne strength) withstood him, and forced him
in the end, to purchase his peace with mony. Then Severus
hastned into Cal
                           •
                        donia, where finding the passages
vncertaine and dangerous, by reason of the fennes,

                        •
                     oods, and deep waters; he caused trees to be felled,
and bridges and cawseis to be made, for his Souldiers
to ma
                        •
                     ch over. The Caledonians in the meane time, sallied
out of the woods, and charged the Romans, who
were much encombred for want of firme ground, and
were oftentimes forced to trace the Country, and to
disperse themselves in severall companies, seeking places
of advantage: by which meanes, a great number of
them perished, while the barbarous people (lying in
ambush, and sometimes leaving their cattell abroad, as
a traine to draw them within danger) suddainly surprised
and killed them, before they could recover their
Campe. This was an vnfortunate journey to the Romans,
who, besides the losse which they sustained by
their enemies, were afflicted with diseases, by reason,
partly of the vnwholesome waters which they dranke,
and partly of the contagious ayre that infected their
spirits: yea, many times they killed one another; for
such as through feeblenesse could not keepe ranke in
marching, were slaine by their owne fellowes, that they
might not be left a prey to their savage enemies. There
died in this enterprise, about fiftie thousand Romans;
Yet would not Severus withdraw his forces thence, till

the Caledonians made offer to treate of peace, whereto
he then hearkned the more willingly, for that he saw
the difficultie, and (in a manner) impossibilitie to bring
that Northerne part of the Ile, wholy vnder subjection,
by reason of the rocks, mountaines, and marishes: as
also for that the Country, being (for the most part) barren
and vnfruitfull, the benefit thereof was not deemed
likely to countervaile the charge, in getting, and
keeping it. The conditions were, That the Caledonians
should first dis-arme themselves, and deliver part of the
Country, (lying next the Province,) into the Romans
possession, and that from that time forward, they
should attempt nothing against the publike peace:
Which Articles agreed vpon, and assurance taken for
the performance, Severus retired himselfe into the Province,
leaving his sonne Bassianus to take charge of the
Army, which after the Emperors departure, grew carelesse
and dissolute: wherewith the Generall seemed nothing
displeased, either for that he was by his owne nature
inclined to the worst; or else, for that he hoped
thereby to win the Souldiers favour, as a meane for his
advancement to the Empire, after his fathers death,
which he had oftentimes attempted by indirect practises,
most vnnaturally to procure.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IX.
                  
                     The Caledonians invade the Roman Camp, and carrying
away the booties which they had taken, are pursued, and
put to the sword by the Romans. Severus the Emperor
repaireth Adrians wall, cutteth a Trench, and carrieth
it thwart the Iland from Sea to Sea. He falleth sicke at
Yorke. His counsell to his sonnes. His death.
                  
                  IN the meane while, the Caledonians, (notwithstanding
the late contract) vnderstanding what disorders
were in the Roman Camp, sodainely invaded it, killing,
and taking booties, which they shared with their
neighbours (borderers of the Province) that had assisted
them in the enterprize. Severus being greatly incensed
therewith, sent part of the Armie to pursue the
Caledonians, expresly commaunding, that they
should be all put to the sword, without respect of age, or
sex. This sharpe manner of proceeding, did somewhat
quaile the hope of the Northern Britans, who fled into
the remote parts of Caledonia: and Severus having rather
stayed, then ended the troubles, (as intending to prosecute
the war with more advantage) spent some time in
repairing and enlarging Adrians Wall, which hee
carryed th'wart the Iland, from Sea, to Sea, intrenching
and fortifying it with bulwarks and square towers, in
places most convenient (to give warning one to another
vpon any sodain assault) for defence of the borders.
Then being wearied with age, sicknesse, and travaile,
having his mind also much grieved with the disloyall
and vnnaturall practises of his sonne Bassianus, he withdrew
himselfe toYorke. 
                     Eboracum, a Colonie of the Romans,
                     
being then the Station of the Sixt Legion, called Victrix,
and afterwards growing to be one of the chiefe places
of account among the Brigantes. For these Stations of
the Roman Legions, were commonly the seed-plots of
townes and cities, both in this Ile, and divers other parts
of the Empire.
                  It was reported, that in his passage thither, a Moore,
with a Cypresse garland on his head, did meet and salute
him by the name of a God: and that, at his entrance into
the Citie, he was by error of the Soothsayer, (that
guided him) brought into the temple of Bellona: and
that black beasts, being appointed for sacrifice, did of
themselves follow him to his Pallace. These things,
howsoever they fell out accidentally: yet they were interpreted
as ominous, in respect of the event. And now
Severus perceiving his death to approach, called before
him some of his Counsellers and chiefe Captaines, vnto
whom he is said to have spoken in this manner:
                  
                     It is now about eighteene yeares, since I was first declared
Emperour by the Army in Pannonia; during
which time, with what care, paine, and travaile, I have
weilded this vast body of the Empire, my continuall
employment in wars, both at home and abroad, may
witnesse sufficiently. For, at my first entrance, I found
the State incumbred every where, and now I shall leave
it peaceable, even to the Britans. The future prosperitie
whereof, must depend vpon the mutuall agreement of
my two sonnes. For neither multitude of men, nor abundance
of treasure, are so availeable to defend and
maintaine Common-weales, as Amity and Vnity between
Governors. For, by Concord, (we see,) that smal
things grow to greatnes, whereas by Discord the greatest
fall to ruine. I must now leave to them (as my successors,)
the Imperiall Diadem, that which Bassianus hath

so long thirsted after, though he know not yet, whether
it be a thing to be wished, or feared, as having not proved
the difference betwixt a Prince, and a private person.
But ambitious mindes are carried blind-fold, they
wot not whither, in desiring that, which having once
obtained, they can neither keepe, without great care,
nor leave, without extreame perill; such a thing is Soverainty,
whose greatnesse is not contained in it selfe,
but consisteth, for the most part, in the opinion, and dependeth
vpon the dispositions of other men. It is Vertue
onely, not glorious titles, which makes men truely
great. My selfe at this present may serve for an example,
to shew, vpon what a weake foundation, humane
greatnesse is built. For, I have beene all things, though now
it availe me nothing: seeing I must pay my debt to Nature,
and after all my exploits in the East & West parts
of the world, (I) must die (as I may say) out of the
world, in a strange Country, if any Country may be
termed strange to the Romans, who have now by conquest,
made all Countries their owne. I exhort you
therefore, as you tender the welfare of the Roman Empire,
of your owne selves, and your posteritie, be true
and faithfull to my sonnes, as you have beene to me,
assisting them with your counsel, and perswading them
to mutuall concord, as the maine pillar to support, both
their estates, and your owne.
                  
                  When he had vttered these, or the like speeches, hee
turned aside, and shortly after yeelded vp the Ghost.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. X.
                  
                     Bassianus practiseth with the armie to make him sole Emperour,
by excluding Geta his yonger brother. The crueltie
of Bassianus. The Funerals of Severus the Emperour.
The state of Britannie from Bassianus to Gallienus,
not mentioned in Histories. Some of the Thirtie Tyrants
vsurpe the government in Britannie in the time of
Gallienus. Bonosus a Britan doth the like in the raigne
of Aurelianus. Victorinus a favorite of Probus the
Emperour, murdereth the Governor of the Province.
Vandals, and Burgundiaus, seate themselves in Britannie.
The Britans licenced to plant Vines. Carus
succeeding Probus in the Empire, assigneth Britannie
to Carinus one of his sonnes, who possesseth it, till Dioclesian
is declared Emperour. C. Carausius Admirall
of the British fleet, is sent to sea to gard the Coasts of Gallia,
and Britannie, against Pirates.
                  
                  
                     BAssianus being advertised of his fathers death, practised
with the Souldiers, by bribes, and faire promises,
that he might be declared sole Emperor: wherto
when he could not perswade them, for the reverence
they bare to his father Severus, he made a league with
the Northern Britans that then assailed the borders, and
returned to Eboracum, to meet with Iulia the Empresse
his mother in law, and Geta his brother. There he caused
the Physitians to be put to death, for not ridding
his father sooner out of the way, as he had commanded
them. Then he appointed secretly to the slaughter, all
those, that for their vertue and wisdom had beene esteemed,
and advanced by his father, and all such, as having
beene Tutors to him and his brother, advised them to

mutuall concord. This done, he entred into consultation
about his fathers funerals, which were solemnised
by the armie with all due rites, according to the ancient
custome in times of warre. The ashes of the dead
bodie being put into a Golden Vrna, were afterwards
by Iulia the Empresse (accompanied with the two Caesars)
carried to Rome, where Severus, after the vsuall ceremonies,
was consecrated a god.
                  Now the affaires of Britannie, for the space of about
fiftie yeares togither, were passed over in silence,
as being either omitted, through the negligence of
Writers in that age, or perishing, through the calamitie
of the times that ensued vnder the Emperors following,
namely, Popilius Macrinus, (the successor of Bassianus)
Varus Heliogabalus, Alexander Severus, Maximinus,
Gordianus the first, second, and third, Philippus
Arabs, Decius, Valerianus. But when Gallienus (who
succeeded Vacerian) had obtained the Empire, the Roman
state was much encumbred, and oppressed with
her owne forces, while certaine Captaines (commonly
called, The Thirtie Tyrants) disdained the government
of so cruell, and dissolute a Prince as Gallienus, and being
chosen Emperors by the armies which they commanded,
vsurped absolute authoritie in diverse Provinces.
Among these, Collianus, Victorinus, Posthumus, Tetricus,
and Marius, (as Histories report) ruled in Britannie. The
Roman Empire, Flavius Claudius, Valerius Aurelianus, Tacitus,
& Valerius Probus, held successively after Gallienus.
                  
                  In the time of the forenamed Aurclianus the Emperour,
it is not to be forgotten, that Bonosus a Britan by
birth, and famous for excesse in drinking, invaded the
Empire with Proculus, vsurping Britannie, Spaine, and
That part of France which at this day conteineth the Provinces of Narbonne, Provence, and Dauphine.
                     Gallia Braccata. But being afterwards vanquished by
Probus the Emperor, he hanged himselfe; whereof there

went a common jest among the Souldiers, that [a
drinking vessell, not a man was hanged vp]
                  Then the Gouernor of the Province in Britannie being
preferred to the office, by meanes of Victorinus a
Moore (a man in great favour with Probus the Emperor)
began to raise sedition among the Souldiers there; with
which practise Probus secretly acquainted Victorinus,
who supposing himselfe touched with the imputation
of his crime, whom he had recommended and advanced
to the government there, desired leave of the Emperor
to go into Britannie, where (giving it out, that he
fled thither for safegard of his life) he was curteously
entertained by the Governor, whom he afterwards
murdred privily in the night, & then speedily returned
to Rome: having, by this devise, appeased the tumults in
the Province, & approved his fidelitie to the Emperor.
                  About this time (as it is reported) certaine Vandals
and Burgundians (which had invaded Gallia) being vanquished
by Probus, were sent into Britannie, where they
seated themselves, and did afterwards good service to
the Romans, in suppressing rebellious attempts there:
though the Emperour then sought to win the Britans
favour, rather by clemencie, then rigor: licencing them
to plant Vines, and make wine, and to do other things,
as well for their pleasure as profit.
                  Then Carus succeeding Probus in the Empire,
assigned Britannie, Gallia, Spaine, and Illyricum, to Carinus,
one of his sonnes, who possessed the same,
till Dioclesian was declared Emperor: in whose time the
Province was peaceably governed, the borders being
strongly garded with forts, and bulwarks against forrein
invasion; but the sea coasts, both of Gallia and Britannie,
were much annoyed with Pirats of lower Germanie, against
whom, C. Carausius, as Admiral of the British fleet,
was sent to sea.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XI.
                  
                     Carausius vsurpeth the Empire in Britannie, in the ioynt
raignes of Dioclesian and Maximianus, who assume
to them Maximinus, and Constantius Chlorus for
assistants by the name of Caesars. Carausius is slaine
by Alectus, and Alectus by Asclepiodatus. London
taken, and sacked by the Franks (the ancestors of the
French) whom the Romans encountring, deprived of
their booties.
                  
                  
                     CArausius was a man, by birth of low degree, thogh
otherwise worthie of the highest, if his owne ambition,
& the guiltines of his actions, had not pricked
him forward, to seeke it by vnlawfull courses, and
to boulster out wrong by that authoritie, which is the
ordinarie meane appointed to punish it; for in short
time he grew verie rich, by taking great store of shipping
and treasure, which he detained to his owne vse,
without restoring the same to the right owners, or rendring
account therof to the Emperors officers. Wherupon
Maximianus Herculeus (whom Dioclesian had taken
to be his Associate in the Empire) being then making
warre in Gallia, surprised the principall men of
Carausius his faction atBolein in Picardie. 
                     Gessoriacum, and gave commandement,
that Carausius himselfe should be made away.
But Carausius being privily advertised thereof, and
knowing, that then there remained for him no meane
fortune betwixt the life of a Prince, and the death of a
Traitor, entred forthwith into actuall rebellion, making
his partie strong both by sea and land, in drawing discontented
persons into the action, and alluring the

Northern Britans to joyne with him, vpon hope of
spoiles to be gotten in the province, which he then ruled
with a kind of absolute authoritie, and soone after vsurped
there the Imperiall ornaments.
                  The Roman state being shaken in diverse places, either
by the negligent government, or ambitious attempts
of Captaines, and Commanders of armies,
(which gave occasion to whole Nations and Provinces
to revolt:) The two Emperours declared Galerius Maximinus
and Constantius Chlorus, as their assistants by the
name of Caesars. Then was Maximinus sent into Persia,
and Constantius into Britannie against Carausius, But before
Constantius arrived there, Carausius was slain by the
practise of C. Alectus his familiar friend, who then vsurped
the Empire, as Carausius had done before. And vnderstanding
that Constantius was comming over with a
great power, he resolved to meete him vpon the Sea,
and impeach his landing; for which purpose he lay with
his Navie vpon the Coast of the IleIle of Wight▪
                      
                     Vectis; but his
hopes failing him, by reason the Romans in a thicke mist
did recover the land, before he could discover them, he
prepared his forces to encounter them in a set battaile
neere the shore. Constantius (having determined to trie
the vtmost of his fortune) to take away from his Souldiers
all hope of returne, did first set his ships on fire,
and afterwards gave the charge vpon Alectus, whose
Armie was (for the most part) composed of Mercenarie
men, consisting of Britans, Franks, Germans, and
diverse other Nations, who fought not all with like
courage: for after the first encounter, some of them
turned their backes, forsaking their Commander,
whoescaped the furie of the battaile by flight, though
he was shortly after taken, and slayne by Asclepiodatus
theCaptaine of the Emperors gard. 
                     Praefectus Praetori
                           •
                        . TheThe ancient Inhabitants of Franconiae in Germanie, that afterwards seated themselves in France. 
                     Francs that served

vnder Alectus, fled to the Citie of London,
which (being weakly garded) they rifeled and sacked,
though they did not long time enjoy the spoile;
for part of the Roman Armie comming thither (rather
by errour in mistaking their way, then of set
purpose) assayled them, tooke away their booties,
and put the most part of them to the sword. This
victorie restored againe to the Roman Empire, the
Province of Britannie, which had beene vsurped about
seaven yeares by Carausius, and three yeares by
Alectus.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. XII.
                  
                     The persecution of Christians in Britannie vnder Dioclesian
the Emperour. The death of Saint Alban the first
British Martyr.
                  
                  NOw began the storme of persecution for Christian
Religion to arise vnder Dioclesian, who commanded,
that throughout the Dominions of the
Empire, the people should offer sacrifice onely to the
gods of the Emperours, and that such as refused so
to do, should be punished with diverse kinds of cruell
death. Hereupon the Christians, (being then dispersed
in diverse parts of the world,) not fearing any torments
that tyrannie could devise, made publike profession
of their faith, which they constantly mainteined,
and willingly sealed with their blood. Amongst
many others that died in Britannie for that cause, Alban,
an Inhabitant of the famous free CittieAn ancient City somtime neere Saint Albans. 
                     Verulamium,
is specially remembred as the first British Martyr,
who being yet but a Pagan, received into his house

a Christian, one of the Clergie named Amphibalus,
that fled from his persecutors: and observing his devotion
in watching, fasting, and praying, became in the
end a follower of his faith and vertue. And to the end
that his guest might escape the hands of them that
pursued him, he put on his garments, offering himselfe
to the Souldiers that were sent to search his house,
and in that habite was presented to the Iudge, before
whom he made confession of his faith, reprooving the
prophane rites of heathenish superstition. Whereupon
he was committed to the Tormentors to be
whipped, and persisting in his constancie, was afterwards
beheaded on the top of an high hill neere the
Citie.
                  It is reported, that the Tormentor (who was first appointed
to behead him) perceiving a miracle wrought
by him, as he went to the place of execution, refused
to do his office, casting the sword out of his hand, and
prostrating himselfe at Saint Albans feete, desired earnestly
that he might either die for him, or with him, rather
then live to be the minister of his death; wherupon
as a professor of that faith, whereof he had beene long
time a persecutor, he dranke of the same cup with Saint
Alban, and in steed of the sacramentall signe of Baptism,
was washed in the bath of his own blood. It is also written
of Saint Alban his executioner, that his eyes fell out
of his head at the verie instant, that the Martyrs head
(being severed from the bodie) fell to the ground; But
whether it were the pleasure of God in the first planting
of his truth here, to approve the same by miracles;
or whether the incredulitie of that Age, might give
Writers occasion to report more then the truth, I will
not take vpon me to censure. There suffered also inLeyceste
                           •
                        . 
                     Legecestria
about the same time, and for the same cause,

                     Aaron and Iulius: and in sundrie other places of this
Ile many other, as well women as men, who gave testimonie
of their patience, in praying for their persecutors,
and also of their pietie by doing things miraculous,
which moved the Pagan Princes at the last to cease
their tyrannie, as being rather wearied with afflicting
the Christians, then the Christians themselves with enduring
the affliction; Such power hath man being assisted
with divine grace, to do, and suffer, even above,
and against Nature it selfe. The maner of Saint Albans
death being engraven vpon a Marble stone, was
set vp within the Citie for a terror to the Christians,
who afterwards erected a Temple in that place, which
was accounted venerable for many ages after the destruction
of Verulamium: out of whose ruines, an other
Towne was raised, continuing the name and memorie
of Saint Alban the Martyr even to this day. Not
many yeares after, Amphibalus also (who converted S.
Alban) being apprehended by the Roman Souldiers,
for preaching the Christian faith vnto the Britans, was
put to death, neere the place where Saint Alban his disciple
had suffered Martyrdome before him.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIII.
                  
                     A briefe Relation of the state of the British Church, from
the raigne of Dioclesian, vnto the comming of Austen
the Monke, who converted the Saxons and English
to the christian Faith.
                  
                  THe storm of persecution afterward ceasing, when
Dioclesian yeelded vp the government, gave free
passage to the profession of christian religion, both

in Britannie, and other parts of the Western Empire, till
such time as Arrius, a Priest of Alexandria, (whose heart
inwardly boyling with discontentment, for not obtaining
the Bishopricke of that place, which he ambitiously
affected,) burst out at the last into open blasphemy
and impietie, against the divinitie and omnipotencie
of the Sonne of God; which heresie (like a contagious
disease, infecting most parts of the world) invaded
also this our Iland, the inhabitants whereof in those
daies, (as men delighting in novelties) were carried hither
and thither with every blast of vaine doctrine, retaining
nothing in matters of religion for certaine, but
their owne vncertaine opinions: But the Arrian heresie
being afterwards condemned by the general Counsell
of Nice, in the raigne of Constantine the Great, the
number of the professors and favourers thereof, as well
in Britannie as other places, daily diminished, and the
truth of Christianitie was generally imbraced by the
Britans, whose Bishops conformed themselves to the
doctrine and ceremonies of the Church of Rome, without
difference in any thing specially remembred, save
onely in celebration of the feast of Easter, after the
antient manner of the Iews: imitating therein, the custome
of the Greeke Churches in Asia, who solemnized
that feast vpon the fourteenth day of the Moone
of March, on what day of the weeke soever it fell:
whereas the West Churches did celebrate it vpon the
first Sunday after the full Moone of the same moneth,
in regard that Sunday was properly accounted and called,
The Lords day, as being dedicated in the Apostles
time, to the eternall memory of Christs resurrection.
And this custome of celebrating the feast of Easter, after
the manner of the Iewes, and of the East Churches,
continued in vse among the Britans, even till the comming

of Austen the Monke, albeit it had been condemned
by divers publike Decrees and generall Counsells.
Neither is it to be forgotten, that in this third Age
after Christ, there were among the Britans, divers men
of speciall note for pietie and learning, as namely, in the
time of Constantine the Great, and Pope Sylvester Restitutus,
a Bishop of London was present, and subscribed to
the Synod, held at Arles in France, about the yeare of
our redemption 325. Likewise, by the testimonie of Athanasius,
certain British Bishops appeared at the Counsell
of Sardica, which was summoned in the behalfe of
that holy Father, against the Arrian heretikes, about the
yeare 350. and also at the Counsell of Ariminum, where
Saint Hillarie greatly commendeth the Bishops of Britannie,
for their zeale and constancie in maintaining the
truth against Arrianisme, which was then dispersed in
most parts of Christendome. And it is not to be doubted,
but that there were many others also worthy of remembrance,
if Time had not worne out the knowledge
of their names and doings.
                  But that which most disturbed the peace of the
Church in Britannie, was the heresie of Pelagius the British
Monke, who in the age next ensuing, maintained
the power and free will of man, against the vertue of
divine grace, with other divelish positions, which being
plausible to flesh and blood, were easily admitted, but
proved in the end, verie pernicious. These occurrents
in the estate Ecclesiasticall, (howsoever severed by distance
of time) I have thought good to set downe together,
rather then to mix them with the relations of
matters civill: and yet not omitting (as occasion shall
require) to touch them againe in their proper places.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XIIII.
                  
                     Constantius Chlorus stayeth the persecution in Britannie.
He dieth at Yorke. Helena his wife, (the mother
of Constantine the Great) travaileth to Ierusalem to
seeke out the Crosse whereon our Saviour suffered. Her
pietie and zeale towards the advancement of Christian
Religion. The vertues of Constantius Caesar her
husband.
                  
                  DIoclesian and Maximianus, having resigned their
authority, Constantius Chlorus stayed the persecution
in Britannie, & afterwards went thither
himselfe, renforcing the garrisons, both within the
Province, and vpon the borders, and establishing a generall
peace throughout the Iland; which done, he repaired
to Eboracum, and there fell sicke of a languishing
disease. In the meane time, Constantinus his sonne, (being
left at Rome as his fathers pledge) escaped from his
keepers, and houghing the post horses, (as he passed the
Countries) that he might not be overtaken by pursuit,
came at length into Britannie, where he was received
with great joy by Constantius his father, who being
then past hope of life, signified in the presence of his
Counsellers and Captaines; That he willingly and
gladly imbraced his death, since he should leave a memorable
monument of himselfe in the life of his sonne,
who (he hoped) should succeede him in the governement,
to protect the innocent from oppression, and to
wipe away the teares from the Christians eyes: for
therein, above all other things, he accounted himselfe
most happy.
                  
                  
                     
Thus died Constantius Caesar, a wise and vertuous
Prince, as being not subject to those vices which commonly
accompany the highest fortunes. He was first
called from the degree of a Senator, to be a Caesar, not
affecting the title for ambition, nor refusing it in respect
of the danger. Helena his wife, the mother of Constantine
the Great, was (as some have written) the
daughter of Coil a British King, though by others it be
otherwise reported. But of what Country or kindred
soever she was, it appeareth by consent of all Writers,
that she was a wise and vertuous Lady, worthy to be
the Wife of such a Husband, and the Mother of such a
Sonne. She was an earnest professor of Christianitie,
and vpon religious zeale, travailed to Ierusalem, where
she found out the Manger wherein Christ was laid at
the time of his birth, and the Crosse whereon he was
nailed when he suffered. By this Crosse many diseases
were cured, and strange miracles wrought, (if credit
may be given to such as have written thereof.) Her
constant desire to advance the Christian faith, first moved
Constantius her husband to favour the Christians,
who having in times of danger hidden themselves (for
the most part) in desarts and dennes, did then come abroad
againe into the view of the world, reedified their
old Churches, founded new, instituted holy daies to
be celebrated in honour of their Martyrs, and exercised
religion freely and peaceably, as being licensed so to
doe by publike Edicts. In all vertues beseeming a
Prince, there were few of his degree, either before his
time, or since, that might worthily be compared with
Constantius, who in the administration of Iustice in civill
causes, carryed so even a hand, as he never vsed to
make difference of persons, or to be mis-led by affection.
He was no wastefull spender of his subjects treasure:

no greedie horder vp of his owne, for he esteemed
money onely, as a thing to be vsed, not kept: and hee
would oft times say, [That it was more behoovefull
for the Common-weale, that the wealth of the land
should be dispearsed in subjects hands, then barred
vp in Princes coffers.] For glorious apparrell and other
outward ornaments, (wherewith Princes vse to dazell
the eyes of the common people,) he was more meanly
furnished, then beseemed the greatnesse of his estate.
His diet was neither curious, nor costly: and when he
feasted his friends, he borrowed his silver vessell, supposing
it a thing vnnecessarie, to have any of his owne;
and considering perhaps, that the mettall whereof they
were made, might be converted to a better vse. In
times of war, he was diligent and industrious: yet not
vsing force, where pollicie might prevaile; for he so
much esteemed the life of a man, as he would never hazard
it in desperate attempts for his owne glory: which
wan him great reputation among his Souldiers, who
for the love they bare him, did presently after his death,
elect Constantine his sonne to succeede him; (other Nations
supposing this our Iland most happie, in first seeing
him saluted Emperor.)
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XV.
                  
                     Constantine the Great is declared Emperour at Yorke.
He subdueth Maxentius and Licinius, the one vsurping
the West Empire, and the other the East. He establisheth
a new forme of governement in Britannie, appointing
Pacatianus to rule the Province there, as Deputie
to the Praefectus Praetorio of Gallia. He translateth the
seate of the Empire from Rome to Bizantium. His
three sonnes, Constantinus, Constans, and Constantius,
raigne successively after his death. Gratianus Funarius
hath the charge of the Armie in Britannie, when
Constans the Emperor is staine by Magnentius. Martinus
Deputie in Britannie vnder Constantius. Paulus
Catena a Commissioner, to enquire of Magnentius
confederates.
                  
                  THen Constantine residing at Yorke, although he seemed
at the first vnwilling to accept the Imperiall
Title, and protested openly against it: yet when
the Senate had confirmed the election, he tooke vpon
him the government of those Provinces, which his father
had held in the West parts, and with an Armie of
Britans and other Nations, he first setled France and
Germany, being then in Armes against him, and afterwards
subdued Maxentius, Maximians sonne that vsurped
the Empire in Italy. Then, with like successe, he
made war vpon Licinius his Associate, who persecuted
the professors of Christianitie in the East parts of the
world. By which meanes, Constantine alone enjoyed
the Empire, and for his many and glorious conquests,
was worthily surnamed the Great. In his time the
forme of government in Britannie, both for Civill and

Martiall causes, was altered, and new lawes established.
The civill governement of the Province there, he committed
to Pacatianus, who ordered the same as Deputy
to the Praefectus Praetorio of Gallia, (an Officer instituted
by him) with a limitation of place and restriction
of that power, which the antient Praefectus Praetorio had
vnder the first Emperors.
                  Then Constantine intending to make war in Persia, either
to defend, or enlarge the limits of the East Empire,
removed the Imperiall seate from Rome, to the Citie
Bizantium, (which he reedified, and caused the same to
be called of his owne name Constantinopolis:) drawing
thither the Legions in Germany, that garded the frontires
of the Westerne Empire, which was thereby laid
open to the incursions of those barbarous people, that
afterwards assailed it, and in the end, possessed the greatest
part thereof. The borders also of the Province in
Britannie were weakened, by removing the Garrisons
there into other Cities and Townes, which being pestered
with Souldiers, (for the most part vnruly guests)
were abandoned by the antient inhabitants.
                  After the death of Constantine the Great, Constantinus
his eldest sonne, enjoyed Britannie as a portion of his
dominion, till making some attempts vpon his brother
Constans, for the enlarging of it, he was by him slaine.
Then was the Empire divided betweene Constans and
Constantius, the two younger brethren. Constans seised
vpon the Provinces which Constantinus his brother
had held, and made a voyage into Britannie, where Gratianus
an Hungarian by birth, had then charge of the
Armie. This Gratianus was surnamed Funarius, for that,
being a young man, he was able (as it is written of him)
to holde a rope in his hand against the force of five
Souldiers, assaying to pull it from him. But Constans afterwads

following ill counsell, (the ready way to
Princes ruines) and giving himselfe over to all kinds of
vice, was slaine by Magnentius Taporus, (the sonne of a
Britan) who then invaded the Empire, vsurping the governement
of Gallia and Britannie, till (after three years
warre with Constantius, the successour of Constans his
brother) finding himselfe vnable any longer to vphold
his greatnesse, he murdered himselfe.
                  Then was Martinus (an aged man) made Deputy of
Britannie, when Paulus a Spaniard, surnamed Catêna, (a
name well sorting with nature) was sent thither as a
commissioner, to inquire of such as had conspired with
Magnentius; But vnder colour of his authoritie, he called
in question such as were not faulty, either vpon
false information, or private displeasure, & sometimes,
to make a gaine of those that were accused: which
course Martinus the Deputy disliking, intreated him,
That such as had been no actors in rebellion, might be
no partners in punishment with offenders. Whereupon
Paulus, charging the Deputy himselfe as a favourer
of Traytors, and privie to the conspiracie, did so far
forth incense Martinus, that (being either impatient of
reproches, or perhaps not altogether giltlesse) he strook
at Paulus with his sword, intending to have killed him,
but failing in the execution, hee presently thrust the
sword into his owne bodie. Gratianus Funarius, though
he were not specially bound by oth to the Emperor, as
some others had beene: yet, for that he had received
Magnentius into his house, was adjudged to forfeit all
his goods: the rest of the accused persons being fettered,
and presented to the Emperour, were condemned,
some to death, and some to exile.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XVI.
                  
                     The government of Gallia, and Britannie is assigned to Iulianus.
Lupicinus, and Alipius, are at severall times
sent into Britannie: Iovinian succeedeth Iulianus in
the Empire, which Valentinian the first, ioyntly with
Valens his brother, doth governe after the death of Iovinian.
The Picts, and Scottish-men invade the Province.
The originall and maners of both Nations. Mutinies
in the Roman armie, appeased by Theodosius.
                  
                  NOw was the government of Gallia and Britannie,
assigned to Iulianus (afterwards called the Apostata)
whom Constantius had made a Caesar. Then
Lupicinus Maister of the Armour to the Emperour, (a
good souldier, but notorious for his pride, covetousnesse,
and crueltie) and after him Alipius, were sent into
Britannie, to represse the barbarous people that had invaded
the Province there, while Iulianus himself remained
in Gallia, not daring to passe into the Ile, both for
that he feared the Gauls, who were readie (vpon the
least occasion) to revolt, and also doubted the Almains,
who were then vp in Armes: But with what successe
Lupicinus, and Alipius prosecuted the warre in Britannie,
I find no certaine report.
                  After the death of Constantius, Iulianus possessing
the Empire (which he had vsurped in the life time of
Constantius) banished Palladius an honourable person
into Britannie, and sent Alipius to repaire the walles of
Ierusalem, in which attempt, God discovering his wrath,
by terrifying the builders with thunder and lightning,
and killing many thousand Iewes, gave an apparant testimonie,

how vaine a thing it is for the power of man to
oppose it selfe against his Imperiall decree.
                  
                     Iovinian succeeded Iulianus in the Empire, which he
held but few moneths. About this time the Picts, Saxons,
Scottishmen, and Attacots invaded the Roman Province
in Britannie (Valentinianus the first of that name
then governing the Empire, togither with Valens his
brother.) These Picts and Scottish-men (as some writers
report) came first out of Scythia, though it be not
improbable that the Picts were any other, then such
Britans, as being either borne in the Northern Promontorie
of the Ile, or flying thither out of the South
parts, entred into confederacie with the Scottish men,
and retained for a time their ancient name of Picts, as
being so called by the Romans (in respect of the old custome
of painting their bodies) to distinguish them
from the Britans then dwelling within the Province.
Neither is there any mention made in Histories of
their name, before the time of Dioclesian, and Maximian.
These Picts, increasing in number, did afterwards
inhabite the Iles of the Orcades, and being, for the most
part, rude, and savage (as the Scottishmen also then were)
did oft-times harrow the borders, and grievously annoy
their civill Country-men (there being commonly
no greater hatred, then that which is bred and nourished
among the people of one Nation,) when they are
severed each from other by difference of maners and
customes. The name of Picts in processe of time (being
changed into that of the Scottishmen, as of the more
populous nation) was in a maner clean forgotten, when
by societie and aliance they became both one people.
                  That the Scottish-men had their originall from the
Scythes, their verie name may seeme, in some sort, to discover;
howbeit, diverse stories affirme, that they travailed
first into Cantabria in Spaine, where (perhaps disliking

that barren soyle) they continued not long, but
sailed into Ireland, and from thence a great number of
them came over into Britannie, landing in the North
part of the Ile, where afterward they seated themselves.
They were people of great courage, and boldnesse: of
stature, tall: strong of bodie: their complexions somewhat
ruddie and high coloured: their apparell was either
verie slender, or none at all, save only to cover their
shame. They were, for the most part, addicted to warre,
vsing peace onely but as a means to repaire their losses.
Neither was their peace altogither idle: for even then
they accustomed their bodies to labours, no lesse painfull
then warre it selfe, and oft-times no lesse dangerous.
To ride with swift pace vp a steepe hill, to swim over
lakes, and standing meeres; to passe over bogs, and fennie
grounds, were things in ordinarie vse with them,
as being accounted exercises of recreation onely. But
above all others, the nobilitie & better sort were delighted
with hunting & that in such measure, as they could
more patiently endure the want of meate, drinke, and
sleepe, then restraint from that pastime, which they
esteemed manly and generous. In their consultations
they were verie secret; and sodaine in the execution of
whatsoever they had projected, by which meanes they
often-times, strooke terror and amazment into the harts
of their enemies, & much annoyed the Roman Province
in Britanny. They were better contented with the necessities
of nature, & more able to endure all extremities of
fortune then the Britans in those times, as being lesse acquainted
with the vaine superfluities & delicacie of the
Romans: In behaviour the Britans were noted to be more
civill, but the Scottishmen (as a people vnconquered, &
admitting no customs but their own) refused to imitate
them, who were brought vnder the subjection of strangers,

or to be reputed like to any other then to themselves.
Wrongs and indignities offred as well to others
as themselves, they sharpely revenged: the slaughter,
wounding, or disgrace of any of their kinred, alies, or
companions, being commonly the occasion of rooting
out the whole familie of him that first gave the offence.
Violent pursuits: seasing by strong hand the goods and
possessions of their neighbors: burning of houses, and
killing (vpon cold blood) such as they had taken in
warre (which others termed crueltie) they accounted
manhood, and policie: supposing the assurance of their
estate to consist, rather in diminishing the number of
their enemies, by open acts of hostilitie, then by pretended
reconciliations, and leagues of amitie, which are either
kept or broken at the will of him that hath the
greater power. Their name is first mentioned in Histories
about the reigne of Constantine the great: though
the Scottish writers affirme, that they were governed by
Kings of their owne Nation, many hundred yeares before
his time. But of things so ancient to have the certaine
knowledge, it is no easie matter: neither is Antiquitie
in it selfe verie much to be regarded, where true
Nobilitie and vertue is wanting. For all Nations at the
first were of barbarous, & vncivill behaviour, till Time
taught them other customes, and emulation kindled the
hearts of the better sort to seeke fame by their owne valour,
rather then the Genealogies of their Ancesters.
These Scottish-men and Picts, being now assisted with
forrein power, presumed more boldly to assaile the Britans,
both by sea and land, killing Nectaridius the Admirall
of the British fleete, and surprising Bulchobaudes one
of their chiefe Captaines, (the mutinie at that time in
the Roman Campe giving them oportunitie, and boldnesse
to do, in a maner, what they listed.) For the Legionarie
                     
Souldiers refused to obey their Leaders, and
even the Deputies themselves, complaining of the partialitie
of their Generals, who punished the least offence
of the common Souldier, and winked at the great
abuses of Commanders and Officers. Hereupon a warlike
troope of Almans was sent over vnder the conduct
of Fraomarius their King, who exercised there the
authoritie of a Tribune, Severus, the Emperors steward
of houshold, and Iovinius were appointed to second
him, with certaine Auxiliarie forces out of Gallia. By
this meanes the furie of those warlike Nations was
somwhat restrained, til the comming of Theodosius, who
first appeased the mutinie among the Souldiers in Britannie,
and afterward prosecuted the service there
with such good successe, as he restored the decayed
Townes, strengthned the borders, appointing night-watches
to be kept there, and in the end, recovered the
Province, which was then contented to admit of Governors,
(as in former times) and as a new conquered
state, had a new name given it; For in honour of the
Emperour Valentinian, the Province was (for a time)
called Valentia. Not long after, one Valentinian a Pannonian
entred into a new conspiracie there, which being
discovered before it was ripe, the perill like to have
ensued thereby, was easily avoyded.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XVII.
                  
                     Gratianus the successor of Valentinian the first, electeth
Valentinian the second, and Theodosius the yonger,
to be his associates in the Empire. Clemens Maximus
commanding the armie in Britannie, vsurpeth the soveraigntie.
Gratianus the Emperour murdered. Saint
Ambrose is sent from Valentinian to Maximus, to
treate of peace. Theodosius the yonger pursueth Maximus,
who is taken, and put to death. The Britans that
follow Maximus, seate themselves in Amorica (in
France,) which thereupon tooke the name of Britannie.
                  
                  THen Gratianus (succeeding Valentinian) elected Valentinian
the second, his brother, and Theodosius
(the sonne of Theodosius afore-named) to be his
associates in government: But Clemens Maximus then
ruling the Armie in Britannie, (vpon emulation and
envie of Theodosius glorie) vsurped the Empire there:
and having transported the strength of the Province
into Belgia, (the German Armie being also revolted to
him) he placed his Imperiall seate among theThe ancient people of France inhabiting betwixt Belgia and the river Mosella. 
                     Treviri,
from whence Gratianus intended, by force, to have expulsed
him; but that as he marched through Italie with
his army (the most part of his souldiers forsaking him)
he fled toLions in France. 
                     Lugdunum in Gallia, where he was entrapped
by a treacherous devise; for, a rumor being spred
(by direction of Maximus) that the Empresse his wife
was comming to visite him, he lightly gave credite
thereto; and thereupon attended with a few persons,
went foorth in private maner to meete her; but in the
Chariot (where he supposed to have seene his wife) he
found Andragathius, one of Maximus Captaines, secretly

hidden, who forthwith leaped out, and murdered
the innocent Emperour, while his attendants, being vnarmed,
and amazed with the sodainnesse of the fact,
made little or no preparation for defence. Maximus having
his mind lifted vp with his fortune, created his
sonne Victor a Caesar, and vsed great crueltie against
those that had served vnder Gratianus. Whereupon
Valentinian doubting his owne estate, sent Saint Ambrose
the Bishop of Millain vnto him, as an Ambassador
to desire peace, which in the end was granted vpon
conditions. But Maximus ambitiously affecting the sole
government, did soone after breake the peace, invading
Italie, and attempting to have taken Valentinian himself,
who to prevent that danger, fled with his mother vnto
Theodosius his associate (then ruling the East Empire) imploring
his ayde against Maximus that vsurped Italie,
and other parts of his government. Hereupon Theodosius
prepared an armie to encounter Maximus, who in Pan
                        
                           •
                        onia
being overthrown, fled to Aquileia, where by the
treason of his own souldiers (while he was paying them
their wages) he was delivered to Theodosius, dis-robed
of his Imperiall ornaments, and speedily put to an ignominious
death. This end had Maximus, after he had vsurped
the Empire five yeares.
                  The like calamities also befell his friends and followers.
For Victor his sonne was afterwards slaine in
Gallia by Arbogustes. Andragathius the murderer
of Gratian drowned himselfe, and diverse of Maximus
his Captaines being taken, were put to the
sword.
                  Howbeit the Britans, by whose power Maximus
had raised himselfe to that greatnesse (as men desiring
rather to trie new fortunes abroad, then to returne
home) resolved to stay in Armorica in France, where

some of their Country-men had remained (as diverse
writers affirme) since the conquest of Gallia by Constantine
the Great. By this meanes, in processe of time (partly
by force, and partly by policie,) they grew so strong,
as they left the possession of a great part of that Country
to their posteritie, which being rooted therein by
many discents, did afterwards enjoy it entirely as their
owne (the name of Britannie continuing there among
them even to this day.) This victorie of Theodosius was
so much esteemed, as the Senate appointed by Decree,
that yearly feasts should be celebrated in remembrance
thereof.
               
               
                  CHAP. XVIII.
                  
                     Stilico is sent into Britannie by Honorius (the successor of
Theodosius (his father) in the Westerne Empire) to defend
the Province against the Picts and Scottish-men.
Emperors elected and deposed by the army in Britannie.
Chrysanthus the Deputie of the Province is made Bishop
of Constantinople. The Romans send over one Legion
out of France into Britannie. They grow wearie of the
government there. The Britans implore their ayde.
                  
                  NOw the Roman Monarchy was drawing on to
her fatall period, when Honorius (succeeding
Theodosius his father in the Westerne Empire,)
sent Stilico into Britannie, to defend the Britans against
the Picts and Scottishmen, who assailed them in most
parts of the Ile, working vpon the weaknesse of the
Province, in which (the most choise and able men
having beene from time to time transported and wasted
in the Roman warres with other Nations) there
remained not then sufficient to defend it selfe.

The common Souldiers there, seeing the state in combustion,
tooke vpon them to elect and depose Emperours,
first proclaiming Gratian a free Citizen of Rome;
but not long contented with his governement, they
murdered him, & elected one Constantine (for the name
sake onely) supposing the same to be auspitious. Constantine
transporting the floure and strength of all Britannie
into Gallia, made many dishonourable leagues
(to the prejudice of the Empire) with the barbarous
Nations that then invaded it, and sent his sonne Constans
(whom of a Monke he had made a Caesar) into
Spaine, where Constans (having put to death some principall
men, whom hee suspected to favour Honorius)
committed the governement of the Country to Gerontius
his chiefe Captaine, by whom he was afterwards
slaine at Vienna in Gallia: and Constantine his father,
having run through many fortunes, was in the
end besieged at Arl
                           •
                        s, where he was taken, and slaine
by the Souldiers of Honorius the Emperour, who then
recovered Britannie.
                  
                  
                     Chrysanthus, (the sonne of Martianus a Bishop) a man
of consular dignitie, was then Deputy of Britannie,
where he wan so great reputation for his vertue and
integritie in the governement, both of the Church,
(which was then tainted with the gracelesse heresie of
Pelagius the Britan) and also of the weale publike of the
Province, as he was afterwards (thogh against his will)
preferred to the Bishopricke of Constantinople.
                  
                  Now the Romans, about foure hundred and seventie
years after their first entrance into the Ile, waxed weary
of the governement of Britannie, and the Britans, that
had beene many times assailed by their vncivill neighbours,
(consorted with strangers of divers Nations)
perceived themselves vnable to make resistance, as in

former times; whereupon they sent Ambassadors to
Rome, requiring aid, and promising fealtie, if the Romans
would reskew them from the oppression of their enemies.
Then was there a Legion sent over into the Iland,
to expulse the barbarous people out of the Province:
which being with good successe effected, the Romans
counselled the Britans, for their better defence, to make
a stone wall betweeneThe Firth of Dunbretton in Scotland.
                      
                     Glota and
                        Edenborough Firth. 
                     Bodatria, (the two
Armes of the sea that ran into the Iland,) and so departed
thence. But this wall was afterwards made onely of
Turves, and not of Stone, as they were directed, (the
Britans having not then any skill in such kind of buildings;)
by which meanes it served to little purpose:
For the Scottishmen and Picts, vnderstanding that the
Romans were gone, passed over the water in boats at
both ends of the wall, invaded the borders of the
Province, and with maine force, bare downe all before
them. Whereupon Ambassadors were sent againe
out of Britannie, to declare the miserable state of the
Province, which without speedy succour, was likely to
be lost.
               
               
                  CHAP. XIX.
                  
                     A second supply of forces sent by the President of Gallia,
into Britannie. The Romans erect a wall of stone for
defence of the Province. The Picts and Scottishmen
breake it downe. The Pelagian heresie is suppressed
in Britannie, by the meanes of Germanus and Lupus,
two French Bishops. The Scottishmen are converted
to the Christian faith by S. Palladius, the Picts
by S. Ninianus, and the Irishmen by S. Patricius.
                  
                  VPon the complaint and earnest solicitation of
the Britans, there was another Legion sent overby

                     Aetius the President of Gallia, vnder the conduct of Gallio
of Ravenna, to aide the distressed Britans; and the Romans
having reduced the Province into her former
state, did tell the Britans, that it was not for their ease,
to take any more such long, costly, and painefull journeies,
considering that the Empire it selfe was assailed,
and in a manner over-run by strangers: and therefore,
that from thence forth, they should provide for their
owne safetie, that they should learne to vse armor and
weapons, and trust to their owne valor. Howbeit the
Romans (in regard of the good service done by the British
Nation in former times) beganne to build a wall of
stone from East to West, in the selfe same place where
Severus the Emperour had cast his Trench, (the labour
and charges of the worke being borne, partly by the Romans,
and partly by the Britans themselves.) This wall
contained about eight foote in breadth, and twelve
in height, (some reliques thereof remaining to be
seene at this day.) Vpon the sea coasts towards the
South, they raised Bulwarkes (one somewhat distant
from another) to empeach the enemies landing in
those parts; and this done, they took their last farewell,
transporting their Legions into Gallia, as men resolved
to returne hither no more. Assoone as they were gone,
the barbarous people (having intelligence thereof)
presumed confidently, that without any great resistance,
they might now enter the Province. And thereupon
accounting as their owne, whatsoever was without
the wall, they gave an assault to the wall it selfe, and
with grapples, and such like engines, pulled downe to
the ground a great part thereof, while the Britans inhabiting
the borders, being awaked with the suddainnesse
of the enterprize, gave warning to the rest of their
countrymen within the land, to arme themselves

with speede, and to make resistance.
                  About this time also, (which was the yeare of our
redemption 430.) the state of the Church in Britannie,
was much incumbred with the heresie of Pelagius, who
being by birth a Britan, by profession a Monke, and (as
some thinke) trained vp in the Monastery of Bangor,
travailed first into Italy, then into Sicilia, Aegypt, and other
East parts of the world, to learne and studie, as he
professed; whereby he wownd himselfe into the good
opinion of many men of great fame in those daies, for
learning and pietie; as namely of Paulinus, Bishop of
Nola, and (by his meanes) of Saint Augustine, till the heretical
assertions which himselfe and his disciple Celestius,
a Scottishman secretly taught, being by Saint Hierom
discovered, were afterwards condemned by the Bishop
of Rome, Innocentius the first: Whereupon they returned
againe into Britannie, being obstinately bent to
maintaine their former heresie: which Agricola, the
sonne of Severianus, a Bishop of that sect, had (not
long before) brought thither, whereby the same, in
short time, was received and approoved among the
Chistians in divers parts of the Ile: so that betwixt heresie
among the Britans themselves, and paganisme professed
by their enemies, the light of Christian religion
seemed, for a time, to be eclipsed. Howbeit, some of the
Britans (disliking those hereticall opinions, which as
yet they were vnable by knowledge in the Scriptures
to confute:) and perceiving withall, what dangerous
inconveniences to the State arose oft times, by reason
of their disagreement one from another in matters of
religion; earnestly required the Bishops of France, to
send over some godly, wise, & learned men, that might
defend the truth of Christianitie, which seemed to be
borne downe by the subtill allegations of humane reason.

Heereupon the Bishoppes there called a Synod,
wherein Germanus, the Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus,
Bishop of Troyes in Champaigne, were appointed to goe
into Britannie, and to vndertake the cause, which they
afterwards prosecuted with so good successe, as many
heretickes among the Britans, were openly convinced,
and Christians confirmed in the faith. About the same
time, Ninianus Bernitius (of the race of the British
Princes) was sent into Pict-land, to convert the inhabitants
there to Christianitie: Palladius a Graetian, was
likewise appointed by Coelestine, Bishop of Rome, to
preach the Gospel in Scotland, vnto such there, as remained
yet in infidelitie, and to suppresse the Pelagian
heresie, newly sprung vp in that Kingdome, to be the
first and chiefe Bishop of the Church there: for which
purpose also Patricius, surnamed Magonius, (borne in
Britannie of a Senators house) was by the same Bishop of
Rome, sent to the Irish and Scottishmen, that then dwelt
in the Iles of the Orcades and Hebrides. These three religious
Fathers were much honoured in those daies
for the reverent opinion which most men had of their
learning and integritie of life: and they are accounted
the Apostles and Patrons of the Scottish, Irish, and Pictish
Nations, as being the severall instruments of the
generall conversion of each of them.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. XX.
                  
                     The distressed Britans flie into Wales, Cornewall, and Britannie
in France. The end of the Roman governement
in the Iland.
                  
                  WIthin few yeares after, the Britans were againe
hotly pursued by the Scottishmen and Picts,
who swarmed over a great part of the Land,
taking from the Britans for a time, all oportunities of
convening and assembling themselves together, as in
former dangers they had beene accustomed; whereby
no small number of the Inhabitants of the Province
(despairing of better successe) retired themselves, giving
way to the present necessitie, while each man (as
in common calamities oft times it falleth out) laying aside
the care of the publike, made provision for his own
safetie: leaving the enemie in the meane time to take
and kill such as resisted.
                  Some of the Britans being driven out of their owne
houses and possessions, fell to robbing one of another,
encreasing their outward troubles with inward tumults
and civill dissention; by which meanes, a great
number of them had nothing left to sustaine them, but
what they got by hunting and killing of wilde beasts.
Others burying their treasure vnder ground, (whereof
great store hath beene found in this age) did flie (themselves)
either into the Countries of theSouth-wales. 
                     Silures and
North-wales.
                     Ordovices, or into the West part of the Ile, (where the
The antient inhabitants of Cornwall and Devonshire.
                     
                     Danmonians then inhabited) or else to their owne
Countrymen in Armorica in France: the rest being
hemmed in with the sea on the one side, and their enemies

on the other, sent to the Emperor for aide, which
they could not obtaine; for that the Goths and Huns invading
Gallia and Italie, the greatest part of the forces
of the Empire was drawne thither for defence of
those places. By reason whereof, (the state of Britannie
now declining with the Empire, and shrinking vnder
the burden of barbarous oppression) the Britans sent
Ambassadours againe to Aetius the President in Gallia,
desiring him to releeve their necessities, declaring withall,
that themselves were the small remnant which survived
after the slaughter of so many thousands, whom
either the sword, or the sea had consumed; for the barbarous
enemie drave them vpon the sea, the sea againe
vpon the enemie; betweene both which, they suffered
two kinds of death, as being either killed, or drowned:
that it imported the majestie of the Roman Empire to
protect them, who had so many hundred yeares, lived
vnder their obedience, and were now plunged into
the depth of intolerable miseries: for besides the calamities
of war, both civill and forraigne at one instant,
they were afflicted with dearth and famine, which forced
them sometimes to yeelde themselves to the mercilesse
enemie. But their complaints availed nothing:
for the Romans plainely denyed to send them any more
succour: whereof the Scottishmen and Picts being certainely
advertised, and knowing how small a number
of ablemen remained in the Province, to withstand
their attempts, assailed first such places of strength as
garded the borders, and afterwards entred the Province
it selfe, where, by continuall course of conquests,
they found a passage into the heart of the Ile, spoiled
the people of their wealth, burnt their Cities, and
brought the inhabitants thereof vnder a miserable servitude.
                  
                     
Thus, about five hundred yeares after the Romans
first entrance, and foure hundred fortie and six after the
birth of our Saviour Christ, the Ile of Britannie, (which
had beene, not onely a principall member of the Empire,
but also the seate of the Empire it selfe, and the
Seminarie of Souldiers, sent out into most parts of the
world) was now, in the time of Honorius bereaved
of the greatest part of her antient inhabitants,
and left as a prey to barbarous
Nations.
               
            
            The end of the first Part of the Historie
of Great Britannie.
         
         
            
            
               ❧The Table of the Contents of
the Chapters in the First Part of
the Historie of Great Britannie.
            
               The first Booke.
               
                  THe Originall of the Britans. C. Iulius Caesar making
warre in Gallia, intendeth a voyage into Britannie. C. Volusenus
is sent to discover the Sea Coasts of the Ile. The Nature,
and Customes of the Britans. page 1
                  
                     Caesar sayleth towards Britannie. The Britans empeach his
landing. The great courage of Cassius Scoeva, one of Caesars
souldiers. 5
                  Some of the Britans submit themselves to Caesar. The Romans
Ships are scattered by tempest. The Britans secretly revolt.
9
                  
                     Caesar repaireth his Na
                        •
                     ie. A skirmish by land betweene the
Britans and Romans. The Britans retire, and with new forces
assaile the Romans, but in the end are put to flight. Caesar returneth
into France. 12
                  
                     Caesars second expedition into Britannie. The Britans fortifie
themselves in a wood; from whence they are chased by the Romans.
Caesars Navie distressed by tempest. 15
                  
                     Cassibelin is chosen by the Britans to be their Leader. The
Britans assaile the Romans, but with ill successe. Caesar with his
Armie w
                        •
                     deth over the river of Thames. 17
                  The Britans surprize the Roman horsemen. The treacherie
of Mandubratius the Britan, whom Caesar protecteth. Cassibelin
                     
wearied with ill successe of the warre, submitteth himselfe to
Caesar. Tribute imposed vpon the Britans. Caesar saileth into
France. 21
                  
                     Augustus succeedeth Iulius Caesar in the Empire. The state
of the Britans in his time, vnder Cuno-belin their Governour.
The first Brittish coyne. The birth of our Saviour Christ. Tiberius
the Emperor forbeareth to attempt any thing in Britannie. 24
                  The ridiculus expedition of Caius Caligula the Emperour,
intending a voyage into Britannie. His vaineglorie and crueltie.
26
                  
                     Claudius succeeding Caius in the Empire, se
                        •
                     deth Aulus
Plautius with an Armie out of France into Britannie. The Roman
souldiers are vnwilling to be transported thither: and entring
into mutinie▪ are appeased by Narcissus the Emperors favorite.
Plautius chargeth the Britans, and taketh Cataratacus their
Captaine prisoner, for which he afterwards triumpheth. 28
                  
                     Plautius the Lievtenant, pursueth the service in Britannie.
Vespasian (serving vnder him) was in danger to have beene
slaine or taken by the Britans, if he had not beene rescued by Titus
his sonne. The Britans, passe over the river of Thames, and assaile
the Romans that follow them. Togodumnus a Brittish
Prince, is slaine in the fight. Plautius being in distresse, desisteth for
a time from further prosecution of the warre. 30
                  The valour and fortune of Vespasian in the Brittish warre.
He subdueth the Ile of Wight. The Expedition of Claudius the
Emperor into Britannie. He defeateth the Britans, and planteth
a Colonie of old souldiers at Maldon in Essex. His sonne is surnamed
Britannicus. At his returne to Rome, he is honoured with
a Triumph. The Christian faith first received in Britannie, in the
raigne of Claudius. 32
                  
                     Ostorius Scapula is sent by Claudius the Emperour, to succeede
Plautius in the office of Lievtenancie. The Britans in divers
parts of the ile take armes, but are speedily suppressed. The
Roman Generall seeketh by lenitie to purchase the good opinion of
the Britans. 35
                  
                     Ostorius the Roman Generall, maketh warre vpon the Silures
and Ordovices, the antient inhabitants of South-wales, and
North-wales. Caractacus their Captaine, being overthrowne

in battaile fleth for succour to Cartismandua, the Princesse of the
Brigantes, who then inhabited that part of the Ile which now conteyneth
the Counties of Yorke, Lancaster, Durham, Westmerland,
and Cumberland. He is betrayed and delivered to Ostorius.
38
                  
                     Caractacus the Brittish Prince is sent to Rome, and presented
there before Claudius the Emperor. His habite, speech, and behaviour.
He is pardoned, and dismissed. 40
                  What opinion the Romans held of Caractacus. Triumphall
honours assigned to Ostorius for taking him. The Britans assaile
the Roman Campein the Countrie of the Silures. The principalitie
of South-wales. The death of Ostorius the Generall. 43
                  
                     Aulus Didius is sent by Claudius the Emperor, to take charge
of the armie in Britannie. Venutius the husband of Cartismandua,
Princesse of the Brigantes, vpon private discontentment, taketh
armes against the Romans. The death of Claudius the Emperour.
44
               
            
            
               The second Booke.
               
                  NEro succeedeth Claudius in the Empire. The Province in
Britannie is governed by Veranius, after whose death, the
charge is committed to Suetonius Paulinus. The Ile of Anglesey
is subdued. The doctrine and manners of the religious
Druydes. 49
                  The Britans oppressed by the crueltie and covetousnesse of the
Roman officers, discover their greevances one to another. Prodigious
signes foregoing the subversion of the Roman Colonie. The
Britans take armes vnder the conduct of Voadica. 52
                  The Britans take armes vnder the conduct of Voadica. Her
Oration to her Souldiers. The Roman Colonie is surprized. Cerealis
comming to succour it, hardly escapeth with life. Catus the
Procurator, flieth into France. 56
                  
                     Suetonius returneth with his armie out of Anglesey. The

Cities of London and Verlam are taken and spoiled by the Britans.
The Romans and Britans make preparation for a set battaile.
60
                  The Oration of Suetonius the Roman Generall vnto his souldiers.
The fight betweene the Romans and Britans. The Britans
are overthrowne. Voadica poisoneth her selfe. The death of
Poenius Posthumus. 62
                  
                     Suetonius renforceth the Roman Garrisons. Variance betweene
him, and Classicianus the Procurator. Polycletus is
sent by Nero the Emperour to examine their doings. Suetonius
is discharged of the armie, which he delivereth vp to Turpilianus.
64
                  
                     Trebellius Maximus succeedeth Turpilianus in the governement
of the Province. Discord in the Armie between Trebellius
and Celius. The death of Nero the Emperour, and succession
of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius. The valour and fortune
of the Fourteenth Legion. 66
                  
                     Vectius Bolanus is sent by Vitellius the Emperour, to take
charge of the Armie in Britannie. Vespasian succeedeth Vitellius
in the Empire. The governement of the Province assigned
to Petilius Cerealis, who soone after leaveth the same to Iulius
Frontinus. 68
                  
                     Iulius Agricola assigned by Vespasian the Emperour to be
Lievtenant of the Armie in Britannie, subdueth the Ordovices,
[the antient inhabitants of North-wales,] and maketh a full conquest
of the Ile of Anglesey. The carriage of himselfe at his first
entrance into governement. 70
                  
                     Agricola reformeth abuses in the Province. His courage, industrie,
and wisedome set forth as commendable qualities in a Generall.
The death of Vespasian the Emperour, whom Titus his
sonne succeedeth in the Empire. 72
                  
                     Agricolaes policie to plant civilitie among the Britans. He
leadeth his Armie without resistance vnto Edenbourgh Firth in
Scotland. 74
                  What opinion the Romans had of the conquest of Ireland. Agricola
setteth out a Navie to discover by Sea, the vtmost limits of
the Iland, and marcheth himselfe by land into the Country of the
Caledonians, [the antient inhabitants of the North part of Scotland.]

The Roman Campe is assailed, and delivered from danger
by the comming in of Agricola. 76
                  The Northern Britans with common consent, arme themselves
to repulse the Romans. The Oration of Galgacus, the cheefe of
their Leaders. 79
                  The Romans prepare themselves to fight. The Oration of Agricola
the Generall vnto his souldiers. 83
                  
                     Agricola marshalleth his forces. The battaile betweene the Romans
and the Northern Britans. Part of the Brittish Armie is
defeated. 86
                  The other part of the Brittish Armie is overthrowne. The Romans
pursuing the Britans through the woods, in danger to have
beene intrapped. The lamentable estate of the Britans. 88
                  The Britans are dispersed, and vnable to renew the war. Agricola
commandeth the Admirall of his Fleete to saile about Britannie.
He planteth Garrisons vpon the Northern borders, betweene
the two armes of the Sea. Domitian the Emperour, being
advertised of his fortunate successe in the Brittish warre, is tormented
with envie and iealousie. Agricola yeeldeth vp the Province
to Salustius Lucullus. 90
                  
                     Agricola returneth to Rome, and is admitted to the presence
of Domitian the Emperour. He betaketh himselfe to a retired
life. He is poisoned. Salustius Lucullus his successour in the governement
of the Province, protecteth Arviragus the Brittish
Prince. Hee is put to death by the commandement of Domitian.
93
               
            
            
               The third Booke.
               
                  
                     NErva Cocceius succeedeth Domitian in the Empire, leaving
the same soone after to Vlpius Trajanus. Adrianus
the successour of Trajan, sendeth Iulius Severus into Britannie
to defend the borders of the Province, against the incursions of the
Northern Britans. The Emperour himselfe with an Armie, entreth

the Iland, and buildeth there a wall of Turves, for defence of
the Province. Licinius Priscus is Gevernor of Britannie. 103
                  
                     Lollius Vrbicus is Lievtenant of Britannie vnder Antoninus
Pius, (the successour of Adrian the Emperour.) He erecteth
another wall of Turves, for defence of the Province, and appeaseth
the Brigantes. (the antient inhabitants of the Counties of Yorke,
Lancaster, Durham, Westmerland, and Cumberland,) beginning
to reuolt. Seius Saturninus Admirall of the Brittish Fleet,
gardeth the Sea Coasts. M: Aurelius Antoninus surnamed
Philosophus, succeedeth Antoninus Pius in the Empire: and
Calphurnius Agricola, Lollius Vrbicus (Britannicus) in the
Province. 106
                  
                     E
                           ••
                        therius the Bishop of Rome, sendeth Preachers into Britannie
to instruct the inhabitants there in the Christian faith. Lucius,
the first Christian Prince in Britannie. The planting and propagation
of religion among the Britans. 107
                  
                     Lucius send
                        •
                     th to Rome for the Lawes of the Empire. The
counsell of Elutherius Bishop of Rome touching the same. Idolatry
suppressed in Lucius his dominions, and Ecclesiasticall

                        〈◊〉
                      established there. The first Archbishop of London.
111
                  The Northern Britans breaking downe Adrians wall vpon
the borders, enter and annoy the Province. Vlpius Marcellus
being sent by Commodus the Emperour, to take charge of the
Armie in Britannie, beateth them backe. The rare vertues of
Vlpius Marcellus the Governour. Hee is dismissed of his office.
113
                  A Mutenie in the Roman Armie. Perennius vndertaketh
to appea
                        •
                     e it. He is accused, and put to death. Helvius Pertinax
being sent by Commodus to pacifie the tumults in the Armie, is
in danger to be slaine. He maketh sute to be discharged of the Lievtenancie.
115
                  
                     Clodius Albinus succeedeth Pertinax in the governement of
the Province. He is honoured with the title of Caesar. Being suspected
of Commodus the Emperour, he retireth himselfe from affaires.
Helvius Pertinax, and Didius Iulianus are elected Emperours
successively after the death of Commodus. Severus succeedeth
Iulianus in the Empire. Heraclianus is Governour of

the Province, which hee afterwards resigneth to Virius Lupus.
Warre betweene Severus the Emperour, and Clodius Albinus.
The death of Albinus. 117
                  
                     Severus the Emperour, maketh preparation for a voyage into
Britannie. The civill governement of the Province committed
to Geta his younger son, whom Papinianus the famous Lawyer
assisteth in the administration of Iustice there. Severus with Bassianus
his elder sonne, marcheth towards Caledonia. Mortalitie
in the Roman Campe. The Caledonians obtaine peace vpon
conditions. Bassianus taketh the charge of the Arme, and Severus
his father returnes into the Province. 119
                  The Caledonians invade the Roman Campe, and carrying
away the booties which they had taken, are pursued, and put to the
sword by the Romans. Severus the Emperour repaireth Adrians
wall, cutteth a Trench, and carrieth it thwart the Iland from
Sea to Sea. He falleth sicke at Yorke. His counsell to his sonnes.
His death. 122
                  
                     Bassianus practiseth with an Armie to make him sole Emperor,
by excluding Geta his younger brother. The crueltie of Bassianus.
The Funeralls of Severus the Emperour. The state of Britannie
from Bassianus to Gallienus, not mentioned in Histories. Some of
the Thirtie Tyrants vsurpe the governement in Britannie in
the time of Gallienus. Bonosus a Britan, doth the like in the
raigne of Aurelianus. Victorinus a favorite of Probus the Emperour,
murdereth the Governour of the Province. Vandals and
Burgundians, seate themselves in Britannie. The Britans licensed
to plant Vines. Carus succeeding Probus in the Empire, assigneth
Britannie to Carinus one of his sonnes, who possesseth it, till
Dioclesian is declared Emperour. C. Carausius Admirall of
the Brittish fleet, is sent to sea to gard the coasts of Gallia and Britannie,
against the Pirates. 125
                  
                     Carausius vsurpeth the Empire in Britannie, in the joynt raigns
of Dioclesian and Maximianus, who assume to them Maximinus,
and Constantius Chlorus for assistants by the name of Caesars.
Carausius is slaine by Alectus, and Alectus by Asclepiodatus.
London taken, and sacked by the Franks (the ancestors of
the French) whom the Romans encountring, deprived of their
b
                        •
                     oties. 128
                  
                     
The persecution of Christians in Britannie vnder Dioclesian
the Emperour. The death of Saint Alban the first Brittish Martyr.
130
                  A briefe Relation of the state of the Brittish Church, from
the raigne of Dioclesian, vnto the comming of Austen the Monk,
who converted the Saxons and English to the Christian faith. 132
                  
                     Constantius Chlorus staieth the persecution in Britannie.
He dieth at Yorke. Helena his wife, (the mother of Constantine
the Great) travaileth to Ierusalem, to seeke out the Crosse
whereon our Saviour suffered. Her pietie and zeale towards the advancement
of Christian Religion. The vertues of Constantius
Caesar her husband. 135
                  
                     Constantine the Great is declared Emperour at Yorke. Hee
subdueth Maxentius and Licinius, the one vsurping the West Empire,
and the other the East. He establisheth a new forme of gouernment
in Britannie, appointing Pacatianus to rule the Province
there, as Deputie to the Praefectus Praetorio of Gallia. He translateth
the seate of the Empire from Rome to Bizantium. His
three sonnes, Constantinus, Constans, and Constantius, raigne
successively after his death. Gratianus Funarius hath the charge
of the Armie in Britannie, when Constans the Emperour is slaine
by Magnentius. Martinus Deputie in Britannie vnder Constantius.
Paulus Catena a Commissioner, to enquire of Magnentius
confederates. 138
                  The governement of Gallia and Britannie is assigned to Iulianus.
Lupicinus and Alipius, are at severall times sent into Britannie:
Iovinian succeedeth Iulianus in the Empire, which Valentinian
the first, ioyntly with Valens his brother, doth governe
after the death of Iovinian. The Picts and Scottishmen invade
the Province. The originall and manners of both Nations. Mutinies
in the Roman Armie, appeased by Theodosius. 141
                  
                     Gratianus the successour of Valentinian the first, electeth
Valentinian the second, and Theodosius the younger to be his
associates in the Empire. Clemens Maximus commanding the
Armie in Britannie, vsurpeth the soveraigntie. Gratianus the
Emperour murdered. Saint Ambrose is sent from Valentinian
to Maximus, to treate of peace. Theodosius the younger pursueth

                     Maximus, who is taken, and put to death. The Britans that
follow Maximus, seate themselves in Amorica (in France,)
which thereupon tooke the name of Britannie. 146
                  
                     Stilico is sent into Britannie by Honorius, (the successour of
Theodosius (his father) in the Westerne Empire) to defend the
Province against the Picts and Scottishmen. Emperours elected
and deposed by the Armie in Britannie. Chrysanthus the Deputie
of the Province, is made Bishop of Constantinople. The Romans
send over one Legion out of France into Britannie. They
grow wearie of the governement there. The Britans implore their
aide. 148
                  A second supply of forces sent by the President of Gallia, into
Britannie. The Romans erect a wall of stone for defence of the
Province. The Picts and Scottishmen breake it down. The Pelagian
heresie is suppressed in Britannie, by the means of Germanus
and Lupus, two French Bishops. The Scottishmen are converted
to the Christian faith by S. Palladius, the Picts by S. Ninianus,
and the Irishmen by S. Patricius. 150
                  The distressed Britans flie into Wales, Cornwall, and Britannie
in France. The end of the Roman governement in the Iland.
154
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        The Princes that ruled in
Britannie, after the Romans
had given over the
governement there, vntill
the Saxons and English
obtained it.
                        Vortiger
deposed.
                        Vortimer.
                        Vortiger
restored.
                        Aurelianus
Ambrosius.
                        Arthur the war-like.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Bishops, and other persons of note, for
Learning and Pietie, either among the
Britans themselves, or sent vnto them from forreine
parts, after the Romans had given over
the protection of them, vntill the comming
in of Austen the Monke.
            
               FAstidius Priscus, a bishop in Britannie (but of what
particular place, it is vncertaine) a man of great knowledge
in Divinitie, and a diligent preacher. He lived
in the time of Honorius the Emperour, about the yeare of
our redemption. 420.
            
               Ninianus Bernitius (descended from the race of the British
Princes) who first converted the Picts to Christianitie.
            
               Palladius (a Graecian) sent from Coelestine Bish. of Rome,
to preach the Christian faith to the Scottishmen, and to
suppresse the Pelagian heresie sprung vp among them.
            
               Patricius (surnamed Magonius) borne in Britannie, of
the familie of a Senator (whence he tooke the name Patricius)
was sent by Coelestine bishop of Rome to the Irish,
and Scottish-men, (inhabiting the Iles of the Orcades,
and Hebredes) to instruct them in the Christian
faith, and to confirme them therein against the Pelagian
heresie.
            
               Bacchiarius (the Scholler of Patricius) was brought vp in
Rome, and lived in great favour with the Bishop of that
place, Leo the first.
            
               Dubrius, who (as some write) was Archbishop of Chester,
Leg
                  ••
                of the Sea Apostolike, & Primate of all Britannie.
He gave over his Ecclesiasticall dignities, and betooke himselfe
to an Eremiticall life.
            
               
               Congellus, the first Abbot of the Monasterie of Bangor,
about the yeare, 530.
            
               David Menevensis, the vncle (as some writers report) of
the warre-like Prince Arthur, translated the Archbishoprike
from Chester to Saint Davids in Wales, whereupon
that Sea is called to this day (of his name) Menevensis.
            
               Kentegernus, a learned Abbot.
            Helmothus.
            
               Gyldas, a Monke of Bangor, and a writer of some part of
the British storie.
            
               Daniel, the first Bishop of Bangor.
            
            
               Sampson, the successor of David Menevensis, in the Bishoprike
of Saint Davids.
            
            Elnodugus.
            
               Assaph, the Scholler of Abbot Kentegerne, who was made
Bishop of Elgoa in Wales, which place was afterwards
called Assaph, according to his name, which it continueth
to this present. He was the first that received his authoritie,
and consecration from those religious men, that were
sent by Gregorie the Great, to preach the Christian faith
to the English Nation.
            Herlanus.
            Elbodus.
            
               Dinothus, Abbot of Bangor, in the time of Austen the
Monke.
            Samuel
            Nivius.
         
         
            
            
            THE SECOND PART
of the Historie of Great
Britannie.
            
               The first Booke.

                     VORTIGER. VLT: PRINC: BRIT:
                     portrait of Vortigern
                  
               
               
                  The first CHAPTER.
                  
                     A repetition of the Contents of the former part. A briefe Relation
of the condition of the Britans vnder the Picts
and Scottishmen, from the Romans departure thence,
vntill the beginning of the raigne of Vortiger, the last
Brittish Prince.
                  
                  
                     THe Conquest of Britannie (as hath
beene afore shewed) was first attempted
by the Romans in the time
of Iulius Caesar, whose short aboad
in the Ile, and occasions of imploiment
else-where, would not permit
him to go forward therewith.
                  After him, Caius the Emperor, vpon lightnesse and
ambition, pretended a voyage thither, which Claudius
his successor prosecuted with effect; for he entred the

Iland in his owne person, and subdued a small part
thereof, which he brought into the forme of a Province,
placing there Aulus Plautius the first Lievtenant,
vnder whom Vespasian, and Titus his sonne (being then
but private men) bare office in the camp. Thence-forth
men of special note & regard were commonly sent thither,
namely Ostorius Scapula (that tamed the Silures,
and Ordovices, and tooke Caractacus their Captaine prisoner:)
Suetonius Paulinus (that conquered the Ile of
Anglesey, and recovered the Province well neere lost by
the generall revolt of the Britans:) Petilius Cerealis (that
brought the Brigantes vnder subjection) & Iulius Agricola,
(who enlarged the limits of the Province, and marched
with his forces even to Caledonia, making the Romans
Lords (in a maner) of the whole Iland, as commanding
all, both by sea, and land.
                  Within few yeares after, Adrian the Emperor himselfe,
having transported an armie thither, to expell the
Picts & north-Britans, (that then invaded the Province)
began first of all to reare a Wall of Turfes to defend it:
and this example Lollius Vrbicus (the Lievtenant vnder
Antoninus Pius) advisedly following, raised another wall
also of like stuffe, to strengthen the borders with a
double rampire; which fortresses the Northern Britans
boldly assailed, greatly annoying the Province, till by
Vlpius Marcellus they were opposed, and repulsed. After
whose departure there chanced in the Roman Campe
diverse mutinies, which Pertinax (that soone after obtained
the Empire) fortunately appeased. Then lived
the Britans in peace for a time, till Clodius Albinus the
Lievtenant (affecting innovation in the state, and presuming
vpon the strength and valour of the armie in Britannie)
assumed there the title of Caesar, and carried over
with him into France, a great number of the most warlike

                     Britans, to renforce his armie, for support of his vsurped
Soveraigntie: by which meanes the Province
was much weakned, and the Picts encouraged againe to
assaile it.
                  
                     Severus the Emperour also, for desire of glorie, made
a voiage thither with Caracalla, and Geta (his two sonns,
and successors in the Empire) intending the conquest
of the most remote and Northerne part of the Ile
beyond Adrians wall: but his ill successe in the beginning,
and despaire of better, made him soone give over
the enterprise, and to retire himselfe vnto the borders
of the Province, where (having repaired the decayed
wall, and cut a trench thwart the Ile from sea to sea) he
ended his life at Yorke.
                  What was done there from the time of Caracalla to
Gallienus the Emperour (whose state as well in Britannie
as other places was disturbed, by the Thirtie Tyrants,
the hystories now extant make little mention, till Carausius
the Admirall of the Brittish fleete, and after him
Alectus, vsurped the Empire in Britannie: at what time
Constantius Caesar ruled the Province, and afterwards
(dying there) left it, as a member of the Empire to his
sonne Constantine surnamed the Great, who was first declared
Emperor in Britannie, whence he transported no
small number of the Inhabitants that had beene trained
vp vnder the Roman Legions there, to make warre in
France and Germanie, which were then in Armes for
Maxentius.
                  
                  After the death of Constantine, the discord betweene
his three sonnes gave advantage also to Magnentius Taporus
(whose father was a Britan) to vsurpe the Empire
in Britannie: and even then was the Province in danger
to have beene over-run by the Scottish-men and
Picts, if Theodosius had not providently repressed their

furie. Clemens Maximus in like maner, vpon emulation
of Theodosius glory, attempted the Empire, and shipped
over the flower of all Britannie into Belgia, and France,
where such as escaped the sword of the enemie, did afterwards
seat themselves, leaving to their posteritie, the
continuance of their name in that place, even to this
day.
                  Then ensued confusion of all things in Britannie,
the Souldiers there swaying them at their owne will:
now naming Emperours; then deposing them againe,
and declaring others in their stead: among whom they
proclaimed one Constantine (for the names sake onely)
a man fatally ordained to be the instrument of the subversion
of the Province: For by transporting into
France the remnant of the Brittish Souldiers, he vtterly
dis-furnished it, and laid it open to all oportunities of
annoyance by the Picts and Scottish-men, who, afterwards
(waxing insolent with their prosperous successe,
in subduing a great part of the Province, and now
and then falling at variance and open warre among
themselves, about the distribution of such spoyles, and
booties as they had taken) did thereby give intermission
and time of breathing to the distressed Britans, that
stood (for the most part) vpon doubtfull termes, as wavering
betweene hope and despaire, and yet sometimes
(like men not vtterly dejected, or neglecting occasions
of advantage, when they were offered) resuming courage
againe, and resolving rather to die with their countrie,
then to abandon it. Whereupon (as Beda reporteth)
they assembled themselves togither from diverse
places, and assailed their enemies, forcing them to retire
within their borders, by which meanes the Britans
(for certaine yeares) lived in peace, and fell to tillage,
and other handy works. After that ensued great plentie

of graine, and other fruits of the earth, which the Britans
abused, mis-spending them riotously in gluttonie
and drunkennesse. Then pride and dissolute living,
(the common causes of the change & ruine of estates)
raigned, aswell among the Clergie, as the Laitie, both
whom the hand of God severely punished, by afflicting
them with a grievous pestilence and mortalitie, which
in short time wasted so many of them, as the quicke
were scarse sufficient in number to bury the dead. Howbeit
(the infection once ceasing) the Britans fell to their
old disorders, drawing therby a greater plague vpon
them, even the vtter subversion, and (in a manner)
rooting out of their name and nation, as by that which
followeth may partly appeare.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     The Britans elect Vortiger to be their King. They send for
the Saxons to aide them. The originall and manners
of the Saxons.
                  
                  AFter the Romans had given over the government
and protection of Britannie, the inhabitants of
the South parts of the Ile, being altogether vnable,
by their owne strength, any longer to withstand
the furious assaults of the Scottishmen and Picts, (who
were already come with their power, as farre as Stamford
vpon the river Welland:) assembled themselves together
in severall companies; and the most antient and
best respected among them, entred into consultation,
what meanes might then be vsed for defence, in a case
of such necessitie. But first of all, for that they had found
by their late experience, what dangerous effects proceede

from civill jarres: they resolved with common
consent, to run all joyntly one and the same course: and
for the better strengthning of this their purpose, they
elected a King, (whose name was Vortiger) a man much
esteemed, both for the nobilitie of his birth, (as being
extract from the line of the Brittish Princes) and also,
for the generall good opinion conceived of his sufficiencie
to vndergoe so weightie a charge, though the
eminencie of his degree, did (soone after) lay open
those vices and infirmities, which his private life had
concealed. To him did all the pettie Princes in the Ile
submit themselves.
                  Then they entred into consultation together, and
called to minde, the conditions of such Nations as
were most knowne vnto them, considering well with
themselves, that from the Romans, there was no more
reliefe to be expected, (Italy it selfe, the seate of the
Empire, being invaded by strangers:) that France was
assailed as well as Britannie: that Germany (though a
mightie and ample region) was not altogether free
from incumbrance. For, this Country had formerly
beene the common receptacle of those Northern people,
that (dwelling beyond the rivers of Rhene and Danow,
and being very fruitfull in generation) came vsually
thither to disburden themselves, and to seeke new
habitations: by reason whereof, the Germans themselves
were much distressed, and now and then forced
to abandon their native soyle; being sometimes also
(by consent among themselves) chosen out by lots for
that purpose; howbeit those strangers, (which had there
planted themselves) were for the most part, better able
to annoy other countries, then to maintaine in peace,
what by intrusion and violence they had gotten. Among
al the Germans, there was at that time no one nation,

which for great adventures both by sea and land,
was more renowned then the Saxons. For, touching
the qualities of the minde, they were bold, hardie, and
vaine-glorious, patiently enduring labour, hunger, and
cold, whereto by the very constitution of their bodies,
and temperature of the climate, they seemed to be framed,
as being verie strong, and yet not vnwealdy, tall
of stature, but not vncomely, or out of due proportion.
For the North Region, by reason of the coldnesse of
the ayre, (which driveth the naturall heate inward)
bringeth forth commonly, men of greater courage and
abilitie of bodie, then those Countries that lie neerer
the Sunne. Their diet was simple and home-bred; neither
knew they any other a long time, till by attaching
some of the Romans ships, stragling about the Coasts
of France and the Lower Germanie, they became first
acquainted with their manner of vittailing. Their habite
was neither verie costly, nor cumbersome, but serving
indeede, rather for decencie and ornament, then
for defence against the sharpnesse of ayre, or such like
annoyances. For their garments were commonly of
linnen or yarne, woven with divers colours, and hanging
loose about them: the lockes of their haire (which
in former times they had beene accustomed to shave)
being then curled and spred abroad in compasse, so that
they covered their shoulders and vpper parts of their
cassocks. The weapons which they ordinarily vsed in
fight, were long speares, round targets, and battle-axes;
having also (trussed vp behind at their backs) certaine
short swords, which they did weare continually for
readinesse vpon all occasions. In the Art of Navigation
they were verie expert, and lived at the first by
pilfering, and afterwardes by open robberie, being
trayned vp therein, even from their child-hoode,

vnder a kinde of discipline. Stormes at sea, vnseasonable
weather, perills of rockes and sands, losse of
goodes and shipwrackes, (which terrifie other men)
they carelesly contemned, while they seemed to have,
not onely a certaine knowledge of them, but also a
kinde of familiaritie with them. The offices of Souldiers
and Marriners, they executed with like skill, and
oftentimes with equall advantage. There was no kind
of crueltie in a manner new, or strange vnto them: neither
were they altogither voide of policy, in watching
oportunities of time and place, to further their desseins,
albeit they were (for the most part) more sodaine
in attempting and procuring other mens harmes, then
warie, or well advised in avoyding their owne. Superiority
in degrees they hardly admitted, but each man
commanded and obeyed, as the case required, being as
readie to learne of his fellowes, what he knew not, as to
instruct others in those things wherein he happened to
be more skilfull then the rest. Of their owne blood
they were nothing at all sparing, but they exercised
crueltie, sometimes even vppon themselves, as making
lesse account, to cast away their owne lives,
then to indure any publicke shame, scorne, or disgrace.
                  When they did set foorth to sea vppon anie voyage,
their custome was, to choose out of the number
of their captives, every tenth man to be murdered,
and offered vp as a purging sacrifice to their profane
gods, esteeming it a worke of religion, and much
more behoovefull for them, then to receive any ransome
for redemption of such prisoners as they had taken.
                  The Ancestors of these Saxons, (as approoved
Writers report) did fetch their originall from the

                     Sacae, (a people of Asia) that came first out of Scythia into
Europe with the Gothes▪ Suevians, and Dacians, and
(being either by nature inclined to warre, or by necessitie
constrained thereto, for supplying their owne
wants) ranged oft times from place to place, as men
alwaies ready, vpon hope of spoile, to be drawne into
any action, or to encounter any perill whatsoever. In
processe of time they seated themselves in Cimbrica
Chessonesus, (now called Denmarke:) and in the raigne
of Dioclesian the Emperour, became famous for their
piracies committed vpon the coasts of Britannie, and
the Lower Germanie; when Carausius (being sent forth
with a Navie to represse them) vnder colour of that
service, attempted and (with some difficultie) attained
the Empire. Afterwards, (passing over the river
of Elbe) they intruded themselves by little and little,
into the antient seate of the Suevians, encroching
also vpon Friseland and Holland: (then called Batavia)
the greatest number of them planting themselves in
that part of Germanie, which is now called Saxonie.
These were the men, whom the Britans supposed
best able, and most likely to assist them: and thereupon
messengers were sent to declare vnto them, that
the fame of their valour and experience in warrelike
actions, had moved the Britans to require their aide,
against a barbarous and bloodie people, which assaied
by force, to subdue the whole Iland: that (next
the Romans, who had now abandoned it) they knew
no Nation more worthie then theirs: that the verie
terror of the Saxons name, (if they should but once
set foote in the Ile) was able to daunt their enemies,
who were (for the most part) men vnarmed, vnskilfull
in militare affaires, and many times confounded by
their owne multitude: finally, that if they would vndertake

this warre, they should want, neither provision
of victuall nor any thing else for their maintenance;
the Iland being verie large and fruitfull, yeelding
aboundance of all things, that might serve, either
for profite, or delight.
                  The Saxons being very glad of this occasion of
employment, (which themselves would have sought,
if it had not beene thus offered) promised to satisfie
the Britans request, by sending over (with speede)
such able men as they had then in readinesse, till further
provision could be made. And so the messengers
were dismissed.
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     The Saxons vanquish the Scottishmen and Picts. Hengist
deviseth how he may get possession of the East part
of the Iland.
                  
                  THe messengers had scarcely made report of their
negotiation at their returne into Britannie, when
the newes came; that certaine Saxons, vnder the
conduct of Hengist and Horsa, (two brethren) were
landed vpon the coast of Kent: whereupon the Britans
from most parts there about, ranne to meete
them, receiving them with salutations, songs, and
feastings, after their Country guise. [The time of
the Saxons first arrivall, heere (by the testimonie of
their owne Writers) was in the yeare of our redemption
450.]
                  But Vortiger the King, and the chiefe of the British
Nobilitie, entertained them in other manner: giving
them thanks for the great care and diligence, which

they had shewed, by their speedie repaire into
the Iland: and acquainting them furher with the present
state of their affaires. Then was there a contract
made betweene both Nations: namely, that the Saxons
should vndertake the warre against the Picts and
Scottishmen, and that the Britans should provide for
them all things necessarie thereto, as vittailes, armour,
and souldiers wages: the charge whereof
should be borne by the Britans onely, who were to
leavie the same by way of tax, to be imposed vpon everie
inhabitant within the Province, according to
his abilitie: which contract, with other articles depending
thereupon, being ratified on both parts;
Hengist (considering wisely the nature of the people
with whom he was to encounter, and the likely advantage
of sodaine attempts) thought it best to take the
first opportunitie, by leading the Saxons (who were
verie desirous to fight) and such of the Britans also
as he supposed fit for service, into those parts where
the barbarous enemie was lodged: and to that end,
provision of vittaile and other necessaries was made,
in such measure, as the shortnesse of the time would
permit.
                  The Scottishmen and Picts, albeit they did not greatly
feare the Britans, (whose courage was much abated
by the ill successe that accompanied their late conflicts:)
yet, (hearing that new supplies of strangers were
arrived to assist them) they waxed more wary, keeping
themselves, for the most part, in their strength:
and now, (vpon certaine intelligence of the approach
of a well ordered Armie) they resolved to trie with
them the fortune of a set battaile: wherein they found
themselves more hardly matched, then in former
times, by reason that the Saxons, (nimbly avoyding the

darts and speares wherewith they were assailed) did
fircely rush vpon the Picts, and with their keene swords
and weightie axes, made way thorow their thickest
troopes: so that (having borne downe the most valiant
before them) they enforced the rest to forsake the
field, and save themselves by flight. After this victorie,
they returned to the Ile of Tanet, (which at their
first arrivall, was assigned to them for a place of residence)
and Hengist their Captaine, fortified there divers
places for defence: hoping by that meanes, both
to keepe his owne Territorie in surety, and also (as occasion
might serve) to inlarge it. For he apprehended
it as a matter of no great difficultie, to make a conquest
of the East part of the Ile; considering that the naturall
inhabitants were alreadie brought vpon their knees,
the King himelfe given over to ease and pleasure, and
in his owne conceit, the more secure, the lesse he intermedled
with publike affaires:) that the state of the
warre now in hand, rested meerely in his owne direction,
and the more freely he was trusted, the more safely
he might deceive: that (though he was sent for to
helpe the Britans,) yet (this faire occasion being offered,
which Fortune seemed to have cast into his lap)
he had no reason to neglect it, by seeking other mens
advantage rather then his owne. As for the contract
made with them, he was no further bound to it, then
the Britans themselves, who had alreadie failed in
performance of some covenants, that the breath of
one dissolveth all the rest: and finally, that in him, who
hath power, (to prevaile where he attempts) nothing
can be adjudged vnlawfull. With these, or the like cogitations,
he nourished his ambitious humor; howbeit,
knowing well, that the forces which were alreadie
brought into the Ile, would not be sufficient to accomplish

the enterprize: hee perswaded Vortiger, it was
verie necessarie, that more aide should be sent for out
of Germanie: and to that end he named his brother
Octha, and his sonne Ebusa, (men of approved valour)
who might be directed to land with a power in the
Picts owne Country, and to assaile the inhabitants
there, while himselfe in the South parts pursued the
rest of them, (with whom he had alreadie encountred:)
whose forces being by that meanes diverted
from the heart of the Ile, to succour their Countrymen
at home, or wanting their wonted supplies, which
should then of force be employed else-where for defence,
there might be some hope of a speedie and full
end of the warre: the event whereof, otherwise was
now more to be feared then in former times, if the
North-Britans, (whetted with desire of revenge, and
having space of breathing given them) should make
head, and assaile them againe. This counsell seeming
profitable, (howsoever it prooved pernitious in the
end) was allowed by the King, eyther for that he foresaw
not the perill likely to ensue thereupon: or else,
for that such things as God himselfe hath determined,
are doubtlesse (though sometimes foreseene) yet never
prevented.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     Saxons, Iutes, and Angles, arrive in Britannie. Vortiger
marrieth Hengists daughter. He is deposed.
                  
                  IN the meane while, the Germans (inflamed with continuall
reports of the wealth and fruitfulnesse of the
Ile) and sollicited by Hengist (who discovered to them
the weake estate of the Britans, and the facillitie of supplanting
them,) hired certaine small vessels; wherein
themselves, their wives, children, and families were
transported into diverse parts of the Land: at which
time, Rowen the daughter of Hengist (a woman of excellent
beautie, and not of the worst behavior) (having
beene specially sent for by her father) arrived in Kent,
and was forthwith conveyed to the pallace, where Vortiger,
and Hengist made their abode.
                  Of those Germans that then came over, there
were three severall kinds of people: namely, Saxons,
Iutes, and Angles, though the Saxons seemed to beare
the most sway, by reason both of the generall respect of
that Nation, for their many and great exploits, and also
for the authoritie of their Captains, Hengist, and Horsa,
who were of the linage of Woden, from whom the Saxon
Princes (that afterwards reigned in the Ile) vsed alwayes
(for honours sake) to derive their discent. From
these Saxons, the East, West, and South Saxons had their
originall. The Iutes (as some writers report, and as the
affinitie of the names may seeme in some sort to inferre)
were discended from the Getes, and Gothes, and dwelt in
the vpper part of Denmarke, which is at this day called
Iuitland. From them the Kentishmen, with the Inhabitants

of the Ile of Wight, and of that part of the firme
land (which lieth over against it) had their beginning▪
The name of the Iutes, was of no long continuance in
Britannie: notwithstanding, their posteritie was incorporated
into the Saxons, and Angles, who were accounted
but one Nation, the name of either of them being
indifferently vsed, as common to both; till in the end,
the Angles possessing the greatest part of the land, they
were all knowen, and called by that name alone.
                  The Angles in those dayes were a people well esteemed
among the Germans, and in number exceeded
both the Saxons, and Iutes. Touching their ancient seat,
the opinions of Writers are differing, though it be most
probable, that they did sometimes inhabit that part of
Denmarke (yet retaining the name of Angle) which lieth
betweene Iuitland, and Holsatia. From them came the
East Angles, the Mercians, and Northumbers.
                  
                  But Hengist knowing well, that fraud, and cunning
practises ofttimes prevaile, where force it selfe cannot,
resolved (as occasion might serve) to make vse of both;
and to that end (observing well the Kings humor) he
applied himselfe in all things to follow it: specially, by
soothing and nourishiug him in those vices, to which
by Nature he was most addicted, supposing thereby to
strengthen his owne estate, and with more securitie, to
accomplish his desire: while the King intended nothing
more, then the satisfaction of his immoderate appetite
in sensuall pleasures, which had alreadie brought him
into contempt and hatred with his people, and would
by all likelihood open the way to his speedie destruction.
Whereupon one day (inviting Vortiger to a feast)
he appointed Rowen his daughter, to attend vpon him
as his Cup-bearer: at which time (by her fathers instruction)
she behaved herselfe in such maner, as the

King fell in love with her: and although he had a wife
then living, yet was he not ashamed to tell Hengist in
plaine termes, that he earnestly desired to become his
sonne in law, if he might attaine his consent for the mariage
of his danghter. Hengist (who had cast out his
bait of purpose to catch him) pretended respect of Vortigers
owne reputation, which (as he said) should be too
much impaired by matching with a poore Maiden, a
stranger by birth, farre inferior to him in degree, and no
way worthy of so great fortune; howbeit, in the end he
seemed by intreatie to yeeld to that, which himselfe
would voluntarily have offred: and so (making vse of
the occasion) he was content to take the thanks, which
he of right should have given. Hereupon Vortiger having
cast behind him all regard, both of divine and humane
lawes, did put away his lawfull wife (by whom
he had three children) and (contrarie to the advise of
his faithfull Counsellers) married Hengist the Saxons
daughter. Vpon the conclusion of this marriage, a
great part of the Countrey of Kent (which had beene
many yeares togither governed by Guorongus, as the
Kings deputie there) was assigned to Hengist, who like
a wilie Serpent, having now gotten in his head, found
meanes in a short time to wind in his whole bodie.
                  It is reported by some Writers, that Vodin (then
Archbishop of London) reprooving the King for his
incontinencie, and other vices (which drew him down
with his Realme to ruine) was by the commandement
of Hengist put to death, with many other Priests, and
religious Votaries, as persons too well affected to their
Country, and odious to the Saxons for profession of
Christianitie.
                  This inconsiderate match, and immesurable bountie
of the King, was much disliked by the Britans, for

that the Saxons, presuming of the Kings favour, by reason
of his new affinitie with them, came over dayly in
great numbers, pestering the East parts of the Ile, and
many times offering abuse to the naturall Inhabitants.
Whereupon the Brittish Nobilitie complained to the
King, that their estate was now much woorse then
before the Saxons arrivall: that Strangers (vnder the
colour of friendship) robbed them of their goods,
and bereaved them of their lands: that secret practises
of such as they trusted, were no lesse to be feared,
then open hostilitie: and that if speedie order
were not taken to expell them, they would in short
time roote out the ancient Britans, and make themselves
Lords of the whole Iland. But Vortiger (whose
affection to his wife, and her kindred weighed downe
all other respects whatsoever) neglected their complaints,
till by his owne experience he was taught,
what daungerous inconveniences proceede from wilfull
rashnesse, and mis-government. For the Britans
(disdaining to be any longer commanded by such a
Prince, as had neither power to command his owne
affections, nor care to provide for the safetie of his
Subjects) declared him vncapable, and by generall
consent, deprived him of all regall authoritie.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. V.
                  
                     Vortimer succeedeth his father in the government. Vortiger
is restored. The most noble of the Britans are
trecherously murdered by the Saxons vpon Salisbnrie
Plaines.
                  
                  THen Vortimer his sonne (a man in disposition of
his mind much vnlike his father) was declared
King, & renued the warre with the Saxons, whom
he encountred in a pitched field neere Ailsford in
Kent. In that conflict Catigern his brother, and Horsa the
brother of Hengist, fighting hand to hand, were both
slaine, whereby though the Saxons perished in greater
number then the Britans: yet by the losse of the Generals
on both sides, the fortune of the battaile seemed
in a maner to be equall. On the part of the Britans
there died no man of name, save onely Catigern, in
remembrance of whose death there was afterwards a
Sepulchre of stone erected, where the battaile was
fought. The like Monument was also built by the
Saxons for Horsa, their Captaine, though Time hath
now defaced it: howbeit the memorie of the place
it selfe (if credite may be given to the Inhabitants
there,) is continued among them even to this day, by
a small Village in East Kent, yet bearing his name.
After this, the Britans made diverse attempts vpon
their enemies, sometimes winning, sometimes
loosing; and then recovering againe, that which they
had lost, when Vortimer the King ended his dayes,
either by a naturall death, or by the trecherie of
Rowen his Stepmother. He was a Prince of great courage

adorned with many Morall vertues, and (as some
writers have reported) a favorer and professor of the
Christian religion.
                  Then was Vortiger the King (either vpon hope that
adversitie had wrought in him a reformation of mind,
or else, for feare lest any civill discord should arise by
the election of any other) revoked with common consent
of the Britans, and restored to his former estate.
During his Sonnes raigne (as the Brittish Storie reporteth)
he lived a private life neere Radnor in Wales,
where he bestowed much cost in building a Castle for
defence (as himselfe vainly imagined against any suddaine
assault.
                  In the meane time, the strength of the Saxons encreased
by new supplies, which came dayly out of
Germanie: and the Britans now doubted their owne
estates so much the more, by reason that the Picts
and Scottish-men (their ancient enemies) were dispersed
in most parts of the Ile: the Saxons also, for their
owne aduantage, entring oftentimes into secret confederacie
and mutuall leagues with them.
                  But Hengist (supposing that he could not with
safetie enjoy the possession of that territorie, which Vortiger
had assigned vnto him, so long as the chiefe, and
most valiant of the Brittish Nation remained alive) devised
by a cunning practise (vnder pretence of hospitalitie
and friendship) to draw them togither into one
place, and on the suddaine to surprise them. To this
end he prepared a solemne Banquet, at which the
King, with diverse Noble personages (as bidden
guests) were present, suspecting nothing lesse, then
what was intended against them. For the Britans
being warme with good cheere, and wine (whereof
they had drunke immeasurably) were scoffed at by the

                     Saxons, the one provoking the other so farre with reproachfull
termes, that in the end they fell from words
to blowes, in such furious maner, as the Britans (being
about three hundred in number, all vnarmed, and
surcharged with Wine,) were slaine in the place, and
Vortiger their King taken prisoner; who (soone after
delivering for his ransome, the whole Countrey of
Kent, with other Provinces thereto adjoyning, into
the Saxons hands) fled to his Castle in Wales: where
(supposing himselfe free from danger) he continued
his vitious and prophane maner of living, till in the
end, both himselfe, and his Castle (as some Writers
affirme) was by lightning from heaven consumed
to ashes.
                  Thus Vortiger the last King of the Brittish blood,
a Prince in manners dissolute, and weake in actions,
was by Strangers dispossessed of his Kingdome: living
to see the ruine of his Countrey, whereof himselfe
was the principall cause, and dying in the ende a
strange and vnnaturall death, which is commonly
the issue of a disordered and infamous life.
                  The report goeth, that this fatall meeting was
held vpon Salisburie Plaines, where (not many yeares
after Aurelianus Ambrosius caused that strange
building of Stone (now called Stone-henge) to be
erected, as a perpetuall Monument of so many worthie
Britans slaine and buried there; concerning
which, sundrie conjectures have beene made, as being
either framed according to mens particular conceits,
or grounded vpon common reports received
by tradition. But by what meanes soever they came
thither, they are accounted at this day, one of the miracles
of England, in regarde both of the Stones
themselves, which are of a huge bignesse: and also of

their composition, and order, whereby they seeme
(in a maner) to be supported with their owne weight,
in hanging one by another: considering withall, that
there are no Stones fit for building, to be found with
in many miles of that place.
               
               
                  CHAP. VI.
                  
                     The calamities of the Britans. The Professors of Christian
Religion in Britannie are persecuted by the Saxons;
whose Idolatrie and superstitious rites are described.
                  
                  NOw were the Britans driven from place to place,
some flying to the Mountaines: others hiding
themselves in Caves vnder the ground, where
they either perished for want of foode, or (comming
abroad to seeke reliefe) were cruelly murdered: their
enemies in the meane time ranging vp and downe
without resistance, razing their houses, polluting the
Altars in their Temples with the blood of their
Priests, burning the Temples themselves, and committing
all maner of Sacrilege and outrage, without regard
of place, or person. For the Saxons, as by little
and little they planted themselves in the most wealthie
& fruitful parts of the Ile; so they endevored to supplant
the truth of Christian religion, whereof they professed
themselves open enemies: as men meerly addicted
to heathenish superstition, in worshipping divers gods
and goddesses; among whom, the images of Thor, Woden,
Frea, and Eoster, were placed in their Temples, as

their chiefe Patrons. They painted Thor with a Scepter
in his hand, after the same manner that the Poets
vsed to describe the image of Iupiter: and him they reverenced
as the commander and disposer of Thunder
and Lightning, with all those 
                        〈◊〉
                      is that are ingendred
in the middle Region of the ayre, consecrating to
him the fifth day of the weeke, which was afterwards
called Tho
                           •
                        sday. The name of Woden they attributed to
Mercury, or (as some write) to Mars, whom they reverenced
as a protector in warre, and a giver of strength
and courage against their enemies: To him they vsually
sacrificed with mans blood, and dedicated the fourth
day of the weeke, (naming it Wodensday) as yet retaining
the first denomination with very little difference.
Vnder the name of Frea, they sacrificed to Venus, (as
the giver of peace and pleasure) whom they adored
sometimes vnder the figure of Priapus, committing to
her the patronage of the sixth day, called Frea day.
Of these three, Thor was placed vpon a three-footed
stoole in the midst, and Woden and Frea on each side.
To the goddesse Eoster, they alwaies offered sacrifice
in the month of Aprill, which thereupon was called
Eoster-month. In their consultations of any weightie
matter, they observed sooth-saying and casting of
lots. Their custome of casting of lots was, first to cut a
branch from a fruit bearing tree, into many peeces,
which (being distinguished with severall marks) they
did cast vpon a white garment at a venture: then (if the
matter concerned the Common wealth in generall)
the Priest; if a private person onely, the maister of the
house (having prayed the gods, and looking towards
heaven,) did take vp every of the said peeces three
times, and interpreted the future successe according
to the forme and similitude of the marks. If the lots

fell out contrary to their mindes, they consulted no
more that day: if otherwise, yet they would make further
tryall, by observing the flying and singing of
birds.
                  They had another practise also, 
                        〈…〉
                      the event
of great and weightie battailes with their enemies.
For they would get some one of that Nation,
with which the warre should be made, and then take
another choice man of their owne, arming them both
after their country guise, and so make triall of their valour,
conjecturing by the successe of that fight, on
whose side the victory should afterwards fall. But of all
other presages, the neying of horses was of greatest credit,
both with the Priests and people; who fondly supposed,
that those beasts vnderstood, and were privy to
their secrets. And heereupon (as some imagine) the
Dukes of Saxonie in times past, gave a horse for their ensigne.
The names also of Hengist and Hors
                           •
                        , (the first
men of note of the Saxon Nation that arrived in Britannie)
doe signifie in their owne language a Horse: which
denominations, whether they were given in respect of
their strength and courage, (qualities by nature proper
to that beast) or whether they received them vpon any
other occasion or accident, I cannot certainely affirme.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. VII.
                  
                     Germanus the Bishop conducteth the Armie of the Christian
Britans against their enemies, (being Pagans)
who by his meanes are defeated. He departeth out of
Britannie.
                  
                  IN the meane time, the Britans (comming together
from the places of their retreate, and combining their
dispersed forces, the better to defend themselves
against the power of the enemie) were freshly assailed
by the Sco
                           •
                        tishm
                           •
                        n & P
                           •
                        cts, a great number of the Saxons
also, being newly entred into association with them:
whereupon Germanus the Bishop, who came over into
Britannie a little before the Saxons arrivall, & had remained
there with Lupus, to the end they might instruct &
confirm the Britans in the true 
                        •
                     aith, against the Pel
                           •
                        gian
heresie, (confident in the goodnesse of the cause, &
to give encouragement to his new converts) offered
himselfe to be the Leader of the Brittish Armie, which
consisted (for the most part) of such Christians as himselfe
had lately baptised. The place wherein he pitched,
was a faire valley, enclosed on both sides with
high mountaines, over which their enemies were to
march. The Bishop himselfe, and certaine Priests that
attended him, standing in the midst of the Armie, exhorted
the Britans to fight couragiously as the Souldiers
of Christ, vnder the banner of his Crosse, (which
badge they had received in their baptisme) and commanding
them all, vpon the enemies approach, to answer
him by crying alowd with one consent, in such
manner as himselfe began. Heereupon the Saxons and

                     Scottishmen ascending the further side of the hill, supposed
to have charged the Britans on the sodaine: which
when Germanus and the Priests that were about him
perceived, they cryed out three severall times, Alleluia:
all the Britans seconding the crie, and the Eccho rebounding
from the hills doubling the sound: by reason
whereof, the Pagans (imagining the number of
the Christians to be much greater then it was indeede)
cast away their weapons, and fled; the Britans killing
many of them in pursuit; & such as escaped the sword,
being drowned in a river which empeached them in
their flying. After this memorable victory, Germanus
perswading the Brit
                           •
                        ns to vnity and constancie in the
profession of Christian religion, as a meanes to make
their attempts (against their enemies) prosperous: departed
out of Britannie, whither (as some Writers report)
he soone after returned, and by the assistance of
Severus the Bishop of Trevers, suppressed the Pelagian
heresie, which (after his departure) sprung vp againe,
and encreased among the Britans. In remembrance of
whose zeale and travaile in that behalfe sustained, the
Christians of Britannie afterwards dedicated vnto him
(as a protecting Saint,) certaine Churches and houses
of religion, in divers parts of the land.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     Aurelianus Ambrosius aydeth the Britans against the
Saxons. The valiant acts of Arthur the Warrelike.
                  
                  THe Saxons (perceiving now that the Britans were
scattered in severall troopes, dis-armed, and vnfurnished
of all things necessarie for support of the
warre) prepared themselves to follow them, and to empeach
them from joyning their forces together any
more: to which end, they divided themselves into severall
companies, with a full resolution, either vtterly
to destroy, or to expell them out of the Ile: which
they had almost brought to passe, when Aurelianus Ambrosius,
comming out of Britannie in France, brought
hither some of the Britans, (that had feated themselves
there) who (pittying their distressed countrymen in the
Iland) determined, either to relieve them, or to perish
in the enterprize. This Ambrosius was a Roman by birth,
honourably descended, and (as hath beene conjectured)
of the race of that Constantine who for the hope of
his name onely, (which was reputed ominous) had
beene elected Emperour by the Roman Armie in Britannie.
And being now the chiefe Leader of the Britans,
he oft times encountred the Saxons, and by the assistance
of Arthur, (a valiant Captaine) gave them many
overthrowes; the circumstances and particularities
whereof I find no where remembred, nor of any thing
else concerning him, save onely that he vnfortunately
ended his life, before he could make an end of the
warre.
                  
                     
Then Arthur the Warlike, (the Nephew of Ambrosius,
according to the opinion of some Writers) vndertooke
the prosecution of the warre, both against the
Scottishmen and Picts, whom he chased into the remote
parts of the North; & also against the Saxons, whom in
twelve severall battailes, (as our Brittish stories affirme)
he valiantly defeated. The most memorable was tha
                        •
                     
which he fought on Bathon-hill, where he obtained a
notable and (if credit in that point may be given to antient
reports) an admirable victorie: and surely, had not
the inevitable power of Fate otherwise determined;
doubtlesse the Britans should have needed no other
helpe to support and repaire their declining and torne
estate. For besides his good inclination to protect the
Christian faith, he was adorned with many heroicall
vertues, but chiefly renowned for the love of Chivalrie.
                  The Brittish Story reporteth, that he instituted an
Order of Knights, who (as his companions) did sit
with him at a round Table, whereupon they were called,
Knights of the Round Table: that forme of a Table,
seeming perhaps most fit to avoid contention, which
many times ariseth among great spirits about superioritie
of place. These Knights were commonly chosen
for their valour and skill in feats of Armes, wherein
they strived (vpon emulation) one to excel another. Into
this societie were admitted strangers of divers Nations,
who for desire of glory, came over into the Iland,
to make proofe of their sufficiency by exercise of armes
with the Brittish Knights. For Arthur himself (by vndertaking
great & difficult enterprises in forraigne Countries,
after he had subdued the Saxons in Britannie)
made his name no lesse famous abroad then at home.
                  Touching his birth, some have doubted whether he

were a Roman, or a Britan: though the Britans challenge
him for their Countryman, confidently affirming, that
he was borne at Tyndagel in Cornewall; and surely, if the
acts of such worthy men (as at sundry times were transported
out of the Ile to aide the Romans in the wane of
the Westerne Empire) had beene faithfully registred,
the glorie of the Brittish Nation might well have been
preserved from all suspition of vntruth, without the
support of forged and fabulous inventions. As for the
place where he died, or the manner of his death, I find
no certaine report concerning the same in any approved
Writer: But his body was buried at Glastenbury,
betweene two Pyramides, where the enscription
of his name (engraven vpon a leaden Crosse) was discovered
many hundred yeares after his death; namely,
in the raigne of King Henry the second; who (having
some intelligence of the place, by the songs of the Brittish
Bards) commanded it to be digged, and the Monument
to be sought for.
                  Divers strange and incredible things to the prejudice
of posteritie, have beene written of this Prince,
of Queene Guinever his wife, of Gawen his sisters sonne,
and of Merlin, a phantastical Prophet, with others, commonly
called, Wandring Knights: matters indeede more
fit for feined Legends, and poeticall fictions, then for a
Historie, which ought to be a Register of things, either
truely done, or at least, warrantable by probabilitie.
And albeit those ridiculous and absurd reports of idle
Writers, doe seeme to have repaired the reputation of
this Prince, and to have called in question the truth it
selfe, so farre forth, as some have doubted, whether
there were ever any such man or not: yet divers Authors
of good regard, (pittying his misfortune in that
behalfe) have both confirmed his being, and commended

him as a great souldier and the chiefe pillar of
the State of Britannie in his time.
               
               
                  CHAP. IX.
                  
                     The Britans flie into Wales and Cornewall, where they
seate themselves. The Saxons and English possesse the
greatest part of the Ile, which is afterwards divided into
severall Principalities.
                  
                  AFter the death of the noble Prince Arthur, the
hope of the Britans was cleane abated, and a great
number of them fled secretly into Wales and
Cornewall, as places furthest off from annoyance by the
enemie, and naturally defensible, by reason of the
bogges, woods, and high mountaines on the one side,
and the seas on the other. Then the Saxons finding
little or no resistance, began in processe of time, to erect
certaine Provinciall governments in the South parts of
the Ile, & in the end, divided the whole Land (excepting
that portion which the Scottishmen and Picts inhabited
Northward) into seven Principalities, which
were severed by certaine limits, and governed (for the
most part) by Princes, according to order of succession,
till by making continuall warre one vpon another,
and the Provinces subdued, augmenting the Dominions
of the Conqueror, the whole land was in the end
brought into a Monarchy by the West Saxons. But in
what manner these things were done, the Writers of
former ages have much varied, and the actions and
events of those times, being set downe so darkely and
corruptly, that I purposed to have omitted the relation
of them, (as a hard and vnpleasant taske for me to vndertake,

and likely to receive small approbation of others:)
if I had not beene thereto induced, partly for
respect of order, which required a continuation, and
partly vpon desire to preserve the memory of some
men, whose names, (as marks of our Christianitie imposed
vpon vs in our baptisme, and registred in our
calenders & Churches) are at this day in some vse with
vs: deserving well (considering the state and condition
of that age) not to be altogether forgotten, howsoever
their doings through the negligence or ignorance of
some Writers, have beene left to posteritie, as records
of Antiquitie, farced with absurdities, and composed
meerely of fragm
                        •
                     nts peeced together, sometimes
without method, and, for the most part, without due
coherence of circumstances and matters. For many of
those Writers, (being Monks and religious persons)
vnacquainted with matters of estate, applyed themselves,
for the most part, to register the charitable deeds
of their Bishops and benefactors, founders and maintainers
of Monasteries and Hospitalls, or such like generall
observations: and if aught were well written by
any secular man, the same hath perished by the many
calamities of the Country, (a thing common to vs
with other Nations) or Time it selfe hath worn out, in
a manner, the remembrance thereof.
                  I purpose therefore, to make onely a bare and simple
narration of the names of the Princes, and to point
out the most memorable things (as I finde them reported)
in their severall raignes: distinguishing the
Principalities themselves, and relating successively
one after another, such actions, as for the most part,
concurred in time: whereby, though I shall be sometimes
forced to report the same matters, yet I shall
more easily avoide confusion and obscuritie, which

the handling of them all joyntly, would bring with it.
And so superficially passing over these imperfect affaires,
of the seven-fold regiment of the Saxons and English,
I will hasten to the occurrents of those times,
which afford more certaine and plentifull matter
of discourse, and may yeeld (perhaps) some
contentation to the Writer, and more
profite and delight to the
Reader.
                  The end of the First Booke of the Second Part of the
Historie of Great Britannie.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧The suceession of the Kentish-Saxon
Princes.
            
               1 HEngist ruled 31. yeares.
               
               2 Vsk 24. yeares.
               
               3 Otta 20. yeares.
               
               4 Ermeric 29. yeares.
               
               5 Ethelbert, the first Christian Prince, 26. years.
               6 Edbald 24. yeares.
               
               7 E
                     •
                  combert 24. yeares.
               
               8 Egbert 9. yeares.
               
               9 Lothar 12. yeares.
               
               10 Edrick 2 yeares.
               
               11 Withred 33. yeares.
               
               12 Edbert 23. yeares.
               
               13 Edelbert 11. yeares.
               
               14 Alric 34. yeares.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧The Archbishops and Bishops in the Principalitie
of the Kentish-Saxons; the times of their succession
and continuance in their Seas, from the conversion of
the English Nation to Christianity, vntill the ra
                  •
               gne
of Egbert, the West-Saxon Prince, who
first obtained the Monarchy.
            
               
                  
                     Anno Dom.
                     Archbishops of Canterbury.
                  
                  
                     598
                     
                        Augustine the Monke, (sent by Gregorie the Great, then Bishop of Rome, to preach the Christian faith to the English) sate 16. yeares.
                  
                  
                     614
                     Laurentius 5. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     619
                     
                        Mellitus (translated from the Sea of London) 5. yeares.
                  
                  
                     624
                     
                        Iustus (translated from the Sea of Rochester) 4. yeare
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                      
                     After whose death, the Sea was voyd one yeare.
                  
                  
                     628
                     Honorius 26. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                     After whose death, the Sea was voyd three yeares.
                  
                  
                     655
                     Deus-dedit 10. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                     After whose death, the Sea was voyd three yeares.
                  
                  
                     668
                     Theodorus 22. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     693
                     Bertualdus 38. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     731
                     Tatwinus 4. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     735
                     Nothelmus 5. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                     After his death, the Sea was voyd one yeare.
                  
                  
                     740
                     
                        Cuthbertus, translated from the Sea of Hereford, 18. yeares.
                  
                  
                     759
                     Bregwinus 3. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     762
                     
                        Lambrihtus, (who had formerly beene Abbot of St. Augustine) 31. yeares.
                  
                  
                     791
                     
                        Aethelardus, (in the time of Egbert the West-Saxon Prince) 13. yeares.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Anno Dom.
                     Bishops of Rochester.
                  
                  
                     604
                     
                        Iustus (ordained the first Bishoppe there by Augustine the Archbishop of Canterbury) sate 20. yeares.
                  
                  
                     624
                     Romanus 10 yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     634
                     
                        Paulinus (translated from the Sea of Yorke) 10. yeares.
                  
                  
                     644
                     Ithamarus 12. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                     After whose death, the Sea was voyd foure yeares.
                  
                  
                     656
                     Damianus 9. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     669
                     Putta 8. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     677
                     Quichelmus 4. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                     After whose death, the Sea was voyd three yeares.
                  
                  
                     681
                     Gebmundus 9. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     693
                     Tobias 34. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     727
                     Aldwulfus 13. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     740
                     Dunnus 24. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     764
                     Eardulfus 11. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     775
                     Deora 15. yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     790
                     
                        Weremundus (in the time of Egbert the West-Saxon Prince) 12. yeares.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            THE SECOND PART:Kentish-Saxons.
            
            
               The second Booke.

                     HENGIST: I: PRINC: SAX:
                     portrait of Hengist
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. I.
                  
                     The Principalitie of the Kentish-Saxons established by
Hengist, whom Vsk, Otta, and Ermeric succeede in the
government. Austen the Monke is sent from Rome by
Gregorie the Great, to preach the Christian faith to the
Saxons and English. He landeth in Kent; where he is
curteous
                           •
                        , 
                           •
                        ertained by Ethelbert, the Prince of that
Countrie.
                  
                  
                     THE Territorie of the Kentish-Saxons,
did at the first, include only
that part, which at this day is contained
within the county of Kent,
being the very entrance & key of
the whole Iland. The west & south
sides of it butte vpon the firme
land: on the East, the Brittish Ocean beateth, and vppon
the North, runneth the famous river Thames,
                     
navigable for ships of very great burden, and ebbing
and flowing many miles within the land: whereby
commodities are brought in, and carryed forth, to the
enriching of it selfe, and the Countries round about.
This Principalitie (enlarged by addition of such Provinces
as Vortiger, after the slaughter of the Brittish Nobilitie
delivered to the Saxons for his ransome) was established
by Hengist eight yeares after his arrivall, about
the yeare of grace 456. Valentinian, the third of
that name, then shoring vp the decayed Empire in the
West. Although (by consent of divers Writers) he ruled
a long time; yet little or nothing is left of record,
concerning any thing done by him, after he was setled
in the governement: either for that perhaps,
no great occasion was ministred to shew himselfe in
action, (the Britans being now seated in the remote
parts of the Ile, and his owne countrymen making
warre in other places of the same) or else, for that (being
wearied with the warre) he gave himselfe to ease
and quietnesse, supposing hee had done enough alreadie,
in making the first attempt in an enterprize
so difficult, and in getting and leaving to his posteritie,
the possession of so faire and fruitfull Countries.
                  After his death, there raigned, eyther joyntly, or
successively, Vsk, Otta, and Ermeric; concerning
whom, I finde no other mention then of their names
onely.
                  
                     Ethelbert (succeeding Ermeric his father) was in the
beginning of his raigne, much encumbred with
warres, which he made with very ill successe against
Ceaulin, Prince of the West-Saxons: but afterwards,
(his knowledge in militare affaires increasing with his
yeares) hee fortunately repaired those losses: extending

his Dominion, (by reducing the South Provinces
to his obedience) even to the water of Humber.
And the better to strengthen his estate by forraigne
aliance, hee married Bertha the danghter of Ch
                           •
                        
                        rebert,
then King of France, a vertuous Lady, and a
professor of Christianitie, wherein the King her husband
was not as yet instructed: howbeit hee permitted
both her selfe and Luidhard a French Bishop,
(that accompanied her into Britannie) to vse the Rites
and Ceremonies of their owne Countrie and religion:
eyther for observance of the contract which Ethelbert
before the marriage had made with the King
her Father to that end, or else, for the heartie and
entire affection which hee bare vnto her, as his wife,
whom God had ordained to bee the meanes of his
conversion to the Christian faith.
                  For in the yeare of grace five hundred ninetie sixe,
and fourteenth of the raigne of Mauritius the Emperour,
Austen a Monke, was sent by Gregory the first,
(surnamed the Great, then Bishop of Rome) to preach
the faith to the Saxons and English, then inhabiting
the Ile of Britannie, where (landing in the Ile of Tanet,
vpon the coast of Kent) hee was entertained in curteous
manner by Ethelbert the Prince, whose heart being
somewhat prepared by his wives perswasion,
and by the example of Luidhard, the devout Bishop
that lived with her) was more apt, in time, to
take impression of the Truth, whereto (though himselfe
assented not at the first,) yet hee licensed it
to be taught privately, and assigned to Austen a
convenient seate at Canterbury, (the cheefe Citie of
that Province) giving him an olde Church, which in
former times had beene erected by certaine Romans.
(exercising there the Christian religion) and consecrated

to our Saviour Christ. This Church was
then reedified, and (not many yeares after) Austen
without the Citie Eastward, layd the foundation of
a Monasterie: for which Ethelbert erected a Church,
wherein both Austen himselfe with his successours,
and also the Christian Princes of Kent, were (for the
most part) interred after their death. This Monasterie
being finished, long time after Austens decease, was
dedicated to him by the name of Saint Austen, whose
memoriall the ruines of that place retaine even to this
day.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     Austen converteth divers of the Saxons and English
from Paganisme to Christianitie. The cause that
first moved Gregorie the Great to intend their conversion.
Austen is consecrated chief Bishop of the English
Nation by the Bishop of Arles in France. He
advertiseth the Bishop of Rome, of the successe of his
voyage into Britannie, and requireth directions touching
the Ecclesiasticall governement to be there established.
                  
                  IN the meane time, Austen (beeing now received
as the Apostle of the English Nation) and
such Priests as were with him, exercised their Ecclesiasticall
functions, without empeachment; and
for that they were altogether ignorant of the Brittish
language, they vsed the helpe of such Interpreters,
as they had brought with them out of
France, in preaching and instructing the people: with

whom, partly by their doctrine, and partly by their example
they prevailed so much, as many of them beleeved,
and were baptized: for their teachers began
then to expresse in their lives the practise of the Apostles
in the Primitive Church, by continuall watching,
fasting, and praying, contemning the world, and contenting
themselves with things necessarie to sustaine
Life and Nature: so strongly were they possessed with
the spirit of zeale, in first planting the Christian religion
among Idolatrous Saxons, and English.
                  
                  It is reported, that Gregorie the Great (when he was
but Archdeacon of the Sea of Rome) tooke notice first
of the state of the Ile of Britannie, by seeing certaine
yong men (borne in a Province of the Northumbers)
presented in an open Market at Rome, to be there sold:
For, marking well their faire complexions, and comlinesse
of stature, he enquired whence they were: and
vnderstanding that they were Angles, of a Province called
Deira, and vnder the government of Alla, but as yet
heathen (for so the Inhabitants of those parts then
were:) he seemed much to lament, that such excellent
outward gifts of Nature, should want the ornaments of
inward grace: and thereupon alluding to the name of
their Prince and Country, (according to their significations
in the Latin, and Hebrew tongue;) he vttered
these words, as it were by way of Prophecie: These men
are worthily called Angles, for they have the verie faces of
Angels: and they shall be one day fellow heires with Angels
in Heaven. For the people of Deira, must be delivered
De-ira Divina, by their conversion to the Christian faith:
and Alla their King must be taught to sing Alleluia to the
praise of the most high God: which worke (being now
Bishop of Rome) he was made the Instrument to effect,
by sending Austen at this time to preach the faith of

Christ in Britannie, where (in a short space) the Christian
Religion encreased, in such measure, that vpon one
day (wherein the memoriall of the birth of our Saviour
was celebrated) there was above ten thousand men,
besides women and children, baptized in a river: the
water thereof being hallowed by Austen the Monke,
who commanded the people (by reason of the great
multitude, and the small number of Priests) to go in by
couples, and one to baptise another, In the name of the
blessed Trinitie.
                  When these things were done, Austen went into
France, where (according to order given by the Sea
of Rome before his departure thence) he was by Etherius
Bishop of Arles consecrated chiefe Bishop of the
English Nation, and at his returne into Britannie, he
sent Laurence a Priest, and Peter a Monke, to advertise
the Bishop of Rome of the successe of his labors, requiring
also further instructions in some doubtfull points,
concerning the discipline of the Church, and other
matters of ceremonie and observance.
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     Instructions sent to Austen from the bishop of Rome, for
the ordering and government of the new Church in Britannie.
The Primacie of the Sea of Canterburie. The
first English bishops of London and Yorke.
                  
                  HEreupon the Bishop of Rome signified by his Letters
to Austen, and the rest of his Associates, how
acceptable a worke, to God and his Church, they
had performed: commending their great zeale, and
constant minds, which neither the travaile of a long

and laborious journey, nor feare of danger by sea or
land, could dismay from persisting in their good intention:
giving thanks to God, that had assisted them with
his spirit, and exhorting them to hold on the course into
which they were alreadie entred.
                  Touching the Ecclesiasticall government, if there
were any thing, either in the Church of Rome, France,
or any other Church, which Austen thought meete to
be altered, for the better service of God: he willed him
therein to vse his pastorall authoritie, and to select out
of everie one of them, what himselfe thought most requisite
for setling an vniformitie of government in the
Church of Britannie: affirming, that divine worship was
not to be esteemed in regard of the place, but the place
to be honoured, in regard of the divine worship. Further,
he put him in mind of the ancient custome of the
Sea of Rome, which had ordeined the profits and revenues
of Bishoprikes to be divided into foure equall
parts: whereof the first was assigned to the Bishop him
self, and the family, for the maintenance of hospitalitie:
the second for the benefite of the Clergie in generall:
the third for reliefe of the poore, and the fourth for repairing
of Churches.
                  Then he admonished him, to deale gently with the
new Converts, and to tollerate some of their erronious
Traditions for a time, lest by restraining them at first
to the precise observation of Christian discipline in everie
point, he might divert them from their good purpose,
and hinder the proceeding in the generall cause:
For he supposed it a matter of verie great difficultie, to
plucke vp at once those ranke weedes of Superstition,
which by long continuance of time had taken deepe

                        •
                     oote in their affections: considering well, that he that
desireth to attaine the highest place, must ascend thither

by steps and degrees, and not by leapes (as it were)
in an instant.
                  He answered likewise many other objections, propounded
by Austen. concerning degrees of consanguinitie
and aliance, to be observed in cases of Marriage,
and also touching the admission of meete persons to be
partakers of the Lords Supper.
                  Touching the punishment of Sacrilege, he advised,
that offenders therein might first be charitably corrected
& admonished, to the end, that (knowing the greatnesse
of the crime) they might, by penance, and restitution
make amends, and detest from thence-foorth to
commit the like.
                  With the Bishops of France, he willed him not to
intermeddle otherwise then by counsaile, and exhortatation,
lest (by interposing himselfe in matters of Ecclesiasticall
government there) he should seeme to thrust
his Sickle into an other mans Harvest: but he appointed
all the Bishops of Britannie to be vnder his jurisdiction,
giving him power to nominate, and consecrate
Bishops in severall places, where he thought convenient.
Howbeit it was then decreed, that the Bishop
of London should (ever after) be consecrated by his
owne Synod, and receive his Pall from the Sea of Rome;
for he appointed the Citie of London to be the Metropolis
and chiefe Sea: though Austen (contrarie to the
Bishop of Romes direction in that behalfe) transferred
it afterwards to Canterburie, as a place vnto which he
was well affected, for the good entertainment he had
there first received: and also, for that it was more commodious
for sending by Sea to Rome, and more free
from danger, then the miner parts about London, whose
inhabitants were lesse civill, and not so well in inclined
to receive the doctrine of christianity, as the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
were: For Pope Gregorie ordained, London, and Yorke to
be the Seas of two Archbishoprikes, and that each of
them should have vnder it twelve inferior Bishopriks,
but that neither of the Archbishops should be subject
to other, nor take place of precedence otherwise then
according to prioritie of consecration, save onely that
(for Austens honour) he appointed all of them to remaine
vnder his jurisdiction during his life.
               
               
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     Austen receiveth the Pall from Rome. Gregorie the
Great sendeth gratulatorie Letters to Ethelbert, who is
converted to the faith, being the first Christi
                           •
                        n Prince of
the English nation. The Church of Saint Paul in London
is founded? Melitus the first Bishop there in the
Saxons time. Iustus the first Bishop of Rochester C
                           •
                        ntention
betweene the English and Brittish Cleargie, about
celebration of the feast of Easter.
                  
                  WIth these and other such like instructions, the
Messengers were dispatched into Britannie,
where, at their returne, they presented to Austen,
the Pall (the ornament of a Bishop) which the Bishop
of Rome had sent vnto him as a 
                        〈◊〉
                      and confirmation
of his Ecclesiastical dignitie and authority,
and also certaine Vessels and Vestments which were
thought meete to be vsed for 
                        〈◊〉
                      in the English
Churches. 
                        〈…〉
                     ,
with divers other godly lea
                        •
                     ned men, were appoynted
to accompanie the Messengers into the Iland,
to the end they might assist Austen, and the Priests there
in preaching the Gospel▪
                  
                  
                     
At that time the Bishop of Rome sent also certaine
gifts of great value to Ethelbert the Prince, and
by speciall Letters commended his favourable vsage
and princely bountie shewed, in receyving and mainteining
such persons, as came into his Countrey,
to instruct himselfe and his Subiects in the knowledge
of true Religion (the greatest blessing that ever
any Nation could enjoy:) signifying withall, that
by his conformitie to those things which they taught,
a happie entrance was alreadie made for reducing
the whole Iland to Christianitie, and that if he persevered
as he had begun, he might vndoubtedly expect
an eternall reward in heaven.
                  For albeit Ethelbert at the first was not verie readily
induced to abandon the ancient superstitious
customes of his owne Nation, partly, for that he had
beene trained vp therein from his tender yeares▪ and
partly, for that he was secretly informed, that some
of the Priests (which then preached the faith of
Christ) were seditious persons, exercising witchcraft,
and seducing the people, vnder pretence of simplicitie:
yet after his conversion he became a zealous professor
and practise
                        •
                      of pietie: erecting faire Temples
for divine Service, endowing them with large possessions;
and earnestly exhorting other Princes within
the Ile to do the like.
                  He founded a Church in the Citie of London,
which the Kentish Saxons (in right of superioritie over
the East-Saxons) at that time possessed, and dedicated
it to the Apostle Saint Paul. In more ancient
times (as some conjecture by the bones of such beasts
as were vsually sacrificed by the Gentiles, and found
in that place) there had beene a Temple dedicated to
Diana; of that Church Melitus (being sent by Austen
                     
to preach the Christian faith to the East-Saxons)
was afterwards elected the first Bishop. The Cittie of
Rochester also he assigned to Iustus, who was consecrated
the first Bishop of that Sea.
                  But while these things were a doing, there arose
some controversie betweene the English Roman Cleargie,
and certaine British Bishops, concerning the celebration
of the feast of Easter, and other Rites and
Ceremonies, wherein the Brittish Church dissented
from the Church of Rome: for the Britans then dwelling
in Wales, and the West parts of the Ile) continued
there the exercise of the Christian faith, which
had beene preserved among them ever since it was
first planted in the Iland, though now and then the
cleere course thereof, was either by contagious Heresies,
or by prophane and irreligious Princes, interrupted
for a time: howbeit, when they perceived the
Saxons themselves in some measure to approove it,
they beganne with boldnesse to make open profession
of it, as seeming therein to agree even with
their enemies, howsoever otherwise in respect of
language, situation, or the law of Nations they were
divided.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. V.
                  
                     Austen calleth a Synode to reconcile the differences between
the Brittish and English Cleargie. The Brittish Bishops
aske counsaile of an Anchorite, whether they should conforme
themselves to such things as Austen the Monke
should require of them. They refuse to accept him for
their Archbishop. Austen appointeth Laurentius to succeed
him in the Sea of Canterburie. He dieth.
                  
                  
                     AVsten perceiving that this disagreement was likely
to prove prejudiciall to the state of the new
Church, thought it the best and safest way, to prevent
the inconvenience in the verie beginning, and to
that end he summoned a Synod, which (by the meanes
of Ethelbert the Prince) he procured to be held vpon
the borders of the West-Saxons Country.
                  At that Synod, seven Brittish Bishops, certain Monks
of Bangor (the greatest Monasterie in the Ile, whereof
Dinothus was then Abbot) and diverse others well
reputed for their learning and knowledge in divinitie
were present. It is reported, that the Brittish Bishops
(before their comming thither) asked counsaile of an
Anchorite (a wise and holie man) living there about,
what he thought meetest for them to do in that great
businesse which they had then in hand: and whether
they should follow the advice and directions of
Austen, or retaine still their ancient Traditious: whereto
it is said, that the Anchorite made this answer: If he be
of God, follow him, and that shall you best discerne by his
humilitie: For Christ sayeth: Take vpon you my yoke,
and learne of me, for I am milde, and humble of heart:

If therefore you perceive by his behaviour, that hee is prowd
and high minded, then be ye well assured, that he is not of God.
Heereupon, when they came to the place where the
Synod was to be kept, and saw Austen sitting in a chaire,
but not saluting them at their first entrance, nor seeming
by his outward gesture to respect them: they
supposed the Anchorists speech to have beene in part
then verified, and with much impatiency, heard the
Arch-bishops oration: wherein they were specially required
to preserve the vnitie of the Christian faith, and
(though they did many things contrarie to the vsage
of the Roman Church,) yet to conforme themselves
thereto in three points, namely, in celebrating the feast
of Easter in due-time, in exercising the ministery of
Baptisme, according to the manner of the Church of
Rome: and in joyning with him, and the rest of the English
Bishops, in preaching the Gospel of Christ to the
heathen of that Nation; which if they would faithfully
performe, he promised, for avoyding contention, (a
matter very dangerous, considering the present condition
of the time) to tolerate the continuance of any other
old rites and traditions, wherein they should dissent
from the Church of Rome. But the Britans (imagining,
that he, who at his first comming, vsed them in
that disdainefull manner, would afterwards, being setled
in a superintendency over them, vtterly despise
them) discovered plainely their discontentment
by their countenances, and made a short answer; that
they would neither observe those things which he required
at their hands, nor acknowledge him for their
Bishop: Whereto Austen with bitter words replyed;
that sith they would not receive peace when it was offered,
they should ere long, feele the heavy hand of war
and vengeance vpon themselves and their posteritie:

and so the assembly was dissolved.
                  Not long after, Austen the Arch-bishop (wearied
with care and travaile of minde) fell sicke of a languishing
disease: and doubting lest the state of the Church
(being as yet greene, and shaken with the blasts of
schisme and division) might easily miscarry for want of
a Pastor: he thought good, while he lived, to provide
for it, by appointing Laurence, a grave and learned
Priest, to succeede him in the Sea of Canterbury: and having
to that end elected him, and caused the election
to be published, he departed this life. His body was buried
in his owne Monastery, within the Church,
which Ethelbert had there erected, and an inscription
in Latine, was set over the place of his buriall, declaring
his name, and qualitie, and the time, occasion,
and successe of his comming into the Ile of Britannie.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. VI.
                  
                     Ethelbert the Prince, provideth for the maintenance of religious
persons. Hee ordaineth lawes for civill governement,
publishing the same in the English tongue. Edbald
his sonne succeedeth him in the Principalitie of
the Kentish-Saxons. His Apostacie. Repentance.
Death.
                  
                  IN the meane while, Ethelbert the Prince, (persisting
with great devotion in the profession of the Christian
faith) did move very many of his subiects to
follow his example therein: and such persons (as professors
of one faith with him) he vsed with speciall favour:
the rest that refused to doe the like, he would not

compell, saying; that he had beene taught, that The service
of Christ must be voluntarie, and not forced.
                  
                  And as he was very forward in advancing and supporting
the State ecclesiasticall, so he was not altogether
carelesse of the civill governement. For by advice
of the wisest and best learned men of his Province, he
made certaine constitutions (after the manner of the
Romans) and published them in the English tongue,
to the end his people might vnderstand them, and (by
knowing the penalties imposed vpon offences) more
readily avoid the offences themselves. By these lawes
he provided first for the weale and safegard of religious
persons, ordaining restitution and severe punishment
for such as by theft or violence, tooke away anything
from Churches, Bishops, or Priests. For he thought it
very meete, that he should, by all meanes, protect and
prefer from worldly annoyance, such men as watched
and prayed for the health & salvation of soules. And
thus spending the rest of his time in the exercise of pietie
and all princely vertues, after he had prosperously
raigned many years, he ended his daies in peace. He had
issue Edbald, who succeeded him in the governement:
and Ethelburga, married to Edwin, Prince of Northumbers.
                  
                  
                     Edbald was (by his fathers direction) trained
vp in the knowledge of the Christian faith, which (after
he had obtained the Principalitie) hee vtterly renounced:
being otherwise also defamed for divers notorious
and detestable vices, whereby the greater number
of his subjects (following his example) returned againe
to idolatry, and ran head-long into all kinds of
enormity: from which, (in his fathers time) rather feare
of temporall punishment, then love of vertue and religion,
restrained them. Heereupon Iustus the Bishop

of Rochester, and Melitus the Bishop of London, (perceiving
this generall defection in the Provinces, both
of the Kentish and East-Saxons, by reason of Edbalds Apostacie,
and being vnable, eyther to direct, or to oppose
themselves against the streame of superstition,
which sodainely brake in vpon them) gave way to the
time, and secretly fled into France, where they remained
till Edbalds conversion: Laurence the Arch-bishop
also intended to have followed them, but that he was
admonished by a vision, (as it is reported) that hee
should not forsake his flocke. In the meane time, Edbald
continuing his profane and vicious manner of living,
fell at the last (through distemperature of minde) into
a frenzie, being also possessed with an vncleane spirit:
When the Arch-bishop of Canterbury taking courage,
(as in a good cause) repaired boldly vnto him, & partly
by admonition, partly by exhortation, prevailed so
farre with the Prince, as in the end he wan him to approve
and professe the truth of Christianitie, from
which by infidelitie he had fallen: whereupon soone
after ensued the recoverie of his bodily health, which
by many grievous infirmities, had beene a long
time much empaired. The remnant of his life, (after
he was rebaptized) he spent in devotion and deeds of
charity, to expiate and make satisfaction for his former
impietie and Apostacie.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. VII.
                  
                     Ercombert succeedeth Edbald in the Principality. The institution
of Lent. Honorius the Arch-bishop of Canterbury
divideth his Province into Parishes. Deusdedit
succeedeth Honorius in the Sea of Canterbury.
Egbert ruleth the Kentish-Saxons after the death of
Ercombert. Theodorus the Arch-bishop of Canterbury
expelleth Wilfrid out of the Sea of York. His learning
in Divinitie and Philosophie. His estimation in
the Court of Rome.
                  
                  THen Ercombert his son, (by Emma the daughter
of the King of France) a temperate and religious
Prince, prosecuted the worke which his father
had begun, in reestablishing the Christian faith within
his Dominions The idolatrous Priests he banished, razing
their Temples to the ground, and erecting others
for the service of the true God. The subjects of his
Realme (being much inclined to excesse in eating and
drinking) he restrained, by commanding a publike fast,
during the space of fortie daies, to be yeerely kept, for
the better exercise of devotion; which custome continueth
among the English even to this day. The Church
of Canterburie was governed in his time by Honorius,
who first (as it is reported) divided his Province into
Parishes, and left his Sea to Deus-dedit, the first Saxon
Arch Bishop, (the former being strangers of other nations;)
his owne name was Frithona, which for his zealous
inclination towardes the advancement of the
Church and Common-weale, was changed into Deus-dedit,
as the man whom God himselfe had specially

given. After him, Wighard was elected, but died at Rome
before his consecration.
                  
                     Ercombert the Prince, having peaceably ruled the
Kentish Saxons about foure and twenty yeares, ended
his life when the continuance thereof was most desired.
He had by Sexourga, (one of the daughters of Anna,
Prince of the East-Angles) a sonne named Egbert,
that succeeded him in the governement.
                  
                     Egbert ruled the Kentish-Saxons with great moderation,
and had not his hands beene defiled with the innocent
blood of Elbert and Egelbright, his cosin germans,
he might worthily have beene registred in the
number of their best princes.
                  In his time there lived Adrianus the Abbot, and Theodorus,
(a Graecian borne) then Arch-bishop of Canterbury,
and the last of those that came out of Italie. They
were men of speciall regard for their learning and holinesse
of life. This Theodorus began first of all others, to
exercise his Pontificall authoritie over all Britannie,
placing and displacing Bishops at his pleasure, consecrating
(contrary to ordinances of the church of Rome)
Bishops of other Seas in the Citie of Yorke, and either
by force or shew of right, removing first Cedda, and afterwards
Wilfrid, (who had bin Bishops of that place)
pretending, that the wealth and possessions of that Bishopricke
alone, were sufficient to maintaine three Bishops,
and that it was meete they should be divided accordingly:
but whether he did it for the selfe same end
that was pretended, or for envie at the glorie and greatnesse
of that Sea, I will not take vpon me to censure.
Howbeit, Wilfrid (being thus expelled, and his Sea dismembred)
exhibited his complaint to Agatho, then Bishop
of Rome; notwithstanding he sought thereby, rather
to manifest his owne innocency, then to accuse

                     Theodorus. Whereupon, being in the end acquited
by judgement of the Court of Rome, he was remanded
into his former seate, which yet he could not obtaine,
by reason that Egfrid, the Prince of Northumberland,
refused to receive him, while Theodorus either openly
opposed against his re-admission, or cunningly vnderhand,
laboured to empeach it: the reputation of this
Arch-bishop, (as of a stowt Prelate, and very well learned
both in Philosophie and Divinitie) being so great
with the Church of Rome in those daies, as she would
not alter or make frustrate, what he indirectly had established;
for further proofe whereof, also may serve the
verie testimonie of Agatho, the Bishop of Rome, who deferred
the Session of the sixth Synod at Constantinople,
(where the Bishops of all other Nations were assembled)
vpon expectation onely of Theodorus his comming
thither out of Britannie.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. VIII.
                  
                     Lothar (by intrusion) succeedeth Egbert his brother in the
governement. The West-Saxons invade the Province
of Kent. Cuthbert Arch-bishop of Canterbury, calleth
a Synod for reformation of abuses in the Cl
                           •
                        rgy.
The succession of the Kentish Princes, from Lothar to
Alrich. Kent is subdued, and annexed to the Principalitie
of the West-Saxons.
                  
                  AFter Egbert, Lothar his brother vsurped the governement,
which by right appertained to Edrick
his Nephew, and (seeking by force, to keepe and
maintaine what by wrongfull intrusion he had gotten)
was in the end (after many conflicts) wounded with a

dart, whereof he died. Then Edrick, the sonne of Egbert
recovered the Principalitie, which hee possessed
with little quiet, partly by reason of civill dissention among
some of his owne subjects, that aspired to the governement,
and partly, for that the Kentish Territorie
was then invaded by Moll, (the brother of Ceadwall,
Prince of the West-Saxons) and divers valiant Captaines
his associates, whom the Kentishmen, by casting fire vppon
their Tents, destroyed and consumed to ashes.
Whereupon Ceadwall, to revenge his brothers death,
hotly pursued the war in Kent, and expulsed Edrick the
Prince, spoiling and burning Townes as he marched,
and chasing the inhabitants from place to place, with
little or no resistance. By reason of these troubles, the
Province remained certaine yeares without a Governor,
till Withred (the sonne of Egbert) purchasing peace
with money, obtained the Regiment, although Swebherd
at that time held part of the Province, either by
vsurpation, or composition. About this time Berctualdus
governed the Sea of Canterbury, vnto which Tatwinus
succeeded: and after him Nothelmus, who was a
speciall helper of venerable Bede, in furnishing him
with notes and instructions for composing his storie
of the Church of England. After the death of Withred,
his three sonnes, Edbert, Edelbert, & Alrich, ruled successively.
During the raigne of Edbert the Prince, Cuthbert
was translated from the Sea of Hereford, to the Archbishopricke
of Canterbury, where he sate about eighteene
yeares. Hee was had in great reverence both of
religious and secular men, in regard of his holinesse of
life, and zealous care for reforming abuses in the Clergie:
For to that end he summoned a counsell of the
Bishops and Prelates of the land, at which Ethelbert
the Prince of the Mercians, with the most part of his

Nobilitie were present.
                  
                     Alrich raigned many yeares, and fortunately defended
his Dominions against the Mercians, till at the last,
he was overthrowne in battaile by Offa their Prince,
who in his owne person invaded the Province of Kent.
He died without issue, being the last Prince of the Kentish
line, which was cut in sunder with the threed of his
life.
                  Then Edelbert, (surnamed Pren) vsurping the State,
made warre vpon the Mercians, by whom he was taken
prisoner, and afterwards escaped, though (recovering
his libertie) he could not recover his former dignitie.
                  
                     Cuthred likewise assum'd, for a time, the title of Prince,
which he left to Balbred his sonne. But now the Provinciall
governement of the Kentish-Saxons, (which had
continued about 380. yeares) drawing on to his fatall
period: Egbert the West-Saxon Prince, strongly assailed
the chiefe places of defence, driving the Mercians out
of the Province, and forcing Balbred also to abandon
it; by which meanes, in the end, making a conquest of
the whole Countrie, he vnited it to the Principalitie of
the West-Saxons.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        ❧The succession of the South-Saxon Princes.
                     
                        1 ALla ruled about 24. yeares,
                        Simen
                        the two elder sonnes of Alla.
                        
                        Plening
                        2 Cissa the youngest sonne of Alla.
                        
                        3 Edilwalch the first Christian Prince.
                        4 Aldin the last Prince of the South-Saxons.
                        
                     
                     It is very likely that there were more Princes of the
South-Saxons, though I finde no certaine report of
any other then those aboue mentioned.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧The succession of Bishops in
the Principalitie of the
South-Saxons.
                     
                        Bishops of Selesey.
                        681 Wilfrid (expulsed from his Sea in Northumberland)
sate 5. yeares.
                        
                        686 Hedda (who was also at the same time Bishop of Winton)
sate 19. yeares.
                        705 Daniel (who likewise held the Sea of Winton) sate
6. yeares.
                        711 Eadbertus 8. yeares.
                        
                        719 Eolla 9. yeares.
                        
                        After the death of Eolla, the Sea was void about 5. yeares.
                        733 Sigga 28. yeares.
                        
                        761 Alubertus 29. yeares.
                        
                        790 Osa alias Bosa (who was Bishop of Selesey, in the time
of Egbert the West-Saxon Prince) sate 27. yeares.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The first CHAPTER.South-Saxons.
                  
                  
                     The principalitie of the South-Saxons established by Ella.
Cissa his yongest sonne succeedeth him therein. Edilwalch
the first Christian Prince of the South-Saxons.
                  
                  
                     ELLA the Saxon, was one of those
Captains, which Hengist (vpon pretence
of ayding the Britans against
the Picts) had sent for out of Germanie,
while himselfe was making
warre in Kent. About the yeare of
Grace 478. being well appointed
for men, shipping, and other warlike
provisions, he arrived on the coast of Sussex (with
his three sonnes, Cimen, Plening, and Cissa:) and after
many sharpe encounters with the Britans inhabiting
those parts▪ was constrained (by reason of his ill successe
in the beginning) to send into Germanie for new supplies,
wherewith he besiegedAn ancient Citie seated in that place, where Newenden in Kent now standeth. 
                     Andred-Cester (a place situated
neere a verie great Forrest) the chiefe and most
defensible fortresse in all the Southern parts, and (having
by policie intercepted the Brittish forces that came
to relieve it) entred the Citie by assault, and put to the
sword, all those that were within: the souldiers ransacking
the houses for bootie, murdering the inhabitants,
and defacing the Citie it selfe, whereof Time hath left
no other remembrance to this day, then onely the
name, and calamitie of the place.
                  After this great losse, the Britans sought rather to
provide for their owne saftie, by flying into the woods,
(whence they might sallie forth vpon advantage, and

retire themselves againe) then by making open resistance,
which oft-times procured apparant and irrecoverable
daunger.
                  In the meane time, Ella began to erect a Provinciall
government over that part of the Ile (lying vpon the
sea South-ward (which at this day containeth the
Counties of Surrey, and Sussex: though his successors by
encroching vpon their neighbor Princes, extended it
afterwards even to the Firth of Humber.
                  
                  After his death, his two elder sonnes Cimen, and
Plening (being either slain in the field, or dead by course
of nature) Cissa his yongest sonne was by generall consent
of the people of his owne nation, received as Governor.
The chiefe seate of his principalitie, was the
Citie of Chichester, which he reedified, and called by
his owne name. He also fortified the place now called
Cissburie in Sussex by casting a trench about it for defence
of the Province.
                  What other things were done by him, as also by
the rest of the South-Saxon Princes, the Writers of the
occurrents of that age, have (for the most part) omitted,
or Time it selfe hath vnhappily bereaved vs of the
knowledge of them. He ruled the South-Saxons verie
many yeares, and died naturally: leaving the government
in peaceable estate to Edilwalch, who succeeded
him therein.
                  
                     Edilwalch, by the earnest perswasion of Wulfhere (the
religious Prince of the Mercians) was first moved to embrace
the Christian faith: and Wulfhere himselfe) being
his Godfather) did at the time of his baptisme, give vnto
him the Ile of Wight, and another small Province in
the West part of Britannie.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     Variance betweene the Archbishops of Canterburie, and
Yorke. Wilfrid chiefe Bishop of the Northumbers,
(expulsed from his owne sea at Yorke) flieth into Sussex,
where he converteth the inhabitants to the Christian
faith. He is curteously entertained by Edelwalch
the Prince, who assigneth to him the Ile of Selesey for
an Episcopall sea. The South-Saxons are brought
vnder the obedience of the West-Saxon Princes.
                  
                  IN the meane time Wilfrid, chief Bishop of the Northhumbers
(being expulsed from his sea at York, by Theodorus
the Archbi. of Canterburie, & openly disgraced
by Egfrid, then Prince of Northumberland) appealed to
the Court of Rome, from which he obtained a definitive
sentence, for his justification, touching those matters
wherewith he was charged, and also for his restitution
and reestablishment in his Sea. But Egfrid the
Prince refused to receive him, protesting against the
sentence, as vnduly procured: whereupon Wilfrid the
Bishop fled secretly into Sussex, and preached the Christian
faith to the South-Saxons, whose Prince named
Edelwalch received him with great joy, assigning vnto
him for his Sea, the Ile of Selesey, where afterwards the
foundation of a Monasterie was laid. After the death
of Egfrid Prince of the Northumbers, he was revoked,
and restored to his former dignitie, which yet he enjoyed
not long without interruption. He was a man of
great courage, as having beene continually exercised
with troubles, and worldly incumbrances, which do
commonly deject and oppresse such as yeeld thereunto,
but do engender constancie or obduracie in such as

encounter and oppose them. The authoritie of the Sea
of Rome he was euer stiffely bent to maintaine. The custome
of celebrating the feast of Easter after the Roman
maner he diligently taught and defended in publike
disputation against the Bishops of Scotland, who observed
the vsage of the East Churches, according to the
tradition of the Iewes.
                  It is reported of him, that while he remained in the
Province of the South-Saxons, he instructed the rude
poore people, (dwelling vpon the Sea coasts) in the art
of fishing with Nets, and Ginnes, by which meanes
they were relieved in the time of famine, wherewith
the Country was then much afflicted.
                  The province enjoyed a long time of prosperitie
vnder this Christian Prince, till in the end it was assailed
by Ceadwall, a man of great power and courage (descended
from the race of the West-Saxon Princes) who
being banished from his owne Country, attempted by
force to have expulsed Edelwalch: and finally (after many
conflicts) slue him in battaile. Howbeit (the greatest
number of his owne forces being spent in that
warre) he was afterwards constrained to abandon the
Province (which Aldin then governed) till afterwards
obteyning the West-Saxon Principalitie, he assaied the
recoverie of it againe, and in the end, by conquest, annexed
it to that government, when it had remained (about
three hundred yeares) vnder the obedience of the
South-Saxon Princes.
                  
                     
                     The succession of the Mercian
Princes.
                     
                        1 Creda, the first Prince of the Mercians, ruled about ten
yeares.
                        2 Wibba (the sonne of Creda,) twentie yeares.
                        3 Ceorla (the sonne of Wibba) ten yeares.
                        4 Penda (surnamed the Stowt) the sonne of Wibba, thirtie
yeares.
                        5 Peda, the sonne of Penda, the first christian Prince.
                        6 Oswin.
                        7 Wulfere, the brother of Peda.
                        8 Ethelred, the brother of Wulfhere.
                        9 Kinred, the sonne of Wulfhere.
                        10 Celred, the sonne of Ethelred.
                        11 Ethelbald.
                        12 Bartred.
                        13 Offa, the nephew of Ethelbald.
                        14 Ecfrid, the sonne of Offa.
                        15 Kenulph, nephew to Penda in the fifth degree.
                        
                        16 Kenelm, a child of seven yeares (the sonne of Ecfrid)
murdered by his owne sister, and reputed a Martyr.
                        17 Ceolwulph, brother to Kenulph.
                        18 Bernulph, defeated by Egbert Prince of the West-Saxons.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧The succession of Bishops in the
Principalitie of the Mercians, till
the raigne of Egbert the first
English Monarch.
                     
                        Bishops of Lichfield, and Chester.
                        656 Diuma, (the first Bishop of the Mercians) sate two
yeares.
                        658 Cella, two yeares.
                        660 Trumherus, five yeares.
                        665 Iarumannus, foure yeares.
                        669 Cedda, (removed from the Sea of Yorke) three yeares.
                        672 Winfridus, foure yeares.
                        676 Sexulphus, sixteene yeares.
                        692 Hedda, twentie-foure yeares.
                        716 Aldwinus, twentie one yeares.
                        737 Witta, fourteene yeares.
                        751 Hemetus, thirteene yeares.
                        764 Cuthfridus, nine yeares.
                        773 Bertunus, seven yeares.
                        780 Higbertus, ten yeares.
                        790 Aldulfus, (in the time of Egbert the West-Saxon
Prince) twentie foure yeares.
                     
                     
                        Bishops of Lindisferne, now called
Holy-Iland.
                        678 Edhedus, sate one yeare.
                        679 Aethelwinus, twenty two yeares.
                        701 Edgarus, nineteene yeares.
                        
                           
720 Kenebertus, thirteene yeares.
                        733 Alwich, eighteene yeares.
                        751 Aldulphus, sixteene yeares.
                        767 Ceolwulfus, seventeene yeares.
                        784 Vnwona, two yeares.
                        786 Ealdulphus, (after whose death the Sea was void certaine
yeares) lived about the time of Egbert the
West-saxon Prince.
                     
                     
                        Bishops of Hereford,
                        680 Putta sate eleven yeares.
                        691 Tirthelus, twelve yeares.
                        703 Tortherus, fifteene yeares.
                        718 Walstodus, eighteene yeares.
                        736 Cuthbertus, five yeares.
                        741 Podda, five yeares.
                        746 Ecca, six yeares.
                        752 Cedda, six yeares.
                        758 Aldbertus, eleven yeares.
                        769 Esna six yeares.
                        775 Ceolmundus, eight yeares.
                        783 Vtellus, five yeares.
                        788 Wulfhardus (in the time of Egbert the West-Saxon
Prince) twentie one yeares.
                     
                     
                        Bishops of Worcester.
                        688 Boselus, sate twelve yeares.
                        692 Ostforus, one yeare.
                        693 Egwinus, twentie foure yeares.
                        717 Wilfridus, twentie seven yeares.
                        744 Mildredus, thirtie two yeares.
                        776 Weremundus, three yeares.
                        
                           
779 Wolberus, two yeares.
                        782 Eathoredus, seven yeares.
                        789 Denebertus, (in the time of Egbert the West-Saxon
Prince) thirtie three yeares.
                     
                     
                        Bishops of the Middle-English, whose Sea
was at Leycester.
                        692 Wilfrid, (expulsed from his province of Northumberland)
sate ten yeares; after whose departure the
Sea of Leycester was governed by the Bishops of
Lichfield, vntill the time of Totta.
                        
                        737 Totta, twentie seven yeares.
                        764 Edbertus, (in the time of Egbert the West-Saxon
Prince) fortie three yeares.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. I.The Mercians.
                  
                  
                     The principalitie of the Mercians, erected by Creda the
Saxon. Penda persecuteth the Christians in his Province.
Peda succeedeth Penda his father in the government.
He marrieth the daughter of Oswin Prince
of the Northumbers, and receiveth the Christian
faith.
                  
                  
                     THe middle part of the Ile of Britannie
(containing at this day the
Counties of Glocester, Hereford,
Worcester, Salop, Chester, Stafford,
Bathe, Warwicke, Leycester, Rutland,
Nottingham, Northampton, Lincoln,
Huntington, Bedford, Buckingham,
Oxenford, and part of the Countie of Hertford) was in
ancient time possessed by the Angles, whom the inhabitants
of the bordering Provinces round about did
then call Mercians. It was in circuit of ground much
larger then either of the other principalities, being at
the first diuided into three parts, according to the severall
situations, namely the East, West, and Middle
Mercia.
                  
                  The first Prince of the Mercians was Creda, who about
the yeare of Grace 586. (either by his owne force,
or by the assistance of such Princes of his owne nation,
as were alreadie established in government) expelling
the Britans, obtained the principalitie.
                  After him Wibba his sonne: then Ceorla, and Penda,
the sonnes of Wibba, ruled successively.
                  
                     Penda was a Prince of a hautie spirit, and a great

persecuter of the Christians: he made continuall incursions
vpon the borders of his neighbour Princes, exercising
all kind of crueltie where he vanquished. Sebert,
Egricke, and Ana, three Religious Princes of the East-Angles,
were by him overthrowne. The Princes of Northumberland,
Edwin, and Oswold, he slue in several battels.
Oswin the successor of Oswald, after many assaults, offering
his richest Iewels, and a great summe of monie,
to redeeme his peace, could not procure it. For Penda▪
                     
had made a solemne vow, that he would never give over
the warre, till he had rooted out the whole Nation
of the Northumbers. Heruepon Oswin perceiving himself
vnable to make resistance against so power-full an enemie,
prayed to God for helpe, protesting, that, if he obtained
the victorie against the Mercians, his daughter
Alfrid, should be consecrated to serve him in perpetuall
virginitie: and a great quantitie of land should
be assigned for the erection and maintenance of Monasteries:
both which (the successe answering his desire)
he afterwards performed.
                  
                     Peda the eldest sonne of Penda (in the life of his father)
possessed that part of the Province, which was
called Middle-Mercia. He married the daughter of
Oswin, Prince of the Northumbers, vpon condition that
he should receive the christian faith:) whereupon he was
baptised by Finan the Bishop ofHoly-Iland 
                     Lindisfarn in the Province
of the Northumbers: and at his returne into Mercia,
brought with him certaine Priests to instruct; and
baptise his people, which Penda himself was contented
to tollerate, either for the affection which he bare vnto
Peda his sonne, or else for that he could not but approve
the conversation of such as taught Subjects to be humble,
charitable, and obedient to their superiors: by reason
whereof, he exercised lesse crueltie against the professors

of Christianitie, then in former times he had accustomed:
pursuing onely such persons, as bearing the
name of Christians, lived dishonestly, and irreligiously,
alledging that they, who neglected the service of that
God, in whom alone they professed themselves to beleeve,
were very wretches, and worthie of all kinds of
punishment.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     Oswin Prince of the Northumbers ruleth the Mercians,
after the death of Peda, till he is deposed by Wulfere,
the brother of Peda. Lichfield is made a Bishops Sea,
for the Province of the Mercians. Chadde is Bishop
of that place. Wulfere is christned. Ethelred his brother
succeedeth him in the Principalitie. He foundeth a
Bishops Sea at Worcester. He resigneth his government,
and goeth to Rome, where both himselfe, and Kinred
his nephew, take vpon them the habit of religion. Celred
his sonne succeedeth him.
                  
                  
                     PEnda being slaine in battell, and Peda his son made
away by the trecherie of his wife, Oswin alone possessed
the government, having at that time also
the soueraigntie over the South-Saxons. The Picts, that
forreyed the borders of his Province, he in short time
reduced to obedience. Then he provided for establishment
both of the Civill and Ecclesiasticall state, advancing
the one by execution of Iustice, and augmenting
the other by large Donations to Religious houses. He
founded the church of Lichfield, which he made the Bishops
Sea for the province of Mercia. Dwina a Scottish
man, Bishop of Holy-Iland, was made Bishop also of that
Province (the number of Priests being then so smal, that

one man had the charge of two Bishoprikes.) The fift
Bishop in succession from Dwina was Cedda; a man
much reverenced for his holinesse of life, and after his
death, commonly called Saint Chadde.
                  
                  But the Mercians desirous to advance Wulfere the
brother of Peda to the government, conspired against
Oswin, and expulsed him by force out of the Province,
which afterwards Wulfere peaceably enioyed.
                  
                     Wulfere in the beginning of his raigne, was a persecuter
of the Christian faith. His two sonnes (that went
to Bishop Chadde, to be instructed therein) he vnnaturally
slue with his owne hands: their dead bodies were
by Ermenheld the Queene their mother, buried in a Sepulchre
of stone, where afterwards a Church was erected;
the place, by reason of the multitude of stones
that were brought thither vpon devotion by the common
people, gave the name vnto the towne, which is
at this day called Stone (in the Countie of Stafford.) But
Wulfere after his conversion to the Christian faith, endevoured
(as he thought) to wipe away the guilt of
that bloodie offence, with the teares of repentance and
satisfactorie works of charitie, in erecting Churches,
and devoting the rest of his life to the service of God:
whose example therein, Ermenheld his wife did follow
after his death, sequestring her self from the world, and
taking vpon her the veile in the Nunrie at Ely, where
Sexburga her mother was Abbesse.
                  
                     Ethelred succeeding Wulfere his brother procured a
Bishops Sea to be established at Worcester: Of that place
Bosellus was the first Bishop. In his time diverse religious
houses were erected, as the Monasterie of Euesham,
(then called Hothe-Holme) founded by Egwinus the second
Bishop of Worcester: the priorie of Teuksburie by
Odo and Dodo: the Monasterie of Glocester by Osreck
                     
Bishop of Glocester, and divers others. The King himselfe
having raigned about thirtie yeares, became a
Monke at Bardony, in the Countie of Lincolne: and
Kinred the sonne of Wulfere, (his Nephew) having enjoyed
the governement fiue yeares, went to Rome,
where he tooke vpon him the habite of religion.
                  
                     Celred, the sonne of Ethelred, (succeeding him) shewed
great courage in his warres against Ina the West-Saxon
Prince, but died before he could finish it.
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     Ethelbald succeedeth Celred in the governement. He is
reprooved by Bonifacius an Englishman, (Bishop of
Vtricht in Holland) for his lascivious life. His Repentance.
Hee erecteth the Monastery of Crowland.
He is slaine in battaile.
                  
                  
                     EThelbald, the successour of Celred, was a professour
of Christian religion, though much addicted to
wantonnesse and sensuall pleasures, for which he
was sharpely reprooved by Bonifacius an Englishman,
(then Bishop of Vtricht in Holland, and afterwards
Arch-bishop ofMentz. 
                     Mogunce in Germanie) who wrote vnto
him, how fowle and dishonourable a thing it was,
that he, which raigned over so many Nations, should
himselfe be the bondslave of fleshly lust: signifying
withall, that those offences of impuritie which he committed,
were punished even among the heathen with
death and cruell torments: that by his ill example, he
corrupted his subjects: that God himselfe for those vices,
had plagued many Princes, both in their own persons,
and in their posteritie: and finally, that the pleasures

of this life, are but short and vaine, and the paines
ordained for sinne, intolerable and eternall.
                  He likewise admonished Cuthbert, Arch-bishop of
Canterbury, that hee should cause the light habites of
Priests and Nunnes, (who fashioned themselves too
much after the secular guise) to be reformed.
                  But Ethelbald being stricken with compunction of
heart, for the lascivious follies of his youth, sought by
all good meanes to prevent those dangers; into which,
through securitie and continuance in sinne, he doubted
that he might irrecoverably have fallen: and first,
by the advise of his Clergie and temporall Nobilitie,
he ordained; that all the Churches within his Dominions,
should be discharged of tribute, and freed from
all burthens and labours, excepting onely such as were
to be vndertaken for the necessary building of Towers,
Castles, and Bridges, for the defence and generall
good of the Province; in which case, none were to be
exempted: and that persons professed in religion,
should enioy the profits of their lands entirely, and not
be constrained to make any other payments out of the
same vnto the Prince.
                  About that time also, Cuthbert Arch-bishop of Canterbury,
by the advice of Bonifacius, the Arch-bishop of
Mogunce, made certaine constitutions for the governement
of the Clergie, vnder his jurisdiction: by which
(amongst other things) it was ordered, that the holy
Scriptures should be vsually read in Monasteries: that
Priests should be no buiers nor sellers of worldly commodities:
that they should receive no rewards for administring
the Sacraments: that there should be an vniformitie
among them in the observation of Ecclesiasticall
ceremonies: that they should both learne themselves,
and teach others the Lords praier, & the articles

of the Christian faith in the English tongue, and that
none should be admitted to holy Orders, but such persons,
whose conversation and maner of living was first
examined and approoved.
                  In the meane time, Ethelbald the Prince (partly of
his owne religious inclination, and being partly moved
by the examples of his predecessors) caused a great
and goodly Monastery to be erected at Crowland in the
Countie of Lincolne, where, for that the ground was
fennie, and vnable to support the weight of a stone
building, many huge piles of Oke were driven into the
Marish, and hard earth (brought thither about nine
miles by water) was rammed in with the piles, wherevpon
the foundation of the Church was laid: such was
the zeale of Princes in those dayes, as they could levell
Mountaines, convert fennie bogs into firme land, and
alter, in a maner, the verie course of nature: no cost seeming
too much, no labour too great, nor any thing impossible
that they had a will to effect.
                  When he had reigned aboue fortie yeares, Cuthred
the West-Saxon Prince, invaded the territorie of the
Mercians: during the continuance of which warres,
Ethelbald was slaine by Bartred (a person notorions for
his crueltie) and was afterwards buried in the famous
Monasterie of Rippon: howbeit Bartred soone lost that
which he had ill gotten: for he was also slaine by Offa
the Nephew of Ethelbald, who succeeded him in the
government.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IIII.The Mercians.
                  
                  
                     Offa ruleth the Mercians. He foundeth the Monasterie of
Saint Albans. He maketh a ditch to divide the Territories
of the English and Walshmen. Kenelmus
the Martyr. The Catalogue of the Mercian Princes,
from Offa, vntill the West-Saxons obtained their
Principalitie.
                  
                  OFfa was a warlike Prince, and for the most part
fortunate. Kineulph the West-Saxon Prince he overthrew
in a setbattaile: and Ethelbert Prince
of the East-Angles, he surprized vnder colour of friendship,
and after his death, vsurped that Province. Howsoever
ambition and desire of glorie, transported him
beyond the limits of his owne Principalitie: yet was
he a great benefactor to the Church: for he erected a
faire Monasterie in the honour of Saint Alban, neere
the Towne that now beareth the Martyrs name, and
richly endowed it by his Charter; He founded also the
Abbey of Bathe: the Archi-Episcopall Sea, he translated
from Canterburie to Lichfield, (the chiefe seat of the
Mercian government,) where it continued but a short
time. Betweene Wales and the borders of his Province
he caused a ditch to be made for defence against the
incursions of the Britans, whom the Saxons then called
Walsh, which in their language signifieth (stranger.)
                  
                     Elfrid his sonne succeeding him, reigned but one
yeare.
                  Then Kenulph (descended from Penda the Tyrant)
obtained the regiment. He assailed the territorie of the
Kentish-Saxons, and tooke prisoner Egbert their Prince,

whom afterwards he freely delivered, vpon the selfe
same day that he dedicated the Church at VVinchelcombe,
whereof he was the founder: adding that speciall
Act of clemencie to the other exercises of prayer
and fasting, then ordinarily vsed at such dedications.
In the Cittie of Hereford also, he founded a Church
which he consecrated to Saint Ethelbert.
                  
                  
                     Kenelm, sonne of Ecfrid, being about the age of seven
yeares was slaine by Quinda his owne sister, that
aspired to the government, and dying innocently, was
afterwards reputed a Martyr.
                  Then Ceolworth the brother of Kenulph, having raigned
but one yeare, was expulsed the Principalitie, by
Bernulph: and Bernulph himselfe, (after three yeares)
defeated by Egbert the VVest-Saxon Prince. Then Lucan
defending himselfe against the West-Saxons, was assailed,
and overthrowne by the East-Angles.
                  
                  
                     VVithlasm for a time withstood the VVest-Saxons,
but in the end submitted himselfe to their subiection,
which he acknowledged by the payment of a yearely
Tribute.
                  After his death, Berthulf possessed the principalitie,
with like conditions, till being assailed by the Pirates of
Denmarke, he was constrained for safegard of his life, to
abandon the Countrie.
                  
                     Burdred succeeded Berthulf, both in estate and fortunes:
for being chased out of Mercia by the Danes, he
fled to Rome, where he died. Then was some part of the
principalitie assigned by the Danes to Ceolwolph, who
held it of them by homage: till Alfred the nephew of
Egbert the West-Saxon Prince, entred the Province with
an armie, and expulsing both Ceolwolph and the Danes,
reduced it vnder the obedience of the VVest-Saxons.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧The succession of the East-Saxon
Princes.
                     
                        1 Erchenwin held the province of the East-Saxons, as
feodatarie to the Princes of Kent.
                        
                        2 Sledda, the sonne of Erchenwin.
                        
                        3 Sebert, the sonne of Sledda, the first Christian Prince.

                              the sonnes of Sebert ruled ioyntly.
                              Serred,
                              Seward,
                              Sigbert,
                           
                        
                        4 Sigebert, (surnamed the Little) the sonne of Seward.
                        
                        5 Sigbert, the sonne of Sigebald, (brother of Sebert.)
                        6 Sigher.
                        7 Sebbi.
                        8 Sigeherd, the sonne of Sebbi.
                        9 Seofride, the brother of Sigeherd.
                        10 Offa, the sonne of Sigeherd.
                        11 Celred.
                        12 Suthred, defeated by Egbert, Prince of the West-Saxons.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧The succession of the Bishops of
London in the Province of the
East-Saxons.
                     
                        604 Melitus, the first Bishop (sent from Rome) sate thirteene
yeares, after whose translation, the Sea was void
about fortie yeares.
                        658 Cedda, eight yeares.
                        666 Wina, (translated from the Sea of Winton) 9. yeares.
                        675 Erkenwaldus, twenty two yeares.
                        697 Waldherus, eighteene yeares.
                        715 Ingualdus, thirtie one yeares.
                        746 Egwulfus, eight yeares.
                        754 Wighedus, seven yeares.
                        761 Eadbrichtus, eleven yeares.
                        775 Deora, nine yeares.
                        784 Eadbaldus, eleven yeares.
                        795 Heathobertus, (in the time of Egbert the West-Saxon
Prince) eighteene yeares.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The first CHAPTER.East-Saxons.
                  
                  
                     The principalitie of the East-Saxons, erected by Erchenwin.
Sebert the first Christian Prince. Miletus the first
Bishop of the East-Saxons, hath his Sea at London.
Saint Pauls church there founded by Ethelbert (the first
Christian Prince of the Kentish-Saxons.) The Church
at Westminster founded by Sebert. Cedda (afterward
called St. Chadde) preacheth the Gospel to the East-Saxons.
Sigher and Sebbi, ioyntly rule the Province.
                  
                  
                     
                        ERchenwin was the first of all the
Saxons, that erected a Provinciall
government among the East-Saxons,
who then inhabited those
parts, which now containe the
Counties of Essex, Middlesex, and
part of the Countie of Hartford:
all which, both himself and his successors many yeares
togither held by homage of the Kentish Princes, as of
their superiour Lords. This Prince having reigned a
long time (with what successe, I find no certaine report,)
left the government to Sledda his sonne, who, to
strengthen his estate by affinitie, married Ricula, the
daughter of Ermerick the Prince of Kent, by whom he
had issue Sebert that succeeded him.
                  
                     Sebert governed peaceably the Province of the East-Saxons,
which in his time was converted to Christianitie:
for in the yeare of Grace 604. Miletus was sent
by Augustin the Archbish. to preach the faith of Christ
to that people, and had the Cittie of London assigned
to him for his Episcopall Sea, where Ethelbert
                     
the Kentish Prince erected a Church, which he dedicated
to Saint Paul, endowing it with large possessions:
and Sebert (following his example therein) founded
an other at the West end of the citie, where afterwards,
a Monasterie was builded: The place at that time (being
environed with water, and overgrowen with
thornes) was called Thorney, and afterwards (by reason
of the situation thereof) the West-Minster.
                  
                  It is reported that in more ancient times there had
beene a Temple of Apollo, which being overthrowen
by an Earth-quake, Lucius the first Christian Prince of
the Britans, reedified and converted to a Church for the
exercise of the Christian Religion.
                  
                     Sebert (having spent the most part of his time after
his conversion) in deedes of Charitie and Devotion,
ended his life, and was buried in that Church, togither
with his wife Ethelgoda.
                  
                  
                     Serred, Seward, and Sigbert his sonnes, ruled ioyntly
the province of the East-Saxons. They were all men of
disordered conversation, and open despisers of religious
rites: for, being not yet baptised, they would have
receyved the Sacrament of Christs bodie: wherein,
for that Miletus the Bishop had opposed himself against
them, they expelled him from his Sea at London, and
themselves soone after were by Kinegles the West-Saxon
Prince, deprived both of government, and life.
                  
                     Sigebert, surnamed the Little, the sonne of Seward,
succeeded in the principalitie, which in short time he
left to Sigbert, (the nephew of Sebert (the first Christian
Prince of the East-Saxons:) Sigbert was by perswasion
of Oswin chiefe governor of the Northumbers, converted
from Paganisme to Christianitie, wherein he
was confirmed, by Cedda, a devout learned man, that
then preached to the East-Saxons, and recovered many

of them, which (after the expulsion of Miletus) had fallen
from the faith. He was afterwards by Finan (the
Bishop of Holy-Iland) consecrated bishop of the East-Saxons:
amongst whom, he preached the Gospell of
Christ without interruption, till such time as Sigbert the
Prince, (procoring the dislike of his Subjects, for that
he shewed too much clemency to the Mercians his enemies)
was trecherously murdered by one of his owne
kindred.
                  After his death, Swidhelin, the sonne of Sexbald, obtained
the regement, and was baptised by Cedda the
Bishop.
                  Then Sigher & Sebbi ruled togither, but not with absolute
authoritie, for at that time they acknowledged allegeance
to Wulfere Prince of the Mercians. In those
dayes great plague and mortalitie fell vpon the Inhabitants
of the Province, and Sigher (renouncing the faith)
fell to Idolatry, which in a short time greatly encreased,
till Iarumanus the Bishop of Lichfield, and certain priests
(being sent thither by VVulfere to that end) laboured
with all diligence to stop the course thereof, and in the
end suppressed it.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     The Devotion, Chastitie, and Chiritie, of Sebbi the Prince.
The maner of his death. Offa resigneth the government,
and goeth to Rome, where he entreth into Religion. Egbert
the West-Saxon Prince, obtaineth the principalitie
of the East-Saxons.
                  
                  IN the meane time Sebbi, and the people vnder his obedience,
(notwithstanding the relapse of their Country-men)
persisted constantly in the faith of Christ:

and Sebbi himselfe by praying, fasting, and Almes ceeds,East-Saxons.
manifested his owne earnest desire to maintaine the
same: being so strongly possessed with the spirit of
zeale, and love of Chastitie, as he perswaded his wife
to a separation, whereby they might serve God with
more puritie of heart: and his pietie and humilitie was
had in such estimation, even among the religious persons,
as they reputed him more meete to have beene a
Priest, then a Prince. After he had (with much difficultie
obtained his wives consent for a separation) he
bestowed the greatest part of his worldly wealth vpon
the poore: reserving nothing for himselfe (besides his
necessarie maintenance) but onely the expectation of a
future recompence. In his time lived Erkenwald a godly
Priest, who was afterward Bishop of London. He
founded two Monasteries, the one for himselfe, at
Chartsey in Surrey, and the other for Ethelburga his sister
at Barking in Essex. Sebbi having ruled about thirtie
yeares, fell sicke of a grieuous and verie painfull disease;
by reason whereof, doubting lest 
                        •
                     hrough frailtie of the
flesh, he might burst out into any intemperate speeches,
or do any other thing vnseemely for his person & profession,
he desired Waldher the successor of Erkenwald,
(then Bishop of London) by prayers and ghostly counsaile
to assist him in his agonies, and that no more then
himselfe, and two of his Chaplains onely might be present
at the time of his departure: so great a care had
this religious Prince in well finishing that race, which
he had prosperously continued the most part of his life:
and in preventing all occasions of scandall to the faith
which he professed. His bodie was buried in the church
of Saint Paul in London, and then Sigeherd, and Seofrid
his two sonnes, successively ruled the Province of the
East-Saxons. After them it was governed by Offa, the

sonne of Sigeherd, who married Geneswede the daughter
of Penda Prince of the Mercians. The possessions belonging
to the Church of VVestminster, he greatly augmented,
and (resigning the governement to Celred)
went to Rome, where he ended his life in a Religious
house. Celred succeeded Offa, maintaining the state of
the Province in peace, till in the end he was slaine: but
in what maner, or by whom, I find no mention. Then
Suthred (either by right of succession, or by election)
obtained the governement, which he enioyed but a
short time; for Egbert the VVest-Saxon Prince, invaded
at one time the Provinces both of the East and Kentish
Saxons, and in the end brought them vnder his subjection:
albeit the Citie of London remained vnder obedience
of the Princes of Mercia, so long as that principalitie
continued.
                  
                     
                     The succession of the Princes of the
East-Angles.
                     
                        1 Vffa.
                        2 Titill.
                        3 Redwald, an Apostatae.
                        4 Carpenwald, the sonne of Redwald.
                        5 Sebert, the brother of Carpenwald.
                        6 Egrick the kinsman of Sebert.
                        7 Ana.
                        8 Athelhere, the brother of Ana.
                        9 Adelwald.

                              the sonnes of Athelhere, ruled ioyntly.
                              Aldulph,
                              Elohwold,
                              Hisberna,
                           
                        
                        10 Ethelbert. 1.
                        11 Ethelbert 2.
                        12 Offa.
                        13 S. Edmund.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧The succession of Bishops in
the Principalitie of the
East-Angles.
                     
                        636 Faelix a Burgundian Bishop of Dunwich, sate twelve
yeares.
                        648 Thomas (his Deacon) five yeares.
                        653 Bonifacius, alias Birtgilsus, seventeene yeares.
                        670 Bisi.
                     
                     
                        
                           After Bisi, the bishopricke was divided
into two Seas.
                           
                              ¶Dunwich.
                              ¶North-Elmeham.
                           
                           
                              671 Aecca, twentie three yeares.
                              Beadwinus.
                           
                           
                              696 Aesculfus, twentie foure yeares.
                              Northbertus.
                           
                           
                              720 Eadberctus, sixteene yeares.
                              Heatholacus.
                           
                           
                              736 Cuthwinus, eleven yeares.
                              Eahelfridus.
                           
                           
                              747 Aldbertus, foure yeares.
                              Lamfertus.
                           
                           
                              771 Eglafus, eight yeares.
                              Athelwulfus.
                           
                           
                              779 Eadredus, six yeares.
                              Hunfertus.
                           
                           
                              785 Althunus, three yeares.
                              Sibba.
                           
                           
                              788 Titfridus, twentie yeares.
                              Alherdus.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. I.East-Angles.
                  
                  
                     The Principalitie of the East-Angles erected by Vffa. Faelix
a Burgundian, preacheth the faith to the East-Angles.
His Episcopall sea at Dunwich in Suffolke. Sebert
the first Christian Prince, resigneth his government
to Egrick, and entreth-into a Monasterie, from whence
he is drawne forth by his subiects, when the Mercians
invade his Province. He is slaine in battaile with Egrick,
whom Ana succeedeth in the government.
                  
                  
                     THe Counties of Norfolke, Suffolke,
and Cambridge, with the Ile of Ely,
were the ancient habitations of
the East-Angles; among whom, Vffa
(about the yeare of Grace 492.)
established a principalitie, which
he left vnto Ti
                           •
                        il, of whom little
or nothing is recorded, save onely the name and
title.
                  Then Redwald succeeding him, entred into league
with Edwin, advauncing him to the government of the
Northumbers, after the death of Edelfrid their Prince,
whom Redwald had slain in battaile. He was afterwards
(by the exhortation of Edwin the Prince,) converted
to Christianitie, from which he was within a short
time withdrawne by his wi
                        •
                     es perswasion, though
Dorwald one of his sonnes persevering therein, was cruelly
murdered by Rochbert a Pagan: and Carpenwald
his other sonne (succeeding his father in the government)
participated with his brother in his fortune; for
he was slaine by the same man, and in the same maner.
                  
                     
Then Sebert his brother obtained the government.
During the raigne of Carpenwald, he lived as a banished
man in France, where he was first instructed in
the Christian Religion. In his time, Foelix the Burgundian
came into Britannie, and made suite to Honorius
the Archbishop of Canterburie, that he might be licensed
to preach the Gospel to the East-Angles: whereto
the Archbishop (approving his zealous intention) willingly
assented; and so the Christian faith within few
yeares was dispersed throughout the Province, by the
diligence and labor of Foelix, whom the inhabitants reverenced
as a man, that (being himselfe happie both in
name and condition) had power also to make others
happie. He was made Bishop of Dunwich in Suffolke,
which being then but a small town, became afterwards
very rich and populous, and was governed according
to the maner of the ancient and best Cities. Many religious
houses (the fruits of devotion in that age) were at
sundry times erected in the place. There was also a Mint
wherein a certaine coine (with the inscription of the
name of the Citie) was stamped. But time hath worne
out in a maner the remembrance of these things at this
day, and the sea hath devoured the greatest part of the
building. It continued an entire Bishops Sea, but a
while; for Bisi (the fourth Bishop in succession from Foelix)
divided it into two Bishopricks: the one of Dunwich,
the other of Holinham.
                  
                  In the meane time Sebert, (imitating the example
of the Kentish Saxons) provided meanes, that the children
born within his Dominions, might be trained vp
in learning, and religion, erecting Schooles, and allowing
stipends for the maintenance of Teachers. He was
also a great benefactor to Hospitals, and Religious
houses, and in the end (resigning the government

to Egrick his kinsman) hee entred into a Monasterie,
(whereof himselfe had beene the founder) and there
remained peaceably, till (by the treacherous practise of
Athelhere, one of his nobilitie) Penda the Mercian
Prince, with an armie of Pagans, invaded his Province;
for then was hee forcibly drawne thence by his owne
subjects, who (finding themselves too weake to resist
their enemies) brought Sebert himselfe into the field:
supposing, perhaps, that his personall presence would
encourage his people to fight with more resolution:
but in that battaile, the East-Angles were overthrowne,
and both Sebert and Egrick his cosin slaine.
                  The like successe in the selfe same manner befell Ana,
who succeeded Egrick in the Principalitie.
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     Athelhere the brother of Ana, ruleth the East-Angles.
He is slaine by Oswin, Prince of the Northumbers.
S. Ethelbert is murdered by Offa, Prince of the Mercians.
Offa having made a voyage into the Holy-Iland,
dieth in his returne homewards. Edmund succeedeth
Offa in the governement. The Martyrdome of
S. Edmund by the Pagan Danes. The Monastery of
S. Edmunds. bury in Suffolke erected. The Principalitie
of the East-Angles annexed to that of the West-Saxons.
                  
                  THen Athelhere the brother to Ana, assumed
the governement, but preventing his time in the
getting of it, he lost it againe ere he was fully s
                        •
                     
                     led:
for, as by combining with Penda the Pagan 
                        〈◊〉
                     
had beene a meanes to hasten the death of his 
                        〈◊〉
                     , hee

and kinsman:East-Angles. so his owne blood (together with Pendaes)
was soone after shed by Oswin, Prince of the Northumbers.
                  
                  
                     Adelwald his brother with little better fortune succeeded
him, leaving the Principalitie to Aldulf, Elohwold
& Hisberna, (the sonnes of his brother Athelhere,)
who by civill discention, (supplanting one another)
made way for Ethelbert to attaine the government.
                  
                     Ethelbert by his wife Laonorine, had a sonne of his
owne name that succeeded him. Ethelbert the second,
was a Prince much renowmed for learning and piety.
He governed the Province with great wisedome and
prosperous successe, till by the perfidious dealing of
Offa, the Mercian Prince, he was shamefully murdered.
For being betrothed to Alfride, the daughter of Offa,
(who ambitiously affected the Principality of the East-Angles)
he was vnder colour of friendship, invited to a
feast, where Offa (by the perswasion of his wife) commanded
his head to be cut off, and his body to be buried
in the banke of a river. By this dishonourable act,
the Mercians obtained the Province. But Offa, being afterwards
touched with sorrow and compunction of
heart for committing it, caused Ethelberts body to be
taken vp, and to be conveied to the Citie of Hereford,
(not farre from the place where he was slaine) and there
to be very solemnly enterred: supposing thereby to expiate
in part, the guilt of his former offence: Afterwards
a Church was there built, and dedicated to Ethelbert
by the name of a Saint. Then Offa vndertooke
a voyage to the Holy-land, and passing through Saxony,
was there received with great ioy by Alkemond the
King his kinsman, and Syware his wife: at that time he
adopted Edmund, the son of Alkemond, to be his heire,
and to succeede him in the Principalitie of the East-Angles,
                     
which did soone after fall vnto him; for Offa
in his returne from the Holy-land, ended his life at Port
St. George: whereupon Edmund speedily repaired into
Britannie, where he was received by the East-Angles, as
their Prince. In his time Hinguar & Hubba, the two Danish
Pirates, invaded Northumberland; and Hinguar having
enriched himselfe with the spoyles of that Country,
sailed towards the coast of the East-Angles, where
(afterwards landing) hee surprized their chiefe Citie,
consuming it by fire. The Citizens also, without respect
of age or sect, he cruelly murdered, and in the
end, tooke Edmund the Prince, whom first the Pagan
Danes perswaded to renounce the profession of Christianitie.
But when they could neither by promises of
assurance of life and safetie, nor by threats and terror of
death, prevaile with him therein, they beate him with
staves, scourged him with whips, and vsed him with all
kindes of barbarous in civilitie and crueltie, which the
religious Prince with great meekenesse and patience,
endured cheerefully, calling vpon the name of Iesus, as
reioycing for his sake, to suffer those torments and
indignities. The Pagans seeing his great constancie and
courage, were transported with furie, and at the last,
wounded him with their shafts, which they shot at
him, till his body was covered over with them. The
                        •
                     
they cut off his head and cast it into a bush. His body
(being afterwards found) was enterred at Bury in
folke, where a goodly Monastery was erected and

                        •••
                     dicated to him, (the ruines therof remaining yet to this
day.) After his death, the Principalitie of the East-Angles
was possessed by the Danes about 50. yeares, till Edward
(the sonne of Etheldred) the West-Saxon Prince expulsing
them, annexed both that Province & the country
of the East-Saxons, (adjoyning to it) vnto his owne
government.
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧The succession of the Princes of
the Northumbers.
                     
                        1 Ida.
                        2 Alla.
                        3 Ethelrick the younger sonne of Ida.
                        
                        4 Ethelfrid the brother of Ethelrick.
                        
                        5 Edwin the first Christian Prince.
                        6 Osric.
                        7 Eanfrid.
                        8 Oswald (the Martyr) brother of Eanfrid.
                        
                        9 Oswin the brother of Oswald the Martyr.
                        10 Adilwald the sonne of Oswald the Martyr.
                        11 Egfrid the sonne of Adilwald.
                        
                        12 Alfred the bastard sonne of Oswin.
                        
                        13 Osred the sonne of Alfred.
                        
                        14 Osric.
                        15 Kenred.
                        16 Ceolnulph.
                        17 Egbert.
                        18 Oswolf.
                        19 Moll.
                        20 Alered.
                        21 Etheldred.
                        22 Aelfwold.
                        23 Osred.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧The succession of Bishops in the
Principalitie of the Northumbers.
                     
                        Arch-bishops of Yorke.
                        625 Paulinus sate nine yeares.
                        666 Cedda three yeares.
                        669 Wilfrid nine yeares.
                        678 Bosa nine yeares.
                        687 Wilfrid (restored) foure yeares.
                        691 Bosa fourteene yeares.
                        705 Ioannes sixteene yeares.
                        721 Wilfridus two yeares.
                        738 Egbertus nine and twenty yeares.
                        767 Ethelbertus thirteene yeares.
                        780 Eanbaldus 1. sixteene yeares.
                        796 Eanbaldus 2. sixteene yeares.
                     
                     
                        Bishops of Lindisfarn (Holy-Iland.)
                        635 Aidanus sate seventeene yeares.
                        652 Finanus nine yeares.
                        661 Colmannus three yeares.
                        664 Tuda two yeares.
                        666 Cedda three yeares.
                        669 Wilfridus nine yeares.
                        678 Eata five yeares.
                        685 Cuthbertus two yeares.
                        
                           
687 Wilfridus (restored) one yeare.
                        688 Eadbertus ten yeares.
                        698 Eadfridus twentie three years.
                        721 Aethelwoldus nineteen years.
                        740 Kinewulfus thirty nine years.
                        779 Higbaldus twenty foure years.
                     
                     
                        Bishops of Haugustald (Hexham.)
                        678 Eata sate two yeares.
                        680 Tumbertus five yeares.
                        686 Ioannes one yeare.
                        687 Wilfridus foure yeares.
                        691 Ioannes (after Wilfrids expulsion.)
                        705 Wilfrid (restored) foure yeares.
                        709 Acca thirtie yeares.
                        739 Frithebertus twenty seven yeares.
                        766 Alhmundus fourteene yeares.
                        780 Tilherus nine yeares.
                        789 Aethelbertus eight yeares.
                        797 Heardredus three yeares.
                        800 Heanbertus ten yeares.
                     
                     
                        Bishops of Whit-hern in Scotland.
                        723 Pethelmus sate thirteene yeares.
                        736 Frithewaldus twenty seven yeares.
                        763 Pechtwinus fourteene yeares.
                        777 Aethelbertus thirteene yeares.
                        790 Beadwulfus.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. I.The Northumbers.
                  
                  
                     The Principalitie of the Northumbers divided into two
Provinces, namely Deira and Bernitia, which are vnited
by Ethelrick. Ethelfrid defeateth the Britans,
and killeth the Monks of Bangor. Edwin the first Christian
Prince. Paulinus preacheth the faith to the Northumbers,
and hath a Sea assigned him at Yorke. The
death of Edwin.
                  
                  
                     THe Principalitie of the Northumbers,
extended northward, over all
that part of the land, which at this
day containeth the Counties of
Lancaster, Yorke, Durham, Cumberland,
Westmerland and Northumberland:
all which were possessed by
the Angles, and divided into two Regiments, whereof
the one was called Deira, and the other Bernitia.
Bernitia was bounded with the river Tyne and Edenborough
Firth: and Deira with the Tyne and Humber.
                  
                  When Hengist was setled in the possession of the
Kentish governement, he sent Octa his brother, and
Ebusa his sonne, to vndertake the conquest of those
parts, which with verie much difficultie they obtained.
The Province afterwardes, (during the space
of ninetie and nine yeares) was governed by certaine
Dukes or Captaines, who held the same by homage of
the Kentish-Saxons.
                  
                  About the yeare of grace 547. Ida erected a Principalitie

in Deira, and Alla his kinsman succeeded him therein:
for at that time, Adda the eldest sonne of Ida, ruled
the Bernicians.
                  
                  
                     Alla governed Deira many yeares: but little mention
is made of him, save onely that in his time, the
English Nation was first made knowne to Gregorie, then
Arch-deacon of the Sea Apostolike, who (being afterwards
Bishop of Rome) sent Augustin the Monke
into Britannie, to preach the Gospel of Christ vnto the
inhabitants there.
                  
                     Ethelrick, the younger sonne of Ida, succeeded
Alla in the government of Deira: and in short
time adioyned thereto, the Province of Bernicia: making
of them both, one entire Principality, which he
left to Ethelfrid his brother.
                  
                     Ethelfrid was a valiant and victorious Prince. Hee
made continuall warre vppon the Britans that inhabited
the borders of his Province, and (chasing them
from their habitations) planted his owne subjects
therein. But Aidan the King of Scots, suspecting
the neighbourhoode of so mightie an enemie, assayed
by force, to empeach his further passage
Northward, till by the Northumbers, (being fewer in
number then the Scottes) hee was in battaile overthrowne.
                  Then Ethelfrid, incouraged with this good successe,
remooved the warre to Chester, where the Britans
in great number had assembled themselves to
make resistance: but, while the Monks and other religious
persons were praying there, that the Britans
their countrymen might speed and prosper well in that
enterprize, Ethelfrid with his forces furiously assayled
them, putting to the sword about one thousand and
two hundred religious persons of the Monastery of

                     Bangor, & driving the rest of the Britans into the woods
and marishes: (many of them perishing by the hand of
the enemie, before they could recover those places.)
                  When Ethelfrid had raigned about twentie seven
yeares, he was slaine in a battaile by Redwald, Prince of
the East-Angles: and left behind him seven sonnes,
whom Edwin (that succeeded in the government) dispossessed,
and banished out of the Province.
                  
                     Edwin was by Boniface the Bishop of Rome exhorted
to embrace the Christian faith, and in the yeare of
Grace 6
                        •
                     6. Paulinus (the third Bishop of Rochester in
succession) was appointed by Iustus the Archbishop
of Canterburie to preach the Gospel vnto the Northumbers,
and to be their Bishop: to which end also, Edbald
the Prince of the Kentish-Saxons, had by letters recommended
him to Edwin his brother in law.
                  In the mean time, Evichelm the West-Saxon Prince,
(ambitiously affecting the soveraigntie of the Northumbers)
practised with Eumer (a man easily corrupted
for desire of gaine) to murder Edwin the Prince:
for the execution of which detestable purpose, Eumer
with a poysoned weapon hidden vnder his garment,
assailed the Prince, and had slaine him in the place, if
Lilla had not thrust himselfe betweene his person, and
the danger; and, (by making himselfe the memorable
example of a faithfull servant) preserved his masters life
with the losse of his owne.
                  In revenge of this trecherous act, Edwin invaded
the territory of the West-Saxons, & (after a great slaughter
of the Inhabitants of that Province) reduced the
most part of it vnder his obedience. Then, to shew the
fruits of his conversion to Christianitie, he gave vnto
Paulinus the Citie of Yorke, to be a Bishops Sea, for him
and his successors: laying the foundation of the Cathedrall

Church of Saint Peter, which was afterwards
finished by Oswald.
                  
                  About the same time also, Paulinus himselfe erected
the great Church at Lincoln.
                  
                  This prince in felicitie of government, excelled all
his predecessors: he was greatly beloved and honored
of his people, and no lesse feared of his neighbor Princes,
who (for the most part) held their Provinces of
him by homage. The Roman Banner Tufa was carried
before him in token of triumph, as well in times of
peace, as warre.
                  It is not to be forgotten, that he caused certain cups
of Iron, and Brasse, to be set by cleare Wels and fountaines,
running by high wayes, for the vse of Pilgrims,
and Travailers: which Cups remained long after in
those places, no man attempting to convey them away,
either for the reverence they bare vnto the Prince,
(by whose appointment they were set there) or else
that they made a conscience to convert to their private
commoditie, such things as were ordained for a publike
good.
                  But Edwin having reigned about seventeene years,
was in the end assailed at one time, both by Penda the
Prince of the Mercians, and Ceadwall the Brittish Prince,
till, with the losse of his life, he made an end of the
warre.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     Oswald ruleth the Northumbers. He is slaine in battaile
against Penda the Mercian Prince. He is honoured
with the title of a Martyr. Oswin his brother succeedeth
him. A Bishops Sea at Lichfield. Egfrid the Prince,
removeth Bishop Wilfrid from his Sea at Yorke. Ceolnulph
and Egbert, successively ruling, give over the
government to enter into Religion. Venerable Bede liveth
in the time of Ceolnulph. The Northumbers
are brought vnder the subiection of the West-Saxons.
                  
                  AFter his death, the Principalitie of the Northumbers
was dismembred againe: For Osrick the sonne
of Elfrick. (Prince Edwins vncle) held onely the
government of Deira, and Eanfrid the sonne of Ethelfrid,
commanded the Bernicians. Both these Princes forsaking
the Christian faith, fell to Idolatrie, and were
slain in battell by Ceadwall the Brittish Prince, that spoiled
& wasted the country of Northumberland, til Oswald
(the brother of Eanfrid) opposed himselfe against the
power of the Britans, whose Captaine Ceadwall, with
the greatest number of his forces, perished in the field.
                  After this victorie, Oswald possessed the Province
in peace, and then sent for Aidan a Scottish-man, to
preach the Christian faith vnto his people, assigning to
him Holy-Iland for his Sea. The Inhabitants of Deira
and Bernicia (who for the hatred which they bare one
to another, had submitted themselves to severall heads)
he wisely reconciled, and vniting them in affection,
brought them vnder the obedience of one governor.
                  He was a zealous professor of the Catholike Religion,

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
which he endevoured to establish throughout
all his Dominions.
                  When he had raigned about eight yeares, he was
killed in a conflict with Penda the Mercian Prince, a
cruell Pagan, who commanded his head and armes to
be cut from the rest of his bodie, and in reprochfull
maner, to be hanged vp vpon high polles: by reason
whereof, and for his holy conversation while he lived,
he was after his death honoured with the title of a
Martyr.
                  Then Oswin the brother of Oswald succeeding him,
was much incumbred, partly by the invasion of the
Mercians, and partly by the rebellion of his own sonne
Elfrid. Adilwald (the sonne of Oswald the Martyr) attempted
by force to have recovered the Province: and
Oswy the sonne of Osrick (sometime governor of Deira)
being trecherously delivered into his hands, he caused
to be murdered.
                  He fought oft times with fortunate successe against
the Mercians, whom (after he had vanquished Penda) he
procured to be instructed in the christian faith: and the
better to strengthen his purpose therin, he erected the
Church at Lichfield to be the Bishops Sea for that Province.
After he had raigned about thirtie two yeares,
he ended his life in peace.
                  Then Egfrid his son ruled the Northumbers. He married
Mildred, one of the daughters of Ana Prince of the
East-Angles. It is reported of her, that (living with her
husband about twelve yeares) she continued all that
time, both a wife, and a virgin; and in the end tooke
vpon her the vaile of a Nun at Ely, where she erected a
Monasterie, and was her selfe the first Abbesse.
                  In the meane while Egfrid removed Wilfrid from
his Bishopricke at Yorke, appointing two other Bishops

over the Northumbers for their better instruction
in the knowledge of Religion. In his time diverse Synods
were called by Theodorus, then Archbishop of
Canterburie, for reformation of abuses in the Church,
for approbation of the five first general Councels, and
for the condemnation of the heresie of Eutyches, who
denied the humanitie of Christ. Not long before his
death, he made warre vpon Edelfrid Prince of the Mercians,
with whom he was afterwards reconciled, by
mediation of Theodorus the Archbishop: and then he
converted his forces against the Irish and Scottish-men,
(inhabiting the Northern Iles) of whom he made a
great slaughter: and the yeare following (making warre
vpon the Picts, contrarie to the advice of Cuthbert the
Bishop) he was slaine by some of his enemies that lay
in ambush to surprise him.
                  Then Alfrid (the Bastard sonne of Oswin) succeeded
him, repairing the decaied state of the Northumbers,
though he could not recover all that the Picts, Scottishmen,
and Britans, had gotten from them in his brothers
time.
                  
                     Osred his sonne (of the age of eight yeares) possessed
the government, till he was murthered by his kinsmen,
Kenred and Osrick, who divided the Principalitie
between them; till falling at civil discord among themselves,
the one supplanted the other: by which means,
Kenred alone ruled the Northumbers, about two yeares.
                  Then Osrick (obtaining the government) elected
Ceolnulph the brother of Kenred to be his successor: Ceolnulph
after he had ruled the Province eight yeares,
and obtained many victories against his enemies, gave
over the regiment, and became a Monke in Holy-Iland.
                  
                  About this time lived Benedict the Priest, who first
taught the Saxons the art of painting, glasing, & Masonrie.

In the raigne of Ceolnulph, Venerable Bede, (the ornament
of that age for learning and pietie) flourished
in Britannie. He writ the historie of the English church,
and dedicated it vnto Ceolnulph the Prince.
                  Then Egbert the cosin-german of Ceolnulph (imitating
the example of his predecessor) forsooke the
world, and entred into Religion. His brother (bearing
the same name) was then Archbishop of Yorke, where
he founded a famous Librarie.
                  
                     Oswolf, Moll, Alered, Etheldred, Aelfwold, and Osred,
raigned successively with like fortune, for the most part;
for they were all either slaine, or deposed by their own
subjects, except Etheldred, who was afterwards restored
to the government, which yet he enjoyed not long: For
(within four yeares after) he was miserably slaine.
                  After his death the Province was wasted, either
by cruell dissention, or forreine invasion by the space
of thirtie yeares; during which time, Eardulph, Alfwold,
Eandred, Ethelred, Readulph, Osbert, and Elle, vsurped
the title of Princes. Readulph, Osbert, and Elle, were slaine
at Yorke by the Danish Pyrates, Hinguar and Hubba,
whom Benbokard (in revenge of the indignitie offred to
him by Osbert, that had ravished his wife) had stirred vp
to vndertake that enterprise. But about the yeare of
grace 800. the Danes were expelled, & the Northumbers
brought vnder the subiection of Egbert the West-Saxon
Prince.
                  
                     
                     The succession of the West-Saxon
Princes.
                     
                        1 Cerdic.
                        2 Kenric his sonne.
                        3 Ceaulin, the sonne of Kenric.
                        
                        4 Cearlick, the nephew of Ceaulin.
                        
                        5 Ceolnulph.
                        6 Kinegles, the first Christian Prince.
                        7 Guichelin, the sonne of Kinegles.
                        
                        8 Cuthred, the sonne of Guichelin.
                        
                        9 Kennewalch, the yonger sonne of Kinegles.
                        
                        10 Sexburga, the widdow of Kennewalch.
                        
                        11 Eascwin, the nephew of Kinegles.
                        
                        12 Kenewin, the yongest sonne of Kinegles.
                        
                        13 Ceadwall.
                        14 Ina.
                        15 Ethelard.
                        16 Cuthred.
                        17 Sigebert.
                        18 Kenulph.
                        19 Britric.
                        20 Egbert.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧The succession of Bishops in the
Principalitie of the West-Saxons.
                     
                        Bishops of Dorchester.
                        635 Birinus sate fifteene yeares.
                        650 Agilbertus, ten yeares.
                        660 Wina, sate at Winton ten yeares.
                        670 Leutherius, seven yeares.
                        686 Hedda, twentie eight yeares.
                        705 Daniel, (who was also Bishop of Selesey) sate fortie
yeares.
                        745 Humfertus, ten yeares.
                        755 Kinewardus, twentie five yeares.
                        780 Aethel
                                 •
                              ardus, eleven yeares.
                        791 Egbaldus, foure yeares.
                        795 Dudda, two yeares.
                        797 Kinebertus, eleven yeares.
                     
                     
                        Bishops of Shireburn.
                        705 Aldelmus, sate five yeares.
                        710 Fortherus, twentie seven yeares.
                        736 Herewaldus, nineteene yeares.
                        756 Aethelmodus, twentie two yeares,
                        788 Denefrithus, twentie one yeares.
                        798 Wibertus, twentie yeares.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. I.West-Saxons.
                  
                  
                     The Principalitie of the West-Saxons, established by Cerdic.
Berinus preacheth the Christian faith to the West-Saxons.
The towne of Dorchester assigned to him for
a Bishops Sea. Kinegles the first Christian Prince.
Winchester is made a Bishops Sea by Kennewalch the
West-Saxon Prince. Ceadwall (resigning the governement
to Ina) goeth to Rome, where he dieth.
                  
                  
                     THe West-Saxons tooke the addition
of their name from the situation
of place, as inhabiting the Westerne
part of the Ile; wherein at
this day, are contained the Counties
of Cornwall, Devon, Dorset,
Wilton, Southampton, and Berk.
                  
                  About the yeare of grace 509.
Cerdic (with Kenric his sonne, and a warlike companie
of Saxons) arrived in Britannie, where they were encountred
by Natanleod a Brittish Prince, neere a shallow
brooke, (afterwards called Cerdics-foord) and now
by contraction of speech, Chardfoord. The fortune of
that bataile, determined the hope of the Britans, and established
the Saxons in possession of the greatest part o
                        •
                     
those Countries: over which, Cerdic and Kenric ruled
with equall authoritie, enlarging their dominions by
the conquest of the Ile of Wight: the governement
whereof, was assigned by Cerdic, to Stuffa and Withgar
his nephewes.
                  After the father and sonne had ruled joyntly about
seventeene yeares, Cerdic (ending his life by course of

nature) left the entire Principalitie to Kenric his sonne.
                  
                     Kenric was oft times assailed by the Britans, who attempted
the recoverie of their antient possessions, but
could not prevaile: and the Province being otherwise
free from annoyance, was peaceably governed during
his time.
                  Then Ceaulin his sonne succeeding him, made warre
vpon Ethelbert the Kentish Prince: in the prosecution
whereof, Oslave and Cnebban (two valiant Captaines of
the Kentish Saxons) were slaine, and Cutholp his brother,
made head against the Britans; from whom, he recovered
divers Forts and Cities, which they had gotten in
the Territorie of the Mercians. But while Ceaulin was
making warre abroad, Cearlic (his brother G
                           •
                        tholps
sonne) kindled a rebellion within the Province, and
by force, vsurped the governement about five yeares.
                  After the death of Cealric, Ceolnulph the sonne of Cutha,
(the sonne of Ceaulin) recovered the Principalitie.
In the beginning of his raigne, the Province of the
West-Saxons was invaded, both by the Britans, & also by
the Scottishmen and Picts. The East-Angles likewise at
the same time assailed it: but Ceolnulph, having appeased
these troubles, and (beginning a new warre against the
South-Saxons) died before he could fully finish it, leaving
the prosecution thereof to Kinegles his sonne:
who with good successe vndertooke the warre, and
(having overthrowne the Britans) converted his forces
against Penda the Mercian Prince; with whom (after
each had tried the others strength in battaile) he concluded
a peace.
                  In the yeare of grace 635. he imbraced the Christian
faith, and was baptised by Berinus, who first preached
the Gospel to the West-Saxons: (Oswald Prince of
the Northumbers, being his godfather at his baptisme.)

The Citie of Dorchester was by Kinegles and Oswald, assigned
to Berinus, for the Bishops Sea of that Province.
                  Then Guichelin, the sonne of Kinegles, and Cuthred,
the sonne of Guichelin, ruled successively, and were both
baptised by Berinus the Bishop.
                  After them, Kennewalch (the yonger sonne of Kinegles)
obtained the governement. He married the sister
of Penda the Mercian Prince, and afterwards put her away:
whereupon Penda, (to revenge the indignitie offered
to his sister) made warre vpon him, and drave him
out of the Province, which he afterwards recovered by
the assistance of Ana, Prince of the East-Angles: for Kennewalch,
during the troubles in his owne dominions,
had fled thither, and was there baptised by Faelix the
Bishop.
                  He founded the Cathedrall Church at Winchester, to
be the Bishops Sea for the Province of the West-Saxons,
and appointed Wi
                           •
                        a to be the first Bishop of that place.
Hee gave also to the Abbot Aldelmus, the towne of
Mal
                           •
                        esbury, where (by the helpe of Elutherius, that succeeded
Wi
                           ••
                        
                      in the Bishopricke of the West-Saxons) he
erected a faire Monasterie, of which, William of Malmesbury,
(who wrote in Latine part of the English History)
was sometimes a Monke.
                  After his death, Sexburga his wife held the Principalitie:
but (finding that by reason of the weakenesse of
her sexe, she was vnable to support so weightie a burthen)
she soone gave it over, and went into a Nunnery
in the Ile of Shepey, which her selfe had founded.
                  Then Eascwin (the nephew of Kinegles) succeeded.
He began a warre against Wolpher the Mercian Prince,
with whom he fought a set battaile. What other things
were done by him worthy remembrance, I finde little
reported.
                  
                     
Then Kenewin (the youngest sonne of Kinegles) ruled
the West-Saxons. He was oft times annoyed by the Britans,
whom in the end he chased into the vtmost parts
of the Province Westward.
                  
                     Ceadwall the nephew of Ceaulin, possessing the government,
subdued the Province of the South-Saxons, and
wasted the Kentish Territories: in the pursuit of which
warre, he gave vnto the Church (even before he was
baptised) the tenths of all those spoiles which hee
tooke. Wherein, howsoever his intention may be censured,
yet the example is no way, justifiable, considering
it is written; That hee which offereth vnto God the
goods of the innocent, doth as it were sacrifice the Son in the

                           •
                        ight of the Father. After hee had subdued the Ile of
Wight, he sent thither Wilfrid the Bishop, to instruct the
inhabitants in the knowledge of Christian religion:
and being wearied with worldly affaires, resigned the
governement to Ina, and went to Rome; where he was
baptised by the name of Peter, and soone after ended
his life. His body was buried in the Church of Saint
Peter, and (over the place where he was 
                        〈◊〉
                     ) the
inscription of his name and condition was engraven.
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     Ina succeedeth Ceadwall in the governement of the West-Saxons.
Peter Pence first paied to Rome. The Bishopricke
of the West-Saxons divided into two Seas.
Lawes made by Ina the Prince. The Church at Wells
made a Bishops Sea. The first arrivall of the Danes in
Britannie, in the time of Britric▪ Egbert the West-Saxon
Prince, subdueth divers provinces, which he annexeth
to his 
                           〈◊〉
                         Principalitie.
                  
                  
                     INa was lineally descended from the West-Saxon Princes.
He was a Prince of great courage and wisedome,
and for the most part fortunate in his attempts: For

                        〈…〉
                      Prince, he withstood by open forc
                        •
                     
the Kentish-Saxons (being weakned by many forme
                        •
                      assaults)
he constrained with great summes of money, to
purchase peace at his hands: and the Province of the

                        〈…〉
                     , after the death of Anth
                           ••
                        
                      their Prince,

                        〈…〉
                      in battaile) he reduced wholly vnder
his obedience.
                  Then he manifested his good inclination, to support
and advance the state of the Church: to which end,
he 
                        〈…〉
                      at W
                           •
                        ll
                           •
                        , that was afterwards 
                        〈◊〉
                     
to a Bishops Sea. He builded also anew, the Abbey
of 
                        〈◊〉
                     , bestowing great cost vpon the Church
there, which he caused to be very 
                        •
                     ichly garnished with
gold and 
                        〈…〉
                     
for the religious persons.
                  He instituted a certaine yeerely payment to the Sea
of 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , 
                     
                        ••
                     ipyning every 
                        〈◊〉
                      of his Read me▪ (that

                        〈…〉
                     
                     
This payment was first called the Kings Almes, and afterwards
the Peter pence.
                  In his time the Bishopricke of the West-Saxons, becomming
voide, was divided into two Seas, whereof
the one remained at Winchester, and the other was established
at Shirborn.
                  
                  He made many good lawes both for the administration
of justice in civill causes, and also for the governement
of the Church: some of which (even in these our
daies) are extant in the Saxon tongue.
                  After he had raigned a long time in great prosperity,
he was perswaded by Ethelburga his wife, to resigne the
Principalitie to Ethelard his kinsman, and to goe to
Rome; where afterwards, professing voluntary poverty,
he ended his latter daies in as lowly and meane estate,

                        〈◊〉
                      he had formerly spent the greatest number of 
                        〈…〉
                     
pompe and glory.
                  
                     Ethelard at his first entrance, was much troubled with
civill discention, which Oswald (one of the princely
blood aspiring to the governement) had raised 
                        〈◊〉
                     
the West-Saxons▪
                      but (that rebellion being app
                        •••
                     ed) he
raigned the rest of his life in peace.
                  Then Cut
                           •
                        red, the kinsman of Ethelard succeeded. The
borders of his Province b
                        •
                     ing strongly assailed by the

                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , he fortunately defended: In his time there appeared
two blazing Stars, which were afterwards noted
to be ominous predictions of those calamities which
befell the Province vnder the tyranny of the Danes.
                  
                  Then 
                        〈◊〉
                      obtained the Principality of the West-Saxons.
He was a Prince much de
                        •
                     ained for 
                        〈◊〉
                     
and oppression of his subjects, the antient lawes and customes
of the Province, 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
in such like outragious practises, he was at the last by
his owne people deprived of all authoritie, and enforced
for safeguard of his life, to hide himselfe in woods
and forrests, where he lived in great misery, secluded
from the societie of men, (whereof by his inhumanitie
he had made himselfe vnworthy) till at the last, he was
slaine in Andreds-wald by a Swineheard, whose Maister
in former times, Sigebert had injuriously put to death.
                  
                     Kenulph (descended from the line of Cerdic, the first
Prince of the West-Saxons) was partly for the honour of
his blood, and partly for the generall opinion of his
sufficiencie, advanced to the government. Such factions
and popular tumults, as had risen by the deposing
of his predecessor, hee pacified with great wisedome
and moderation. He was the first founder of the church
at Wells, where a Bishops Sea was afterwards placed.
Howbeit hee was much inclined to the wanton pleasures
of the flesh, which were the occasion of his destruction
in the end: for, going in private manner to visite
a strumpet, (whom he kept) he was entrapped by one
of Sigeberts kinsmen, and murdered in the way.
                  Then Britric (being also of the race of Cerdic) governed
the West-Saxons. Hee was a Prince by nature more
addicted to peace then warre: He married Eadburga, the
daughter of Offa, Prince of the Mercians, by whose ayd
hee expelled Egbert, the West-Saxon that invaded
his Province, forcing him to flie into France, where afterwards
he lived (like a banished man.) In his time about
the yeare of grace 800. the Danes first attempted
to land in Britannie, whereat their arrivall, they tooke
the Ile of Portland; but Britric (combining with some
other of the Saxon Princes) ioyntly assailed them, and
in short time chased them out of the land: and Britric
himselfe, having raigned about seventeene yeares, was

poisoned by Eadburga his wife, who fled into France,
transporting thither great store of treasure.VVest-Saxons. But (not finding
that good entertainement which she expected at
the French Kings hands) she became a Nunne, and afterwards
Abbesse of a religious house; from whence a
                        •
                     
the last, shee was expulsed for committing adulterie
with a lay person and ended her vitious and dishonourable
life in extreame povertie.
                  After the death of Britric, the West-Saxons were governed
by Egbert, who enlarged his dominions by many
and great conquests: for first, he brought vnder obedience
the Walshmen, (who had beene alwaies accustomed
vpon advantage, to make incursions into the Province:)
then with like successe, he assailed and subdued
the Mercians, the Northumbers, the Kentish and the East-Saxons,
whose Provinces he annexed to the Principalitie
of the West-Saxons, as by relation
of that which followeth, more
plainely shall appeare.
                  The end of the Second Booke of the Second Part of the
Historie of Great Britannie.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧The Table of the Contents of
the Chapters in the Second Part of
the Historie of Great Britannie.
            
               The first Booke.
               
                  
                     A Repetition of the Contents of the former part. A briefe relation
of the condition of the Britans vnder the Picts and
Scottishmen, from the Romans departure thence, vntill the beginning
of the raigne of Vortiger, the last Brittish Prince.
page 173
                  The Britans elect Vortiger to be their King. They send for
the Saxons to aide them. The originall and manners of the Saxons.
177
                  The Saxons vanquish the Scottishmen and Picts. Hengist
deviseth how he may get possession of the East part of the Iland. 182
                  
                     Saxons, Iutes and Angles, arrive in Britannie. Vortiger
marrieth Hengists daughter. He is deposed. 186
                  
                     Vortimer succeedeth his father in the government. Vortiger
is restored. The most noble of the Britans, are trecherously murdered
by the Saxons vpon Salisburie Plaines. 190
                  The calamities of the Britans. The professors of Christian religion
in Britannie, are persecuted by the Saxons; whose idolatry and
superstitious rites are described. 193
                  
                     Germanus the Bishop, conducteth the Armie of the Christian
Britans against their enemies, (being Pagans) who by his meanes
are defeated. He departeth out of Britannie. 196
                  Aurelianus Ambrosius, aydeth the Britans against the Saxons.
The valiant acts of Arthur the Warlike. 198
                  The Britans flie into Wales and Cornewall, where they seate

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
themselves. The Saxons and English possesse the greatest part of
the Ile, which is afterwards divided into several Principalities. 201
               
            
            
               The second Booke.
               
                  THe Principality of the Kentish-Saxons established by Hengist,
whom Vsk, Otta, and Ermeric succeede in the governement.
Austen the Monke is sent from Rome by Gregorie the
Great, to preach the Christian faith to the Saxons and English.
He landeth in Kent, where he is curteously entertained by Ethelbert
the Prince of that Countrie. 209
                  
                     Austen converteth divers of the Saxon and English from Paganisme
to Christianitie. The cause that first moved Gregorie the
Great to intend their conversion. Austen is consecrated chiefe Bishop
of the English Nation, by the Bishop of Arles in France. He
advertiseth the Bishop of Rome, of the successe of his voyage into
Britannie, and requireth directions touching the Ecclesiasticall government
to be there established. 212
                  Instructions sent to Austen from the Bishop of Rome, for the
ordering and governement of the new Church in Britannie. The
primacie of the Sea of Canterbury. The first English Bishops of
London and Yorke. 214
                  
                     Austen receiveth the Pall from Rome. Gregorie the Great,
sendeth gratulatorie letters to Ethelbert, who is converted to the
faith, being the first Christian Prince of the English Nation. The
Church of Saint Paul in London is founded. Melitus, the first
Bishop there in the Saxons time. Iustus the first Bishop of Rochester.
Contention betweene the English and Brittish Cleargy,
about the celebration of the feast of Easter. 217
                  
                     Austen calleth a Synod to reconcile the differences betweene the
Brittish and English Cleargie. The Brittish Bishops aske counsell
of an Anchorite, whether they should conforme themselves to such
things as Austen the Monks should require of them. They refuse
to accept him for their Arch-bishop. Austen appointeth Laurentius
                     
to succeede him in the Sea of Canterburie. He dieth. 220
                  
                     Ethelbert the Prince, provideth for the maintenance of religious
persons. Hee ordaineth lawes for civill government, publishing
the same in the English tongue. Edbald his sonne succeedeth him
in the Principalitie of the Kentish-Saxons. His Apostacie, Repentance.
Death. 222
                  
                     Ercombert succeedeth Edbald in the Principalitie. The institution
of Lent. Honorius the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, divideth
his Province into Parishes. Deus-Dedit succeedeth Honorius
in the Sea of Canterbury. Egbert ruleth the Kentish-Saxons
after the death of Ercombert. Theodorus the Arch-bishop
of Canterbury, expelleth Wilfrid out of the Sea of Yorke. His
learning in Divinitie and Philosophie. His estimation in the Court of
Rome. 225
                  
                     Lothar (by intrusion) succeedeth Egbert his brother in the government.
The West-Saxons invade the Province of Kent.
Cuthbert Arch-bishop of Canterbury, calleth a Synod for reformation
of abuses in the Clergy. The succession of the Kentish
Princes, from Lothar to Alrich. Kent is subdued, and annexed to
the Principalitie of the West-Saxons. 227
                  ¶The Principalitie of the South-Saxons established by Ella. Cissa
his youngest sonne, succeedeth him therein. Edilwalch the first
Christian Prince of the South-Saxons. 233
                  Variance between the Arch-bishops of Canterbury and Yorke.
Wilfrid chiefe Bishop of the Northumbers, (expulsed from his
owne Sea at Yorke) flieth into Sussex, where he converteth the inhabitants
to the Christian faith. Hee is curteously entertained by
Edelwalch the Prince, who assigneth to him the Ile of Selesey, for
an Episcopall Sea. The South-Saxons are brought vnder the obedience
of the West-Saxon Princes. 235
                  ¶The Principalitie of the Mercians, erected by Creda the Saxon.
Penda persecuteth the Christians in his Province. Peda succeedeth
Penda his father in the governement. He marrieth the
daughter of Oswin, Prince of the Northumbers, and receiveth
the Christian faith. 241
                  
                     Oswin Prince of the Northumbers, ruleth the Mercians after
the death of Peda, till he is deposed by Wulfere, the brother of
Peda. Lichfield is made a Bishops Sea for the Province of the

                     Mercians. Chadde is Bishop of that place. Wulfere is christned.
Ethelred his brother succeedeth him in the Principalitie. He foundeth
a Bishops Sea at Worcester. He resigneth his governement,
and goeth to Rome, where both himselfe and Kinred his nephew,
take vpon them the habit of religion. Celred his sonne succeedeth
him. 243
                  
                     Ethelbald succeedeth Celred in the governement. He is reproved
by Bonifacius an Englishman, (Bishop of Vtricht in Holland)
for his lascivious life. His repentance. He erecteth the Monasterie
of Crowland. He is slaine in battaile. 245
                  
                     Offa ruleth the Mercians. Hee foundeth the Monastery of
Saint Albans. He maketh a ditch to divide the Territories of the
English and Walshmen. Kenelmus the Martyr. The Catalogue
of the Mercian Princes, from Offa, vntill the West-Saxons
obtained their Principality. 248
                  
                     
                        •
                      The Principalitie of the East-Saxons, erected by Erchenwin.
Sebert the first Christian Prince. Melitus the first Bishop of the
East-Saxons, hath his Sea at London. Saint Pauls Church
there founded by Ethelbert (the first Christian Prince of the Kentish-Saxons.)
The Church at Westminster founded by Sebert.
Cedda (afterward called St. Chadde) preacheth the Gospel to
the East-Saxons. Sigher and Sebbi, ioyntly rule the Province.
252.
                  The Devotion, Chastitie, and Charitie of Sebbi the Prince. The
manner of his death. Offa resigneth the governement, and goeth to
Rome, where he entreth into religion. Egbert the West-Saxon
Prince, obtaineth the Principalitie of the East-Saxons. 254
                  ¶The Principalitie of the East-Angles erected by Vffa. Faelix
a Burgundian, preacheth the faith to the East-Angles. His
Episcopall Sea at Dunwich in Suffolke. Sebert the first Christian
Prince, resigneth his government to Egrick, and entereth into
a Monasterie, from whence he is drawne forth by his subiects, when
the Mercians invade his Province. He is slaine in battaile with
Egrick, whom Ana succeedeth in the government. 259
                  
                     Athelhere the brother of Ana, ruleth the East-Angles. He is
slaine by Oswin, Prince of the Northumbers. S. Ethelbert is
murthered by Offa, Prince of the Mercians. Offa having made
a voyage into the Holy-Iland, dieth in his returne homewards.
                  
                     
                     Edmund succeedeth Offa in the government. The Martyrdome
of S. Edmund by the pagan Danes. The Monastery of S. Edmunds-bury
in Suffolke erected. The principality of the East-Angles
annexed to that of the West-Saxons. 261
                  ¶The Principality of the Northumbers divided into two Provinces,
namly Deira and Bernitia, which are vnited by Ethelrick.
Ethelfrid defeateth the Britans, and killeth the Monks of Bangor.
Edwin the first Christian Prince. Paulinus preacheth the
faith to the Northumbers, and hath a Sea a signed to him at
Yorke. The death of Edwin. 267
                  
                     Oswald ruleth the Northumbers. He is slaine in battaile against
Penda the Mercian Prince. He is honoured with the title
of a Martyr. Oswin his brother succeedeth him. A Bishops Sea
at Lichfield. Egfrid the Prince, removeth Bishop Wilfrid from
his Sea at Yorke. Ceolnulph and Egbert, successively ruling,
give over the government to enter into religion. Venerable Bede
liveth in the time of Ceolnulph. The Northumbers are brought
vnder the subiection of the West-Saxons. 271
                  The principalitie of the West-Saxons, established by Cerdic.
Berinus preacheth the Christian faith to the West-Saxons. The
towne of Dorchester assigned to him for a Bishops Sea. Kinegles
the first Christian Prince. Winchester is made a Bishops Sea by
Kennewalch the West-Saxon Prince. Ceadwall (resigning
the government to Ina) goeth to Rome, where he dieth. 277
                  
                     Ina succeedeth Ceadwall in the government of the West-Saxons.
Peterpence first paied to Rome. The Bishopricke of the
West-Saxons divided into two Seas. Lawes made by Ina the
Prince. The Church at Wells made a Bishops Sea. The first arrivall
of the Danes in Britannie, in the time of Britric. Egbert
the West-Saxon Prince, subdueth divers Provinces, which he annexeth
to his owne Principality. 281
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧The succession of the Kings of
England from Egbert the first
English Monarch, vntill the
Norman Conquest.
            
               1 Egbert raigned thitie seven yeares.
               2 Ethelwulfe (the sonne of Egbert) twentie yeares.
               3 Ethelbald, (the eldest sonne of Ethelwulfe) five yeares.
               4 Ethelbert, (the second sonne of Ethelwulfe) five yeares.
               5 Ethelred (the third sonne of Ethelwulfe) five yeares.
               6 Alfred, (the yongest sonne of Ethelwulfe, 29. yeares.
               7 Edward (surnamed the Elder) twentie three yeares.
               8 Athelstane, (the eldest sonne of Edward) sixteene yeares.
               9 Edmund (the second sonne of Edward) six yeares.
               10 Edred (the yongest sonne of Edward) nine yeares:
               11 Edwin (the elder sonne of Edmond) foure yeares.
               12 Edgar, surnamed the Peaceable (the yonger sonne of
Edmond) sixteene yeares.
               13 Edward, surnamed the Martyr (the elder sonne of Edgar)
foure yeares.
               14 Ethelred, surnamed the Vnreadie, (the yonger sonne of
Edgar,) thirtie seven yeares.
               15 Edmund, surnamed Ironside (the sonne of Ethelred)
in whose time the Danes possessed the greatest part of
England.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧The succession of the Princes of
Denmarke in the Kingdome
of England.
            
               1 Cnute raigned nineteene yeares.
               2 Harold the first, surnamed Hare-foote (the Bastard
of Cnute) foure yeares.
               3 Hardy-Cnute, (the sonne of Cnute) two yeares.
               16 Edward the Confessor, raigned twentie foure yeares.
               17 Harold the second, the vsurper.
               18 William Duke of Normandie, surnamed the Conqueror.
               
            
         
         
            
            The beginning of the reigne of
Egbert the first English
Monarch.
            
               EGBERT. I: SAX: MONARCH:
               portrait of Egbert
            
            
               VPon report of the death of Britric,
Egbert with great speed returned
out of France, where (during the
time of his abode) he had served
with good commendation in the
warres, vnder Charles the Great,
by meanes whereof (his reputation
encreasing among his
owne Country men) he was thought worthy of the
government, before he obtained it: Besides, the Nobilitie
of his blood, & the pusillanimitie of the late Prince

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
his predecessor, seemed to adde more sufficiencie to
his owne merit.
            At his first entrance he assayled the Cornish and
Walsh-men, who commonly vpon the change of Governors,
vsed to make incursions into the Provinces
next adioyning to them, continuing their claime
(as it were) to those countries, from which the Britans
(their ancestors) had beene expelled; and though formerly
they had thereby sustained many, and great
losses: yet it well appeared, that they had not altogither
lost their wonted courage, hereditarie to that warlike
Nation. The Cornish-men being first subdued, he
employed his whole forces against the Walsh, whom
he earnestly pursued, never desisting, vntill he had pierced
into the verie vtmost limits of Wales, vpon the
Westerne Sea. This fortunate proceeding, bred both
enuy and iealousie in diverse Princes of the land, specially
in Bernulph the governour of the English-Mercians,
who thought it a necessarie point of policie to make
opposition betimes, lest the West-Saxons growing too
great, the Principality of Mercia might be endangered:
considering withall, that it would be more advantageable
to make an offensive warre, then to rest meerely
vpon defence, wherein the perill and hazard was likely
to be as great, as in the other: the gaine and glory much
lesse. Herevpon he entred the Province of the West-Saxons,
with a huge armie, consisting of men (for the
most part,) vnmeete for militarie service, as being by
long ease and idlenesse corrupted, and become faint
hearted, and vnwealdie, so that at the first assault (made
by their enemies) they turned their backs, and being
confounded by their owne numbers, were over whelmed
one vpon an other in their flight.
            
               
The fortune of this battaile did cut in sunder the verie
sinewes of the Mercian government, which soone
after (as vnable to support it self any longer) fell to the
principalitie of the West-Saxons. And now Egbert
conceaving hope of like successe, in attempting the
Conquest of the other provinces, and knowing well,
that the Kentish Prince was then scarce setled in his
government, and hated of his subjects, he supposed,
a fit oportunitie was offered, to bring that part of the
Ile also vnder subjection; and thereupon, sent his sonne
with an armie to invade it, appointing Alstan the warlike
Bishop of Shirburne, and VValhard (a man of good
reputation for armes in those times) to assist him, with
direction and advice in the prosecution of the warre,
which was begun and ended prosperously both in one
yeare.
            In the meane while, the East-Saxons being taught
by their neighbors example, how much better & more
safe it is to prevent the calamities of an invasion by
yeelding obedience, then by standing vpon termes of
defiance (where there is no hope to preuail) voluntarily
submitted themselves. But the Northumbers held out yet
longer: making open resistance against the VVest Saxons,
till partly by their owne civil discord, and partly by the
irruption of the Danes (that annoyed their coasts) they
were glad to seek the ayd and protection of the VVest-Saxons,
as holding it a better course in that case of necessitie,
to become subiect to a nation that they knew,
then to be made slaves to strangers.
            Thus were the Principalities of the Kentish▪
                and
East-Saxons (with the English-Mercians and Northumbers)
brought vnder Egberts obedience, 
                  〈…〉
                greatest
part of the Ile made, in a maner, one Monarchie,

which forme of government it seemed in some sort to
retaine, even during the continuance of the seven-fold
regiment of the English-Saxons, amongst whom some
one Prince was alwaies of greater power then other, &
had a right of superioritie above the rest. Neither was
there any thing now wanting, for the establishment of
an absolute governmnt; for the VValsh-men (the posterity
of the antient Britans) were for the most part slaine
in battell, & those that survived were vtterly disarmed,
and thrust into a corner of the Ile. The citie of Chester
(their strongest hold) was possessed by the English, with
out al hope to be recovered. As for the South-Saxons, &
East-English, (whose Provinces remained as yet vnconquered)
they were but a handfull in comparison of the
rest, & more likely to seeke the assurance of their estates
by a reasonable composition, then by standing any long
time vpon defence, if they should be assailed.
            But Egbert (knowing well that there was as much
wisdome requisite in the keeping and well ordering, as
there had beene valor shewed in the getting of those
Provinces) held a generall assembly at VVinchester, (the
chiefe Citie of the VVest-Saxon Princes) where he was
with great and vnusuall ceremonies of state, declared
King.
            Then for the vniting and setling of the Soveraigntie
in himselfe & his successors, he ordained that the Inhabitants
(who had been a long time distinguished by diverse
names,) should now be made an entire nation,
and being governed by one Prince, should bear iointly
one name: & to that end he commanded by publike Edict,
that the several Provinces (so vnited) shuld for ever
after he called Angles-land, which by a contraction of
the word, or corruption of the time was afterwards (as

at this day it is) called England. For, the memorie of the
Iutes being long since worn out, & the name of the Saxons
now suppressed by edict, the Angles only remained,
who in respect of their number might seem to chalenge
by right the denomination: and it is certaine,
that the Inhabitants of the greatest part
of the Ile, were (many yeares
before) commonly called
Angles, or English.
            
         
         
            
            
            Certaine short Notes touching the
Roman state militare, for the better vnderstanding
of the first Part of this Historie:
namely, for the helpe of such as are
ignorant in the ancient
Roman Stories,
            THe forces which the Romans vsed in their foreine
warres,The Legionary forces. consisted of Legions and Aydes.
            
            The Legions were generally divided into Footmen,
& Horsemen, whose number was oft times changed,
according to the difference of times, & alteration
of the state; the Citie of Rome being first governed by
Kings: afterwards by the Senate, and people vnder the
Consuls, and Tribunes (which was commonly called
The free State, and, Time of Libertie:) and lastly, by the
Emperors.
            The Legion vnder the first Emperors (for to speake
of former times is not so proper to this purpose) consisted
of 6000. Foot, and 600 Horse, or there-abouts.
            The chiefe Officer of the Legion, was called Legatus
Legionis, (Lievtenant of the Legion,) who had the
principall charge as well of Horse as Foot, vnder the
Lievtenant generall of the Armie, or Governor of the
Province for the Emperor; which Lievtenant, and Governor
is commonly called in the Roman storie Legatus,
or Propretor, as the Governor for the Senate and people,
was called Proconsull; [for some Provinces were at
the disposition of the Emperors only, and others were

assigned by the Senate and People.]
            The inferior Officers of the Legion, were the Centurion,
Ensign-bearers, &c.
            
            The Footmen in the Legion, were equally divided
into ten Cohorts, or Companies, whereof each one had
a Superintendent Officer.
            The 600. Horse in the Legion, were divided into ten
Troopes, called Turma
                     •
                  : everie Troope containing
three Decuries, or Thirty Horse, over whom were placed
Officers called Decuriones, that had everie one the particular
charge of ten Horse.
            The chiefe Officer of the Troope, was called Praefectus
Turmae.
            
            In the Legion none were to be inrolled for Soldiers,
but Citizens of Rome, and men of ingenious professions.
            The additions of number, as namely, the First, Second,
Third Legion, &c were given to the Legions at first,
in regard of the time and order of mustering, and became
afterwards Surnames, togither with other additions
of place, person, and qualitie, imposed either vpon
accident, or for distinctions sake.
            ¶The Aydes, or Auxiliarie forces,Auxiliarie forces. sent from forreine
Countries (being by league and contract bound to assist
the Romans in their warres) were divided into companies
of Foot, called Cohortes, and wings of Horse,
which they termed Alae.
            
            Everie Cohort conteined six hundred Foot, whose
chiefe Officer was called Praefectus.
            
            There were eight Cohortes commonly assigned for
the Aydes of one Legion.
            
            Everie Ala, or wing of Horse, contained about three
hundred, whose chiefe Officer was also called Praefectus,
and the inferior Officers [Decuri
                     •
                  nes.]
            
               
There were commonly two of these wings assigned
(togither with the eight Cohorts of Foot above
named) for the Aydes of one Legion.
            
            Who so desireth to be more particularly instructed herein:
let them read the learned; and judiciall Annotations
vpon Tacitus, translated by Sir Henrie Savile Knight;
whence I haue extracted these notes, as also borowed
a great part of the Translation it selfe, as may appeare
in the second Booke of the first Part of this worke.
         
         
            
            The names of certain Writers of the
Roman, and English Storie, out of
whose workes, the matter of the precedent
Historie hath beene) for
the most part) collected.
            
               Writers of the Roman Storie.
               
                  IVlius Caesar, his Commentaries, de bello Gallico.
                  
                  
                     
                        Cor. Tacitus.
                        
                           Dio: Cassius, his Bookes of History.
                        His Annales, translated into English by
Richard Grenoway.
                        
                        His first foure Bookes of Historie, and the
life of Iulius Agricola translated into
English by sir Henrie Savile knight.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ammianus Marcellinus, his 18. Bookes of Historie.
                  Master Camden, his Britannia.
                  
                     The Writer of the Booke entitled, The three Conversions
of England from Paganisme to Christian religion.
               
            
            
               Writers of the English Storie.
               
                  Venerable Bede, his Historie of the Church of England.
                  William the Monke of Malmesburie, his Bookes of the
deedes of the English Kings and Bishops.
                  
                  Master Camden, his Booke (Britannia.)
                  Iohn Stow, his Annals.
                  
                     The above named Writer of the Booke entituled, The three
Conversions of England from Paganisme to Christian
Religion.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  Faults escaped in the Printing.
                  
                     Page 9. line 5. recovered Caesars
Tent, where
                     reade
                     hee came to Casars presence, of
vvhom
                  
                  
                     11. 13 out of the Roman Camp
                     out of the view of the Roman Camp
                  
                  
                     13. 4. charged with the Britans
                     
                     charged by the Britans
                     
                  
                  
                     23. 3. Gassibelin
                     Cassibelin
                  
                  
                     27. 10. clyffes of the Ile possessed
                     cliffes of the Ile, which were possessed
                  
                  
                     54. 22. at other times) and more
                     at other times) to attempt, and more
                  
                  
                     57. 7 sweat
                     sweet
                  
                  
                     73. 25. to 
                           •
                        ortefie a worke
                     to fortefie; a worke
                  
                  
                     79. 12. armed at the Mount
                     arrived at the Mount
                  
                  
                     97 figure 2
                           •
                        . Pessenius Niger
                     Pescenius Niger
                  
                  
                     98. fig. 30. Vibius Pallus
                     Vibius Gallus
                  
                  
                     99. fig. 47. Costantius
                     Constantius
                  
                  
                     109. 17. assention
                     ascension
                  
                  
                     113. 7. soldiers, then ranging the
Countries: they wasted
                     soldiers; Then ranging the Countries,
they wasted
                  
                  
                     126. 24. Collianus
                     Lollianus
                  
                  
                     142. 2. Imperiall decree
                     immutable decree
                  
                  
                     150. 8. Bodatria
                     Bodotria
                  
                  
                     162. 26. Roman Artaie
                     
                     Roman Army
                     
                  
                  
                     163. 15. practiseth with an Armie
                     practiseth with the Army
                  
                  
                     163. 21. Aurelianus Victorinus
                     Aurelianus. Victori
                           •
                        us
                  
                  
                     165. 2. Amorica
                     Armorica
                  
                  
                     181. 9. Chessonesus
                     Chersonesus
                  
                  
                     184. 24. breath
                     breach
                  
                  
                     188. 4. attain
                     obtaine
                  
                  
                     192. 15. in actions
                     in action
                  
                  
                     199. 25. nIto
                     Into
                  
                  
                     200. 28. repayred
                     empayred
                  
                  
                     215. 19. and the family
                     and his family
                  
                  
                     223. 17. prefer
                     preserve
                  
                  
                     223. 23. of Northumbers
                     of the Northumbers
                     
                  
                  
                     224. 4. direct
                     divert
                  
                  
                     231. fig. 1. Simen
                     
                     Cimen
                  
                  
                     241. 12. either of them
                     any of them
                  
                  
                     260. 27. Holo
                           •
                        ham
                     Hol
                           ••
                        cham
                  
               
            
            There be divers other errors, which the vnderstanding Reader may easily reforme.
         
      
   