
      
         
            
            
            
               The Triall of Baſtardie: THAT PART OF THE ſecond part of Policie, or maner of Gouernement of the Realme of England: ſo termed, Spirituall, or Eccleſiaſticall.
            Annexed at the end of this Treatiſe, touching the prohibition of marriage, a Table of the Leuitical, Engliſh, and Poſitiue Canon Catalogues, their concordance and difference.
            BY WILLIAM CLERKE.
            Iohn Chriſoſt.
            Nemo verè indè, aut obſcurus, aut clarus eſt.
            
                IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA NULLA.
            
            LONDON, Printed by Adam Jſlip. 1594.
         
         
            
            
            To the right worſhipful Robert Redmayn, doctor of law, Iudge Delegate and Commiſſarie (for the vacancie of the See) within the Citie and dioces of Norwich, increaſe of worſhip, with all health and happineſſe.
            
               THe ſingular good affection (right worſhipfull) I haue reaped at your handes, deſerueth more at mine, than a bare imitation of learning: Neuertheleſſe for the loue you beare me, I haue aduentured (and the rather) to preſent theſe labors, whatſoeuer they may ſeeme vnto you, to ſignifie aſvvel the continuance of my ſtudies, vvherein you haue encouraged me, as to manifeſt that deſire I ſhould haue, to ſhew my ſelfe as vvilling

to be thankfull for a benefite receiued, as any reaſon would I ſhould be. Beſides the argument it ſelf conſidered, our modern natures, and mine owne imperfection togither, might iuſtly moue no leſſe. When therefore I conſidered (firſt) that you fauour the Authour, next, ſo well appointed to defend the worke (the regalitie, laws, and cuſtomes of this land vntouched) I reaſoned thus, Duo vincula fortiora, and ſo it became an oblation vnto you, which accepted, you receiue it from him, vvhoſe heart giueth it freely, and vvithall, that dutie and affection, that your former fauors haue merited: and ſo I reſt your Worſhips in equall duetie and affection.
            
               W. C.
            
         
         
            
            The Preface.
            
               WHen he had handled (that honourable knight, Sir Thomas Smith) in his Repub. Anglorum, amongſt other things, the generall conſent and authoritie, as well of the Prince and nobilitie, as the commons of this land togither; that is to ſay, the Parliament, i. the whole head and bodie of this Realme, as alſo the authoritie of the Prince apart, and had deſcended to the point, viz. How he doth, this head, diſtribute his authoritie and power to the reſt of the members, for the gouernment and common-wealth of the politique bodie of the ſame, and (in the proſecution of that) had diſcuſſed as well at large the maner and forme of the trials or iudgements that be abſolute, here, and definitiue by Parliament, Battell, and the great Aſsiſe: the method he obſerued, and the argument that he handled therein, brought him (at the laſt) and his ſtile, to the court which is ſpirituall, or eccleſiaſticall here in England: ſo termed in the books of law, the Court Chriſtian, or Curia Chriſtianitatis.
            
            
               
This hath equally (with the other) it force, power, authoritie, rule, and iuriſdiction. Briefly it is deſcended from the ſame ſtocke: namely, the imperiall crowne of this land. But this neuertheleſse, though parcell of the ſame gouernment or pollicie, he hath paſſed ouer, onely with a bare mention.
            Neither is it anie maruell: for being (when hee wrote that worke) in the midſt of ſo weightie affaires, ambaſſadour in the court of France: it rather ſeemes, than contrarie, his buſineſse, there, preuented him: how could he otherwiſe, or at the leaſt be iudged ſo, by any probabilitie, being (as he was) of that authoritie in his own profeſsion, viz. Doctor of the ciuill law, haue pictured (as he did) that courſe ſo liuely, where leaſt hee was experienced, and omitted the other?
            The Archbiſhops (he ſaith) and Biſhops haue a certaine peculiar iuriſdiction in teſtaments, legations, tithes, mortuaries, marriages, adulterie, fornication, orders, religion, &c. Theſe (he ſaith be ordered in their courtes, after the faſhion and maner of the law ciuill, or rather cōmon by citation, libel, conteſtationem litis, examination of witneſses priuily, by exceptions, replications apart, and in writing, allegations, matters by ſentences giuen in writing, appellations from one to another, as well à grauamine, as à ſententia definitiua.
            
            
               
Their names he addeth and titles of Procurators, aduocates, aſſeſsors, ordinaries, commiſſaries, &c. far from the maner (as he ſaith, and as it is indeed) of our order in the common lawe of England, that part of the policie or gouernment of the land that hee handled at large, and this is all the light he hath left of the ſpirituall courſe, the other.
            I haue therefore aduentured (gentle reader) to imitate that worthy learned man in his ſecular trials there, in this ſpiritual cogniſance, The triall of Baſtardie here.
            Neuertheleſse, becauſe it ariſeth, the queſtion of Natiuities in the ſecular courts, but incedētly: and the Ordinaries iurisdiction (by conſequence) not ordinarie in that triall, but delegata (as it followeth more at large in this treatiſe:) it muſt, this part of that ſecond part of gouernment, be alwaies vnderſtood, as the iuriſdiction to the Ordinarie is demandata from the prince, and not otherwiſe. I haue therefore compoſed it, and not (I hope) vnaptly, atreatiſe of it ſelfe: and that becauſe the iuriſdiction in this triall is diuerſe from the reſt. This is therefore preſented vnto thee heere: the reſt thou ſhalt haue, if God permit, in the tractat of the Ordinarie.
            
            In the meane time (if it pleaſe thee to accept it) this thou ſhalt haue withall, viz. How the lawes,

how the canons, haue and do either of them eſteem of Baſtardy diuerſly: and how they haue and do, the laws and canons, make their computations (in degrees of conſanguinitie) diuerſly.
            This computation (verily) in degrees in this kind, inconſideratly, that is to ſay, without regard of the laws, and canons, how they repute the ſame, begat in former ages no ſmall error in Genealogies, the laws of Matrimonie, the holy Fathers numeration, and auncient Computation of the Church.
            Of ſuch an effect as this, that infringed ſo long ago the prohibibition of marriage, commended alſo vnto thee here in euery kind, where both the tree, and forbidden fruit is pictured, Eſtimandum eſt, or rather to be feared it is, of ſuch coniunctions had, a baſe kind of people, ignoble, and licentious to be begotten, apt to prouoke in time, euen the reſt to naughtineſſe alſo, and make them become in fine, nor manly in war, nor ſtable in faith, nor honoured of men, nor beloued of God.
            But let no man be here too ſeuere a iudge: for vertue ſomtimes ſprings from lawleſſe knowledge, and vice againe from lawfull: neither let me flatter nor offend: the one is no defence of ſinne, nor the other impeachment of lawfull matrimony: for neyther doth the adulterous child that is vertuous, nor ſhake

off, nor ſhadow his adulterous parents crime, nor the legitimat that is vicious, diſhonour the vndefiled bed. And to this effect it is written, Sicut boni filij adulterorum, nulla eſt defenſio ſic mali filij coniugatorum, nullum eſt crimen nuptiarum.
            
            Let him therfore neuer feare to ſincke, that hath this reſt to beare him, namely, vertue: for though his parents be the worſt, their vileneſse ſhall not blemiſh him at all, if vertue beares him vp: for if themſelues (if conuerts afterwards) their former life deſtroys not, much more their off-ſpring decked with his proper vertue ſhines, and ſhall not be eclipſed with the oprobrious liues of his parents; and why? Non eſt eius culpa qui naſcitur, It is anſwered thus, it is not his default that is borne, Hierom. in Epiſt. cont. Ruph
                     •
                   diſt. 56. c. naſci. but his that doth beget him, the ſeed it ſelfe is not reputed euill: for nature receiuing hir owne, ſhee beſtowes it, ſhe frames it next a bodie, the ſeruing members enſue, Et inter illas ſacri ventris anguſtias, dei manus ſemper operatur: Hence is the fleſh, wilt thou condemne it now? looke at the fleſhly meanes: Non peccat terra quae confouet, non ſemen quod in ſulcis iacitur, non humor, vel calor, quibus temperata frumenta in germen pullulant, ſed (verbigratia) fur & latro: Temper thy iudgement therfore in this behalfe, Quia non in ſeminibus, ſed in voluntate
               
               naſcentis, cauſa vitiorum eſt, atque virtutum. And if a law were made, that ſuch might inherit, the vertuous I meane in the one, before the vitious other, why ſhould not that law be iuſt? the other I call not vniuſt, but yet it is but temporall, and within the libertie of Princes, iuſtly to be altered by the times, though iuſtly they cannot ſtand in one common wealth together: for that that is in preſent beeing bridles now the parent to be father of Legitimation, and the other ſhould bridle (if it were) the ſonne to furniſh himſelfe with vertues, leaſt happily his father ſhuld haue begotten a better ſonne abroad, than all the world can finde at home.
            I would be loath in mouing a charitable iudgement in the ſonne, to ſeeme to giue hope to the father, or libertie to offend, Godforbid. The happieſt off-ſprings they be, and nearer vnto hope (let all mentake me ſo) that be borne De legitima parentum coniunctione, approbata perleges, whereof more at large in this treatiſe: for leauing the adulterous bedde: or knowledge had without ſolemniſed marriage, which alſo we haue touched in the ſame, that knowledge had (in marriage) in conſanguinitie and affinitie, haue been, is, and wilbe in all chriſtian ages to come, reputed for no leſſe, for ſundrie reaſons. And firſt becauſe that naturallie a man

doth owe a certaine honour, reuerence, and feare to his parents, and therefore vnto others of his kinne, which come verie nigh of the ſame, in ſo much that in old time (as Valerius Maximus ſheweth) it was not lawful for the ſonne, to bath in one place with his father, leaſt he ſhould ſee him naked.
            Secondlie, ſuch perſons muſt needes be conuerſant, and in companie together: if nature therefore abhorred not knowledge in ſuch, they ſhould haue too much opportunitie to licentious liuing, whoſe neereneſſe remooueth all ſuſpition from the world. And behold the heathen Philoſopher here. Where 
               Ariſt lib. 2. polit. (ſaith he) a man doth loue his kinſwoman by nature, if there ſhould be put to this the loue of bodily medling, there ſhould be too much heat and feruentneſſe of loue, and too great prouocation to fleſhly luſt, which is contrarie to the chaſtitie of marriage.
            
            Thirdly, ſuch marriages ſhall hinder that mutuall loue and friendſhip, that is both profitable and honeſt to human ſocietie, for when a man doth take a wife that is a ſtranger to him, all the kinred of his wife be knit vnto him by a certaine league of friendſhip and loue, as if they were his owne: this hath nature ordeined alreadie in blood. Hence proceeded the prohibitiō of the Canons, That men and women, to whom loue and concord was thought

both profitable and honeſt, ſhould be knit together by ſundry degrees of kinred, and not that one ſhuld haue many in one, ſed ſingulae ſpargerētur in ſingulos, the Canons tearme them neceſsitudines, which they would haue diſperſed. In the treatiſe of the determinations of the moſt famous and moſt excellent vniuerſities &c. fourth Chap. after the authour (whoſoeuer he was) had cited, touching ſuch vnlawfull marriages, the doctours of the church of Chriſt, that were of greatest authoritie, fame, and renowne, he deſcended to others, which, though not of ſo great authoritie, yet their iudgements for their credit, learning and grauitie, was receiued worthely, amongſt whom he affirmed (to this effect) of an Archbiſhop in this land, viz. being asked by what reaſon the forbidding we ſhould not marrie in cōſanguinitie nor affinitie, had ſo great ſtrength and power in the church? anſwered. The laws and Canons of the church, be full of this commandement, and there be many decrees of the old fathers alſo, that we ſhould not marrie with any of our blood, &c. and as for the cauſe and reaſon of this commaundement, albeit I might ſay that the ſimple and plaine reaſon is, to obey the power and authoritie of them to whom Chriſt ſaid, It is not you your ſelfe that ſpeaketh, but the ſpirit of your father
               
               which ſpeaketh in you, &c. yet for all that, by the conſideration and marking alſo of holy ſcripture, I am woont to thinke thus with my ſelfe, amongſt the old & ancient people of the Iews, it was not lawful for any perſon to marry with any out of his tribe: and when I doubted and ſought a reaſon why ſo, the daughters of Zelophehad, came to my remembrance, &c. But in this caſe Moſes gaue an anſwere to their carnalities, That they ſhould not marrie out of their tribe: but the goodneſſe and perfection of vs that be Chriſtian folke, is not on this faſhion, for ſeeing our heritage is God, of whom it is ſpoken, God is loue and charitie, as the Iewes vſed a law agreeable to their heritage, ſo we ought to maintaine a law for ours, which is the law of loue and charitie.
            
            There is light & darkneſſe, good and euill, there be lawfull and expedient, lawfull not expedient, nor lawfull, nor expedient marriages; theſe be ſeen in diuers families, in outward degrees, in nigh kinred: with this, I commend to the reader the admonition of the Engliſh church, that is, to conſider in contracts of matrimonie, what is lawfull, what honeſt, what expedient.
         
         
            
            Gregor. Nazian. de bono Coniugij.
            COniugium radix & fulcrum nobile vitae,
            
               Coniugium praeſtat, ſi ſis ſine robore vires:
            
            Sic ſumus inter nos, aureſquè, manuſquè, pedeſquè,
            Mutua ſic duros emollit cura labores,
            Mutua ſic gemina dulcedine gaudia creſcunt,
            Quin deſiderium, conceſſo limite, claudit
            Coniugium, cuſtoſquè aeternùm obſignat amores:
            Vt ſunt carne ſimul iuncti, ſic mente cohaerent,
            Inter ſequè pijs miſcent incendia Flammis.
            Et quia praeſidij eſt, rerumquè hic maior egeſtas,
            Foemina virquè deo, maiori pectore fidunt.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ A Table of the contents of this Booke.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. I. OF poſſeſsions and natiuities, their cogniſance and triall. fol. 1
               
                  CHAP. II. The canonicall and ſecular computations in conſanguinitie, their confuſion. The ſequel. The Lateran ſynod. The anſwere of the Prelates, to the kings writ of Baſtardie. Their inſtance. The concluſion of he nobles at Merton. fol. 7
               
                  CHAP. III. The tranſmiſsion or writ of certificat to the Ordinarie. The Statutarie antecedents to the ſame. fol. 24
               
                  CHAP. IIII. The Ordinarie. His office, and order in proceeding.

fol. 31
               
                  CHAP. V. Of matrimonie, and legitimate iſſue. fol. 39
               
                  CHAP. VI. Of conſanguinitie or bloud: The figure and declaration thereof. fol. 51
               
                  CHAP. VII. Of affinitie or alliance by marriage: The figure and declaration thereof. fol. 58
               
                  CHAP. VIII. Of the prohibition Leuiticall. fol. 67
               
                  CHAP. IX. Of the prohibition Canonicall. fol. 71
               
                  CHAP. X. Of the ſucceſsion of the ſtatutes in marriage: and their force at this day. fol. 77
            
         
         
            Faults eſcaped in the printing.
            Pag. 15. line, 26. for that is deſcended, read, from whom is deſcended. Pag. 41. line, 17. for exceſſe, read acceſſe. Pag. 48. line, 24. in the note, for Patrimonium, read Matrimonium. Pag. 21. line 3. in the note, for A2. 28. read an. 25. cap. 19.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Triall of Baſtardie.
            
               CHAP. I. 
               
                  Of poſſeſsions and Natiuities, their cogniſance and triall.
               
               
                  THe iſſue of the defiled bed, before we come to handle it, either in it ſelfe or the contrary, leaſt happily the readers ſhould (ſome of them) looke for another iſſue here, than I know they be likely to finde, I meane a relation of pleadings in poſſeſſions, after the common lawes: I aduertiſe them before hand, howſoeuer this may ſeeme to fit the argument, Haec non iudicantur in Eccleſia, The church hath no cogniſance of them.
               The poſſeſſion of Radulphus and Agatha his mother, left them by Radulphus the father and grandfather to Agatha and hir ſonne, when he went to Ieruſalem, impeached afterwards by F. great vncle to Radulphus the ſonne, in that he obiected, this Agatha was begotten by Radulphus hir father, of Au
                        •
                     line the wife of Alan, in the time of Alex. 3. manifeſteth as much in the Canons. Cap. cauſam quae. Qui ſil. ſunt legit. For when the incidēt queſtion of hir natiuitie aroſe before the ſecular Iudges, it

came in the end to the audience of Alexander, who in his commiſſion in that cauſe of the Iuriſdiction of the church, to the BB. of London & Worceſter, (hauing touched the poſſeſſory Iudgement of the king) countermaunded immediatly againe his former reſcript in theſe wordes, viz. Cauſam quae inter R. & F. ſuper eo quod mater dicti R. dicitur non fuiſse de legitimo matrimonio nata agitari dinoſcitur, vobis commiſimus terminandam: verū quod literis noſtris inſeri fecimus, v
                        •
                     praefato R. poſſeſſionem omnium quorum poſſeſsor extitit, quando Auus ſuus proficiſcendi Hieroſolimam iter arripuit, ante principalis cauſae ingreſſum faceretis reſtitui, ſi eadē poſſeſsione fuiſſet per violentiam ſpolitatus. Nos attendentes quod ad Regem pertinet, non ad eccleſiam, de talibus poſſeſsionibus iudicare, ne videamur iuri regis Anglorum detrahere, qui ipſarum iudicium ad ſe aſſorit pertinere, f. v. mandamus, quatenus regi poſſeſsionum iudicium relinquētes, de cauſa principali, videlicet vtrum mater predicti R. de ligitimo ſit matrimonio nata, plenius cognoſcatis, & cauſam huiuſmodi terminetis. &c. that is to ſay, The cauſe or queſtion notoriouſly knowne to be moued betweene R. and F. touching that, that the mother of the ſayd R. is affirmed not to be borne in lawfull matrimonie, we haue committed to you to be determined; howbeit, where we cauſed to be inſerted in the ſame our letters, that you ſhould ſee the poſſeſſion of all things reſtored to the aforeſaid R. that he poſſeſſed when his grandfather tooke his iourney to Hieruſalem, before your entrance to the principall buſines, (if violently firſt he he had beene ſpoiled of the ſame) weighing that the Cogniſance of ſuch poſſeſſions appertaineth not to the church, but to the king, & leaſt we ſhould ſeem to

derogate from the right of the king of England, who claimeth they pertain to himſelf, we require you (leauing the poſſeſſorie iudgement to the king) that you take abſolute knowledge of the principall cauſe: that is to ſay, whether the forenamed R. his mother bee borne in lawfull matrimonie, & determine the ſame.
               The politique bodie of this land conſidered as it is compacted of all ſortes and degrees of people, deuided onely in tearmes, and by names of ſpiritualtie, and temporaltie: hauing auctoritie, the one part, commonly called the Engliſh Church, to declare, interprete, and ſhew any cauſe, queſtion, or doubt of the Law diuine, or ſpirituall learning, and to adminiſter ſuch offices and dueties as to their roomes ſpirituall doth appertaine: the other, the lay or temporall Iudges, for triall of propertie of landes, ſecular contentions, as alſo the conſeruation of the people of this Realme in quiet and peace, and howe they doe, both their auctorities and iuriſdictions conioyne together in the due adminiſtration of iuſtice, the one to helpe the other, appointed ſo, ordained and inſtituted to that purpoſe and end, that the kings & queens of the ſame (according to their plenarie power from God) might be furniſhed of themſelues to render iuſtice and finall determination to all ſubiects, and in all cauſes, as they haue and doe at this day hold (of God) to themſelfe, and by their ſword, their people and crowne: acknowledging no ſuperiour on earth, without reſtraint or prouocation, to any pope, prince, or potentate in the world, 24. H. 8. cap. 12. in prohem. ad idem de repub. Anglo. may giue a light to that we haue ſaid of the ſpirituall and ſecular powers before.
               
                  
For howſoeuer they may ſeeme to be diſtinguiſhed in themſelues, they be but one body, hauing but one onely head, the royall and kingly maieſty of this land, where the Ariſtocraticall gouernmentes and Democraticall, haue been euermore ſtrange vnto vs: for deuided in times paſt into many & ſundry kings, reigning ech abſolutly in his country, not vnder the ſubiection of other, till by fighting, the vanquiſhed alwaies falling to the augmentation of the vanquiſher, it grew at the laſt into one Monarchy, neuer did any take inueſtiture at the Emperors hand of Rome, or any other ſuperior forraigne prince or Potentate, but held (as I ſayd before) and as they haue, doe, and will hold of none but of God, their people and crowne.
               Hence it is taken for an Empire in the world: wherof (as did Vlpian de publico romanorum iure) I may as boldly write viz. Huius ſacroſanctae, & Auguſtae ciuitatis ſtatus, in ſacris, & ſacerdotibus, & magiſtratibus conſiſtit: that is to ſay, The ſtate of this imperiall common-wealth, conſiſteth in holie thinges, and in prieſts, and magiſtrates: for ſo we repute no leſſe the magiſtrate thā the prieſthood, to be ordained of God; as the apoſtle Rom. 13. teacheth, & whereof Duarenus dilateth thus, viz. Sunt cnim magiſtratus & ſacerdotium velut vnius corporis, id eſt eccleſiae, duo membra precipua: quorum alterum alterius auxilio eget. Verily they are (ſaith De ſacris eccleſiae miniſt. ac benefic. lib. 1. cap. 1. 
                  Duarenus) the magiſtracie and prieſthood, as it were of one bodie, that is to ſay, two principall members of the Church; hauing need the one of the others aſſiſtance. And in another place, Nam etſi religionis & ſacrorum procuratio omnibus alijs rebus nobis antiquior eſſe debeat, tamen imperio
                  
                  magiſtratus ad tranquilitatem inter homines tuendam est opus, ſine qua; ne religio quidem couſiſlere poteſt: Itaque Iuſtinianus noſter maxima dei inter homines dona eſſe ait, 
                  Nouel. 6. 
                  ſacerdotium, & imperium, quorum vnum diuinarum rerum adminiſtratio, alterum humanarum gubernatio moderatioqueſit: non enim (vt apud hebreos quondam atque Romanos ijdem & reges erant & pontifices) 
                  Euſeb. lib. 1. Hiſt. Eccleſ. c. 5. c. cleros. 21. Diſt. 
                  ita in Chriſtiana repub. idem homo vtran
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      perſonam ſuſtinet, & vtrumque munus exequitur; ſed duae ſunt functiones, diuerſae, quarum vnaqueque plurimum operis habet ac difficultatis: communis tamen eſt vtrinſque finis, & ſcopus: nempe religionis, & mandatorum diuinorum, in otto & pace conſeruatio. Hinc Iuſtinianus noſter de conſenſu & concordia rerum diuinarum & humanarum, ſacerdotij, & imperij loquens, ſimphoniae verbo vtitur: that is to ſay, The charge of religion, & of ſacred things, though it ought to be (in antiquitie vnto vs) preferred before all things els, the power notwithſtāding of the magiſtrate is needfull for the preſeruation of peace amongſt men; without the which religion verily cannot conſiſt: Iuſtinian therefore affirmeth Prieſthood and the Magiſtracie, the chiefeſt giftes of God amongſt men, in that the one is the adminiſtration of diuine thinges; the gouernment the other, and moderation of things humane: for not (as in times paſt the ſame were kinges and biſhops with the Hebrewes and Romanes) ſo in a Chriſtian common-wealth now, the ſame man beareth and executeth the perſon and office of them both; It is and was of anciēt time due to the imperiall crowne of this realme to haue the ſoueraignty and rule ouer all maner perſōs borne within the ſame whether eccleſiaſticall or lay: but the kings and queenes, neither haue, doe, nor will challenge authoritie and power of miniſterie of diuine offices in the church. Jniunct. an 1. Eliz. tit. Admonition.
                   but they are two diuerſe functions, requiring either of them great labour and difficultie. The end and ſcope notwithſtanding of either, common to both; the conſeruation namely of religion, and

diuine commandementes, in quiet and peace. Iuſtinian hereupon treating of the concordance, and agreement of diuine and humane things, Prieſthood, and the Magiſtracie, vſeth the worde ſymphonia, as much as concent or harmonie in muſicke.
               But to the ſtate of the cauſe, after the Latines, the iſſue in the common-law, in the canon and ciuill lawes, the incident queſtion, Baſtardie, whoſe triall our argument is, and whether wee will haſten our ſtile: the incident queſtion I call it, for it is not ſprung where it riſeth in the ſecular court tanquam emergens in iudicio, (ſuch as be ſaid in the lawes we mentioned laſt) to haue originem nouam poſt iudicium incohatum, reſpicientes proceſſum; but incidently, reſpecting onely merita negotij principalis, and not the proceſſus at all.
               Here (affirmed that reuerend doctor Sir Thomas Smith, 
                  De repub. Anglo. lib. 2. cap. 12. ſpeaking of the iſſue generallie) is the place where the ſtrife & debate remaineth, as a water held in a darke and cloſe veſſell iſſueth out, is auoyded, and emptied, and no where els: and that ſtroke (ſaith he) well ſtroken, is the departing of all the controuerſies.
               Theſe we may leaue to whom they be more familiar in their termes, than they can, or at the leaſt is neceſſarie (touching this triall) they ſhould be made interpreted, to the common capacitie of the reſt. Hence iſſueth out our purpoſe: that is to ſay, the incident queſtion (effected) of the natiuitie, before the ſecular Iudges, in ſecular cauſes of poſſeſſion; the kings or queenes writ enſueth to this effect as followeth Infra. ca. 3. to the Ordinarie, and there his Iuriſdiction beginneth.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II. 
               
                  The Canonicall and ſecular Computations (in conſanguinitie) their confuſion. The ſequell. The Lateran ſynod. The anſwere of the Prelates to the kinges writ of Baſtardie. Their Inſtance. The concluſion of the Nobles at Merton.
               
               
                  IN the Romane Ciuill and Canon ſupputatiō of degrees, there inſueth nowe a difference to be handled in them: that is to ſay, a diſcent, or diſcord, or that which is more, a preiudice, and a violence too, to the Lawes, to the Canons, and either ſo to other: howbeit not in themſelues, but their application and practiſe: like a well tuned Inſtrument vnskilfully handled. Hence indured the ſecular lawes of this land an iniurie (in their poſſeſſorie Iudgementes) by the Canons, as alſo did in former time the Canons, by the ſecular ſort, till king Henry the third reformed (in the end) the one, the other, the Lateran ſynod; wherof wee ſhall treat ſeuerally in their places, but firſt of the violence to the Canons.
               For declaration of this, (by the way) Computatiō muſt firſt be conſidered of (in degrees of conſanguinitie or bloud) & how it is diſtinguiſhed by Canonicall and Legal: the computation canonicall is declared in the chapter of conſanguinitie hereafter, the legal or ſecular computation we haue briefly related

here, and that for two cauſes, the one (hauing occaſion to ſpeak of the preiudice to the canons) it is deriued from it, the other it ſhall explane the Canonical computation the better, therefore it is pictured here, according to the ſecular emperor Iuſtinian his lawes, to the end (I ſay) that compared with the figure enſuing of conſanguinity it may ad the greater light vnto it, and either conſequently vnto other.
               Theſe Legal and Canonical computations, I know not how it came to paſſe, but that I may vſe the wordes of the Canon, Quidam Legum & Canonum imperiti, certaine as well Legiſts as Decretaliſts, ignorant both of the lawes and Canons, confounded them; what violence grew by this to the Canons enſueth, for when it had taken roote, this negligent or malitious error, (for ſo we may coniecture) they could not be ſo ignorant all of them, from whom it ſprang, Cenealogiae terminū Nuptialia iura, numerationem ſanctorū patrum, & antiquam Eccleſiae cōputationem: peruerſa quadam calliditate diſturbare nituntur. It diſturbed, or they diſturbed with it (this error) by their peruerſe ſubtility, the bonds and ſcope of Genealogy, the laws of matrimonie, the holy fathers numeration, and auntient cōputation of the church: and beſides their ſtrange, prophane, and erronious cōputation, which they grounded vpon the ſecular lawes, they determined their Genealogie in the ſixt legal degree, affirming there the Legal computation determined. But what Iuſtinian defined, and vnto what degree, (his ſecular computation) I leaue to Iuſtinianiſtes to define, onely to aunſwere this error, his wordes be theſe, Hactenus oſtendiſse ſufficiat, quemadmodum gradus cognationis
                  
                  numer entur: namque ex his, palam eſt intelligere, quemadmodum vlteriores gradus numerentur: generata quippe perſona, gradum adijcit. When Iuſtinian had extended aſcending, deſcending, and collaterally his numeration, and ſpecified to the ſixth Legal degree; this may ſuffice (ſaith he) touching the computation of degrees in kindred: for by this it is eaſie to nūber the reſt that be further off; foraſmuch as a perſon begotten, begetteth a degree, &c. This touching their errour in determining the Legal computation onelie.
               For their confuſion, I meane of both computations in one: were the infection thereof, as far forgone in marriages with vs, as it was confuted then in the Lateran counſell, we ſhould not, I ſuppoſe (after the phraſe of the ſcripture) come ſo neare to the ſhame of our kindred as nowe we doe: but hereof more, and more fitly hereafter.
               To their period again, their ſeries in their Genealogie was legal: their computation legal, to the ſixt degree: but their termination, there, neither legal, nor Canonicall: What then? Computatis namque gradibus, &c. aut finitur conſanguinitas in Sexto gradu, &c. The Canon asketh this queſtion, viz. (Computation therfore had) doth it determine or not determine conſanguinitie in the ſixth degree? inferring thus: Si autem finitur, fallaces erunt leges quibus iſti vtuntur, qui in decimo gradu ſibi ſuccedere conſanguineos inbent: quod ſi non funitur conſanguinitas in huiuſmodi ſexto gradu, falſidici erunt iſti qui vltra illum ſextum gradum nolunt computare conſanguinitatem: igitur aut leges erunt falſae, aut
                  
                  iſti qui ſic finiunt generationem: ſed vi verdicae leges, & veraces ſunt Canones, dicamus id quod veritas habet, ſcilicet quod non terminatur conſanguinitas in huiuſmodi ſexto gradu, &c: that is to ſay, Verily if it determineth ſo, they be deceiuable lawes which they vſe, that command ſucceſſion in bloud in the tenth degree: but if it determineth not cōſanguinitie in the ſixth degree, they ſhalbe falſe ſayers, that refuſe (in conſanguinitie) to make their computation beyond the ſaid ſixt dedegree: to conclude, the lawes muſt needes be falſe, or they that ſo determine generation. But as the laws be right, and the canons true, ſo let vs perſiſt in that, that trueth it ſelfe poſſeſſeth, namely (touching conſanguinitie in the 6 degree) in not determining there.
               Their numeration remaineth nowe to be ſpoken of, their Series, their order, and (touching the ſame) the cenſure of the Lateran ſynod. Neither would I be taken to impeach their numeration, but the diſguiſed habit they gaue it. For it ſorteth, and ſo it is approoued with the ſecular lawes i. the law of their nation ſo called the Romane ciuil law, as alſo (after the reuerend authous Mr. Bracton, and Mr. Plowden: for ſo they haue applied it either of them in their works) of ours.
               Touching the ſecular computation what may be ſaid for further information therein, wee referre to that demonſtration enſuing to the eye, according to Horace: Certior aure arbiter eſt oculus, that is to ſay, Of the two i. the eye, and the eare, the eye is the certainer iudge. Hinc agrimenſores, and the view de ventre inſpiciendo were & be in vſe in the ciuil law, as alſo (as

occaſion is miniſtred) exerciſed in this land: thus we leaue them (the ſecular computations) to that relation that enſueth of the Lateran ſynod, viz.
               
               
                  Ad ſedem apoſtolicam (for ſo the canon relateth the ſame) perlata eſt queſtio nouitar exorta de gradibus conſanguinitatis, quam quidam legum & canonum imperiti excitantes, eoſdem propinquitatis gradus contra ſacros canones, & eccleſiaſticum morem numerare nituntur: nouo & inandito errore affirmantes, quod germani fatres, vel ſorores, inter ſe, ſint in ſecunda generatione: filij eorum & filiae in quarta, nepotes eorum vel neptes in ſexto, talique more progeniem computantes, in huiuſmodi ſexto gradu eam terminātes, &c. Nos vero (Deo annuente) hanc queſtionem diſcutere curauimus: in ſynodo habita in lateranenſi conſiſtorio, conuocatis ad hoc opus epiſcopis & clericis atque iudicibus diuerſarum prouinciarum: Denique diù ventilatis legibus, & ſacris canonibus, diſtincte inuenimus: ob aliam atque aliam cauſam: alteram legum fieri, alteram canonum computationem. In legibus ſiquidem ob nihil aliud ipſae graduum mentio facta eſt, niſi vt hereditas vel ſucceſsio ab vna ad alteram perſonam (inter conſanguinios) deferatur. In canonibus vero ab hoc progenies computatur, vt aptè monſtretur vſque ad quotam generationem a conſanguineorum nuptijs ſit abſtinendum. Ibi preſcribitur vt hereditas propinquis more legitimo conferatur: hic vero vt ritè & canonice inter fideles nuptiae celebrentur. In legibus aiſtinctè non numerantur gradus, niſi vſque ad ſextam: in canonibus autem vſque ad ſeptimam diſtinguitur generationem. Hac ergo de cauſa, quia hereditates nequeunt deferri: niſi de vna ad alteram perſonam, idcirco curauit ſecularis imperator in ſingulis perſonis ſingulos perficere gradus: quia vero nuptiae ſine duabus non valent fieri perſonis, ideo ſacri
                  
                  canones duas in vno gradu conſtituere perſonas, &c. that is to ſay, A new-found queſtion is propoſed to th'apoſtolique Sea of the degrees of conſanguinitie, the which certaine mouing, vnskilfull in the lawes and canons, contrarie to the ſacred canons, haue ſtriuen to confound them: in a ſtrange and new errour affirming, that German brothers and ſiſters are betweene themſelues in the ſecond generation, their ſonnes and daughters in the fourth, their nephewes and neeces in the ſixth, & making their computation of their progenie ſo in the ſaid ſixt degree they determine it, &c. Now we in a ſynod holden in the Lateran conſiſtorie, aſſembled thereunto, the Biſhops, Clergie, and Iudges of diuerſe prouinces, haue had care to diſcuſſe this queſtion: and after long examination had (in the end) of the lawes and canons, we found it out diſtinctly, at the laſt, one computation (for this and that reaſon) to be had of the lawes, an other of the Canons: for mention verily is made in the laws of degrees, to no other end but that ſucceſſion or inheritance ſhould deſcend (in conſanguines) from one to another: but in the canons for this; that it may manifeſtly be ſhewed to what degree in kindred, marriages ſhould be abſtained from; it is preſcribed there, that inheritance ſhould lawfully be conferred to the next; here, that mariages be rightly amongſt chriſtians, and Canonically celebrated: degrees in the laws, are not in names and tearmes diſtinguiſhed, beyond the ſixt degree; in the Canons to the ſeauenth generation: for this conſideration therefore in perſons, that ſucceſſions cannot paſſe but from one to another, the ſecular emperour prouided

to appoint in ſingular perſōs, ſingular degrees: but that mariages conſiſt not but of two, the ſacred Canons haue therefore in one degree ordained two.
               M. Beza reproueth this numeratiō of the Canons, becauſe the Canons number (as he ſaith) by the De repud. pag. 25. perſons, and not their generations; and therefore affirmeth, that Multo planius & rectius loquuntur, qui generationes, non perſonas enumerādas dicunt. They ſpeak (ſaith M. Beza) more plainly falſe, and more truely, that affirme the generations, and not the perſons to be numbred, and his reaſon is, Cum generatio efficiat gradum, that is, Becauſe the generation makes the degree. De repud. pag. 26. Indeed there were certaine Canoniſts, before the Lateran ſinod, and Legiſts too, that numbred ſo, whoſe ignorance was condempned there, but neuer ſince but in earthly ſucceſſions, and ſo they number ſtill, that is to ſay, the degrees by the perſons, to conferre their inheritance to the next; but by the generations, the Canons number the degrees in mariage cauſes, that we come not too neer to the kindred of our ſleſh: wherein they varie not from M. Beza at all, but onely in the equilaterall lines, where he maketh two brethren two generations, & their children foure, & ſo in the reſidue where their generatiōs be, & ſo he affirmeth thē to be eiuſdem, euen of the ſame Pag. 26. 
                  ſpeciei & ſeriei, by the order & courſe of nature, & therfore do the Canons make thē the ſame generations, and the ſame degrees, and ſo his wordes many ſeeme to import no leſſe where he ſaith, Natura enim ipſa oſtendit tot opportere gradus, quot ſunt generationes, that is to ſay, Euen nature her ſelfe doth ſhew, ther ought to be ſo many degrees, as there be generatiōs: neuertheleſſe

we muſt count thē ſo, (ſaith he) as we reſpect Ordinem numerandi, and make them ſo by the order and courſe of numbering, two generatiōs: the which he holdeth in all the laterals, to be holden without exception, as may appeare by that treatiſe: that is to ſay, ſo many perſons ſo many degrees; the Canons hold the ſame in the aſcending and deſcending lines, Vna dempta: the vſe of this rule is explaned, in the chapter of conſanguinitie hereafter: this M. Beza reproueth alſo, viz. the rule of Vna dempta, and yet hee Pag. 15 confeſſeth it hath nothing in it, that is differing from the truth, for ſo he writeth, Et ſi nihil ſtatuit à veritate alienum, tamen non recte concepta est, that is to ſay, Though it ordereth nothing that is differing frō the trueth, yet it is not conceiued aright: but let it ſuffice it be true and holdeth where the Canons vſe it, that is in the aſcending and deſcending lines, vpright and downeright ſtraight, they bend it not to the laterals, for it will not hold with the rule of generation there, wher the perſōs do ſpread thēſelues, or nature rather ſpreadeth the perſōs on either ſide. Here is their difference in the equilaterals only where M. Beza giueth libertie to marrie within the prohibition of the Canons, but his prohibition is the ſame with the Canons in the the reſt, ſo far as the Canon prohibition reacheth, except in the perſons that be not collateral or vice-parents & childrē the one to the other: & the ſame their rules with his of the collateral or vice-parent, & of the honeſty of nature, only his prohibition goeth beyond the prohibition of the Canons, in the laterals that be not equal, wherin ſo much the nearer he draws thē to the law of nature, as he carries them

further off from the kinred of their fleſh, this is ſeene in that example, viz.
               
               
                  
                     PETRVS
  
                           MARTINVS
    
                                 IOHANNES
       
                                       STEPHANVS
          
                                             MARCVS.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           BERTA
    
                                 ROBERTVS
       
                                       ALBERTVS
          
                                             
                                                Gaius
                                                
                                                   
                                                      Martin
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                             TITVS
             
                                                   MARIA
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               For he prohibiteth Martin to marrie with Marie, (his grandfathers neeces nephues neece) becauſe he may not marry with Bertaes daughter, that is, with his ſiſters daughter: and this he confirmeth by the rule of the honeſty of nature, which is this, Cū naturae honeſtate pugnat, vt cuius ſiliam ducere non potes, neptim poſsis, that is to ſay, It is againſt the honeſtie of nature that thou ſhouldeſt marrie with his or hir neece, whoſe daughter thou canſt not marrie: this for his prohibition. But for his libertie, touching that we haue ſayd before, let vs ſuppoſe Albertus hath an equilaterall ſonne vnto Titius, viz a brother that is diſcended, a ſecond Martin, this Martin ſhal marrie with this Marie his grandfathers neece, and yet his father is Maries firſt colateral parent, that is to ſay, hir fathers brother, notwithſtanding both the rule of collateral parent, and the rule of the honeſtie of nature, which ſhould ſeeme as well to hold in the one as the other, for Martin
                  
may not marrie with his grandfathers daughter, that is, his aunt, by the expreſſe leuitical prohibition; why ſhal he then marry with his neece, whoſe daughter he may not marrie by the former rule? I will not determine between ſo reuerēd a diuine & the canon lawes, only I haue written this, that ſuch as haue or ſhall hereafter haue the reading of that treatiſe, may enter into conſultation with themſelues amongeſt themſelues, why the elder Martin in this example ſhould not marrie with his graund-fathers neeces nephewes neece, and the yonger Martin ſhould marrie with his graund-fathers neece? onely I may cite S. Ambroſe, who affirmed plainly they might not Ambr. lib. 8. Epiſt. 66. marrie by the lawe of God: but Mr. Beza anſwereth that S. Ambroſe affirmed this memoria lapſus, as much to ſay, as forgetting himſelfe. To this I may cite another that writeth thus, Quia vero Beza, hanc iuris canonici computationem ridet & improbat ideo ſciendum & obſeruandum 
                  Ioachim. a Beuſt in admonitione de grad pag. 230. 
                  eſt quod in conſiſtorijs harum terrarum (non obſtante conſideratione Bezae) computatio iuris canonici obſeruetur, & ſecundum eam pronuncietur: i. Where (ſaith he) Mr. Beza derideth and reprooueth the computation of the canon lawe, it is therefore to be noted and obſerued, that in the conſiſtories of theſe prouinces of ours, the computation of the canon law muſt be obſerued, notwithſtanding the conſideration of Beza, and be pronounced after it.
               And ſo the computation of the lawes of our land, ſpiritual or lay, muſt be obſerued, and be pronounced after them in theſe prouinces of ours, notwithſtanding the conſideration of any.
               And this computation is naturall: whereof more

at large in the chapter of conſanguinitie heereafter. Thy ius primogeniti, thy fathers inheritance, take it by the legall figure, it is lawfull for thee, and number vnto that, by that computation there, viz. Father, Sonne, 1. 2. and ſo in order in the reſidue. But ſeeke not a wife by that computation, in the other that inſueth; namely the canonicall figure, ſpecially in the midſt of the tree, thou haſt no portion there: thou ſhalt not come neere it, but touch it not in any wiſe: it is the kindred of thy fleſh, yea, thy fathers bloud, which forced, he that caſt out Adam from the garden of Eden, and ſet the cherubins there, and the blade of a ſword, to keepe the way of the tree of life, Gen. chap. 3. hath ſaid, That bloud ſhalbe vpon thee: and though thou tarrieſt (i. Thou dieſt not the death) becauſe the Leuit. chap. 20 iudiciall is gone, yet the morrall law abideth, which thou tranſgreſſeſt, and neuer dwelleſt long in that ſeede, and thy fathers inheritance togither: for the Lord hath ſet a ſword, to keepe the way thereof, from that poſteritie.
               It commeth thus to paſſe that two legal degrees do make but one canonicall: brothers (for example) reckoned after the ſecular lawes in the ſecond degree in legal ſucceſſion; after the canons be numbred in the firſt, in cauſes of matrimonie: their children (there) in the fourth, here in the ſecond: (there) their nephewes in the ſixt, here in the third, and ſo deſcending ſtill in the collateral lines (for otherwiſe they differ not) the 8 and 10 by the lawes, the 4 and 5 by the canons, and ſo of the reſidue.
               Theſe computations mentioned here before, not regarded in their ſeuerall natures, wrought the confuſion

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
proſecute the example particularly.
               The Lawes we haue ſaid of the Church and this Realme of England, be diuerſe in their eſtimation of Baſtardie: that is, they repute it diuerſly. The canons diſtinguiſh here, Legitimation enſues (by the canons) a ſubſequent marriage, in certain caſes they diſpence: the lawes diſtinguiſh not, they reſpect not marriages that enſue, they diſpence not: neuertheleſſe they diſable not (the laws of the land) the legitimation by the canons in orders and prieſthood: Adea vero quae pertinent ad regnum (after Mr. Bracton) 
                  De acquirend. rerum dom. cap. 29 
                  Non ſunt legitimi nec heredes iudicantur, propter conſuctudinem regni, quae ſe habet in contrarium: that is to ſay, Touching the ſecular iudgementes of this Realme, they bee not legitimat nor iudged to be heires, for the contrarie obſerued cuſtome in this land. The Arch-Deacon (for example) of Yorke Cap. innotuit. De elect. vnlawfully firſt elected to that dignitie in the church of Worceſter, touched in his natiuitie, many things induced (eſpecially concurring) his deſpenſation in the Canons, viz. Literarum ſcientia, morum honeſtas, vitae virtus; fama perſonae, concors capitulielectio, petitio populi, aſsenſus principis, ſuffraganeorum ſuffragia, humilis denotio confitētis, that is to ſay, His knowledge in learning, his honſty in maners, the vertue of his life, the report of his perſon, his agreeable choyſe of the chapter, the peoples requeſt, the prince his aſſent, the ſuffagranes voices, his owne humilitie, which freely choſe and humbly to acknowledge rather his defect, than hee would Laeſa ccnſci
                        •
                     tia, i. aſſume the paſtoral office with a wounded conſcience. To conclude, ſuch bee the lawes and iudgements of the church, their allowance

ſuch, & diſallowance (by the lawes of the land) as ſhall be their practiſe and excerciſe ſpirituall or Lay. H. 8. Aa. 28. cap.
               
               To end in a word this generall and obſcure tranſmiſſion to the ordinary, note by the way, what a ſubtill fallation enſued, viz. a certificate to the ſecular court, neyther true nor falſe: for ſo, & verum reſcribatur, & falſum, i. The ordinarie may certifie both right and wrong in diuerſe reſpects, for hee may certifie Mulier, that is to ſay him, a legitimate, and rightly too, to orders and dignities: but of the land, Baſtardus, that is, To inheritance a baſtard. This for the preiudice to the laws.
               Touching now the king, the prelats, his obiection, their anſwere, their inſtance, and the nobles their concluſion at Merton, Craſtino ſancti vinccntij, i. The morrow after the feaſt of S. Vincent (there) the Archbiſhop of Canturbury, his ſuffagranes, and greateſt part of the earles and barrons of this land aſſembled to the Corronation of the king, and queene Alianour his wife, treating of the common wealth of the ſame, touching many articles that concerned both the king & the queene, to the which they were ſummoned al, this obiection (tearmed in the ſtatutes, The kings writ of Baſtardy) amongſt othe matters was handled, viz. Whether one beeing borne afore matrimonie, may inherit in like maner as he that is borne after matrimonie. All the Biſhops aunſwered vnto this, That they would not nor could not anſwere vnto it, becauſe it was directly againſt the common order of the church, and all the Biſhops inſtaunted the lordes that they would conſent that all ſuch

as were borne afore matrimony ſhould be legitimat, as well as they that be borne within matrimonie, as to the ſucceſſion of inheritance, for as much as the church accepteth ſuch for legitimate: and all the earles & Barons with one voice anſwered, That they would not chaunge the lawes of the realme, which hitherto hath been vſed and approued.
               
                  Poſtea verò die Iouis proximè poſt feſtum ſancti Dioniſij, that is to ſay, The thurſday next enſuing the feaſt of Dioniſius, the ſame yeare, the king in his court holden at Merton, and namely before the moſt reuerend fathers the archbiſhops of Canterburie and Yorke, the Biſhop of Chicheſter, lord Chancelor then, the BB. of Dureſme, Ely, Norwich, London, Bath, Exceſter, Carleil, Hereford, Rocheſter, and many other honourable perſonages, prouided when Baſtardy ſhould thenceforth be obiected, in the kinges ſecular court againſt any for ſuch a cauſe (that is to ſay, Thou art a Baſtard, and therefore, Becauſe thou wert born before thy father and mother their mariage ſolemniſed) there ſhould be ſent Loquela (as much to ſay, as that tranſmiſſion we haue mentioned) to the ordinarie, to this effect, and in this form of wordes viz. That Inquiſition be made whether ſuch or ſuch were born before ſpouſals or matrimony, or not: and that the ordinarie ſhould certifie againe, the king in the ſame for me of words, without ambiguitie.
               
                  The vſe of this figure and readie vnderſtanding.
                  THe vſe hereof is practiſed daily in inheritances, whoſe right deſcendeth Quaſi ponderoſum quid
                     
                        
                        
                        THE LEGAL FIGVRE·
                        
                           
                              The ſignification of the com
                                 paſſes and characters of this Figure.
                              
                                  
                                 g Great vncles great vncles vncle. The ſon 
                                    〈…〉
                                 .
                              
                                 h his, hir, ſonne daughter. 8
                              
                                 i his, hir, nephew neece. 9
                              
                                 k his, hir, nephews neeces ſonne daughter. 10
                              
                                 l his, hir, nephew neeces nephew neece. 11
                              
                                 m his, hir, nephews nephews neeces neeces ſon daught. 12
                              
                                  
                                 f Great vncles great vncle. The ſame aunt. 6
                              
                                 g his, hir, ſonne daughter. 7
                              
                                 h his, hir, nephew neece. 8
                              
                                 i his, hir, nephews neeces ſonne daughter. 9
                              
                                 k his, hir, nephews neeces nephew neece. 10
                              
                                 l his, hir, nephews nephews neeces neeces ſon daught. 11
                              
                                  
                                 e Great vncles vncle. The ſame aunt. iij. 5
                              
                                 f his, hir, ſonne daughter. iij. 6
                              
                                 g his, hir, nephew neece. iij. 7
                              
                                 h his, hir, nephews neeces ſonne daughter. iij. 8
                              
                                 i his, hir, nephews neeces nephew neece. 9
                              
                                 k his, hir, nephews nephews neeces neeces ſon daught. 10
                              
                                  
                                 l Great vncle. The ſame aunt. iij. 4
                              
                                 e his, hir, ſonne daughter. iij. 5
                              
                                 f his, hir, nephew neece. iij. 6
                              
                                 g his, hir, nephews neeces ſonne daughter. iiij. 7
                              
                                 h his, hir, nephews neeces nephew neece. 8
                              
                                 i his, hir nephews nephews neeces neeces ſon daught. 9
                              
                                  
                                 c Vncle. Aunt. ij. 3
                              
                                 d his, hir, ſonne daughter. ij. 4
                              
                                 e his, hir, nephew neece. iij. 5
                              
                                 f his, hir, nephews neeces ſonne daughter. iiij. 6
                              
                                 g his, hir, nephews neeces nephew neece. 7
                              
                                 h his, hir, nephews nephews neeces neeces ſon daught. 8
                              
                                  
                                 b Brother. Siſter. j. 2
                              
                                 c his, hir, ſonne daughter. ij. 3
                              
                                 d his, hir, nephew neece. iij. 4
                              
                                 e his, hir, nephews neeces ſonne daughter. iij. 5
                              
                                 f his, hir, nephews neeces nephews neece. 6
                              
                                 g his, hir, nephews nephews neeces neeces ſon daught. 7
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     eadens deorſùm, recta linea vel tranſuerſali; neuer aſcending againe the way that it came, except it be à latere, propter defectum haeredum inferius prouenientium: that is to ſay, Inheritaunce deſcendeth (like a weighty or pō
                     derous thing, that falleth downewards) in a right, or collaterall line, neuer aſcending the way it came again, but laterally or ſideward, for want of deſcēding heires. It is thus to be vnderſtood, ✚ is that perſon in this figure, whoſe diſtance in degree is demaunded from euerie other peſon in the ſame, vpwards, downward, or collaterally, on the fathers or the mothers ſide; this is made manifeſt in the 6. chap. of this treatiſe, together with the order of numbring the degrees in either computation. Now for the ſignification of the compaſſes, (in this figure) and letters expreſſed in the ſame, as well great as ſmall, this is expreſſed on the ſide of this figure, thus: viz. by the great letters, and the ſmall that be lincked vnto them: for example, capitall F. hath ſix little letters lincked vnto it, there is writen ouer F. (the ſtocke) what tearme it hath in conſanguinitie, after the laws, and what degree vnto ✚ whoſe aſcending ſtock he is; there is alſo written vnder euery other litle letter that is linked vnto F. the tearme & degree it hath likewiſe vnto ✚, whoſe Collateralls they be: the ſame of euery capital letter, and of their generations. This may ſuffice for the aſcendents and collaterals; the deſcendents be declared in the figure.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. III. 
               
                  The Tranſmiſsion or writ of certificat to the Ordinarie-The Statutarie antecedents to the ſame.
               
               
                  
                     REx venerabili in chriſto W. eadem gratia Lincoln. epiſcopo ſalutem. Sciatis quod cum A. in curia noſtra, coram nobis vel coram Iuſt. noſtris peteret verſus B. tantam terram cum pertinentijs in tali villa, idem B. venit in eadem curia, coram &c. et obiecit eidem A. quod nullum ius habuit in terra illa eo quod Baſtardus eſt, quia natus antequam talis pater ipſius A. deſponſauit matrem ipſius A. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod conuocatis coram vobis conuocandis, rei veritatem inde diligenter inquiratis. viz. Vtrum praedictus A. natus ſuit antequam praedictus talis deſponſauit talem matrem ipſius A. vel poſt, & inquiſitionem quam inde ſeceris ſcire ſacias nobis vel iuſticiarijs noſtris talibus, per literas veſtras patentes teſte, &c. The cauſe of this obiection in this writ of Baſtardie is Prioritie of the natiuitie to the ſpouſels that enſued: the wordes therefore be (here) after Mr. Bracton omitted, that be inſerted in the other that enſue, viz. Et quoniam huiuſmodi inquiſitio pertinet ad forum eccleſiaſticum. For example, Rex talt cpiſcopo ſalutem Sciatis quod cum A. peteret verſus B. tantam terram cum pertinentijs in tali villa vt iu
                        •
                     ſumu & idem. B. venerit in eadem curia & diceret quod fuit in ſeyſina in eadem terra ſicut de illa quaeh hereditarie deſcendit de quodam G. patreſuo cuius heres ipſe eſt vt dicit, idem A. obiecit cidem B. in cadem curia noſtra quod nihil
                  
                  iuris potuit habere in terra illa petita quia Baſtardus eſt, & natus de adultera, aſſerens ſe eſſe filium legitimum ipſius. G. heredem, & quoniam huiuſmodi cognitio ad forum pertinet eccleſiaſticum vobis mandamus quod (conuocatis conuocandis) &c. vt ſupra: the reaſon of difference is this, Tranſmiſſion (there) is arbetrarie, neceſſarie here: for (ſaith Mr. Bracton) Nihil pertinct ad iudicem eccleſiaſticum cognoſcere de prioritate & poſterioritate natiuitatis eius cui opponitur Baſtardia, cum ſponſalia vel matrimonium hinc inde conceſſa ſunt: that is to ſay, The ſpiritual iudge hath no cognition (where ſpouſals or matrimonie be confeſſed on either part) of prioritie or poſterioritie of his natiuitie, to whom Baſtardie is obiected: with whom accordeth the treſ-reuerend Iudge, ſir Robert Brooke, affirming it hath been tried by the countrey: where he diſtinguiſheth betweene generall and ſpeciall Baſtardie. The other Tranſmiſſion, or rather in the other caſe, is neceſſary, becauſe (ſaith Mr. Bracton) Non pertinet ad iudicem ſecularem diſcuſsio, vtrum ſit ibi matrimonium vel non, The deciding of matrimony, or not, appertaineth not to the ſecular Iudge.
               To the common vnderſtanding of all, briefly, the writs wee haue mentioned immediatly heere before proceeded the one of them from this obiection, viz. Birth or natiuitie before marriage ſolempnized: the other from this, viz. Iſſue of a colourable wife, an adultereſſe, a wife de facto, and not de iure, to him that is lawfully wedded to another, or haply to none: in our vulgar ſpeech, and after the plaineſt faſhion, a whore: more ciuilly after cuſtome and common curtiſie, a concubine, a leman, or ſuch as was the woman of Samaria, i. A wife without a husband.
               
                  
But we muſt not (by the way) confound or ſeeme to make all one the whore, the adultereſſe, and the concubine, ſo termed in the canons, ſcortum, maecha, amica, or concubina; they bee verily diſtinguiſhed (there) 36. Q. 1. I. ex illa. Aliud eſt fornicatio: aliud ſtuprum: aliud a dulteriū: aliud inceſtus: aliud raptus. 
                  Per aliud, & aliud, by one, and another, that is to ſay, The whore is one, the adultereſſe another, the leman another, whoſe miſliuinges and miſconſtruction of my wordes togither, may terme them haply whores all three: but note their difference, that is to ſay, The whore, hir common requeſt makes hir a votoreſſe of ſingle life, for ſhee will not wed. The adultereſſe, of adulterium, as much to ſay, as ad alterius thorum, hir proprietie is hir husbands, but her propertie hir owne: Now, the concubine is holden at the will of her lord. They be alſo diſtinguiſhed by their offſprings, Manſeres, Nothos, and Spurios. Hence ſprang theſe verſes in Latine:

                     Manſcribus ſcortum, ſed moecha nothis dedit ortum,
                     Vt ſeges à ſpica, ſic ſpurius eſt ab amica.
                  
               
               Theſe Latine verſes from the gloſſe I haue rudely engliſhed thus, viz.
               
               
                  The whore doth manſcr Baſtard bring,
                  The nothos baſeth' adultereſſe wife:
                  As from the care the corne doth ſpring,
                  The leman is baſe ſpurius life.
               
               AThird tranſmiſſion enſueth to the court chriſtian to this effect, viz. Rex tali epiſcopo ſalutem. ſciatis quod cum A. in curia noſtra coram, &c. peteret verſus B.
                  
                  tantam terram cum pertinentijs in tali villa vt ius ſuum, idem B. venit in eadem curia & dixit quod predictus A. nihil iuris clamare poterit in terra illa quia Baſtardus eſt, eo quod C. pater ſuus cuius heredem ſe facit nunquam de ſponſauit matrem ſuam, & quoniam huiuſmodi cognitio de tali Baſtardia obiecta ad forum pertinet eccleſiaſticum, vobis mandamus quod (conuocatis conuocandis) coram vobis, &c. vt ſupra, Here they were the parties (by the obiection of the aduerſe part) the parents namely of him or hir to whom this obiection was made, and from whence this writ proceedeth, affianced, betrothed, and contracted; they wanted onely the Churches benediction. i. They were neuer ſolemnly nor vnſolemnly married in the face of the Church, nor elſwhere: heereof more largely in the chapter of matrimonie hereafter.
               The fourth and laſt tranſmiſſion that wee purpoſe here to treat of, is conceiued in this forme of words, viz. Rex tali epiſcopo ſalutem. Sciatis quod cum A. in curiae noſtra, &c. peteret verſus B. tantum terrae cum pertinentijs in tali villa vt ius ſuum, idem B. venit in eadem curia & obiecit eidem A. quod nihil iuris inde clamare potuit quia Baſtardus eſt, eo quod natus fuit per tantum tempus ante matrimonium contractum ſolemniter in facie eccleſiae inter talem patrem ipſius A. reſponſum fuit a predicto A. quod natus fuit poſt matrimonium cōtractum inter patrem & matrem ſuam tempore interdicti, adhibita omni ſolemnitate que tunc potuit adhiberi. Et quoniam huiuſmodi cauſae cognitio, &c. vt ſupra, Queſtion was moued here of the natiuitie ratione interdicti eccleſiae: that is to ſay, Grounded vpon the prohibition of the canons; hereof likewiſe in the chapter prohibition canonicall: this may ſuffice for

the writ or tranſmiſſion to the Ordinarie, and ſo we be come to the ſtatutarie antecedents to the ſame. The occaſion whereof was, a fraud obiected in parlement, in 10 of king Hen. 6.
               This obiected fraud was touched in general terms by Mr. Bracton in the reigne of king Henrie the third: for writing (then) of th'effect of legitimation, Delegi
                        •
                      & conſuet. ang lib. 5. tit de except. n. 17. his wordes be theſe, viz. Effectus vero legitimationis probatae hic eſt, quod cum ſemel probata fuerit & indicium protali red datur in curia regis, ſemper quoad omnes legitimus crit, niſi in probatione interuenerit fraus, &c. ſed fraudulenter poſſet fieri inquiſitto hoc modo, vt ſi quis plures terras vel amplus haereditates peteret à diuerſis, procurare poterit petens per fraudem, quod ab aliquo ipſorum ei opponeretur Baſtardia, & it a paciſci cum eo, ne quid diceret in teſtes, & contra teſtificata: & ſic fraudulenter probare poſsit legitimationem; & hic obtinere verſus omnes: quod quidem eſset iniquum: The effect (ſaith he) of legitimation is this; that once proued, and iudgement thereof giuen in the kinges Court, hee ſhall be alwaies reputed and with all men a legitimate, except there ſhall happen to fall out and be fraud in the proof, &c. But thus th'inquiſition may fraudulently be made, that is to ſay, If one demaundeth diuerſe landes, or ample hereditamentes of diuerſe men, the demandant may procure by fraud, that Baſtardie (by ſome one) be obiected againſt him, and couenant therewithall that hee excepteth not (at the time) againſt his witneſſes, their perſons, or depoſitions: and ſo hee ſhoulde prooue his legitimation, but fraudulently, and conſequently preuaile againſt all the reſt: but this were verie vniuſt.
               
                  
This fraud how neer it commeth to the obiected fraud in the ſtatutes, the readers may eaſily diſcerne. But to our purpoſe, hence proceeded the Statutarie antecedents, mentioned to be handled in this chapter; to eſchew as well ſuch ſubtil diſheriſons, (if need ſhould be) in that ſaid caſe, as in other the like in time to come: touching therefore theſe Statutarie antecedentes, it was (by the aduiſe and aſſent of the ſpirituall and temporall lordes, as alſo the ſpeciall requeſt of the commons in that Parlement aſſembled) ordained and eſtabliſhed by authoritie of the ſame, as followeth, viz. That from henceforth all Iudges of or in the courtes, where anie plee is, or ſhalbe depēding, taken, or moued, in which Baſtardie is, or ſhall be alleaged againſt anie perſon party to the ſame plee, and thervpon an iſſue ioyned, which by the law ought to be certified by the Ordinarie, that the Iudges, or one Iudge, of, or in the courts where the ſaid plee is, or ſhal be depending, taken, or moued (before the time that any writ of certificate paſſe out of the ſame court to the Ordinarie, to certifie vpon the iſſue ſo ioyned, or to bee ioyned) ſhall make a remembraunce vnder their ſeales, or his ſeale, at the ſute of the demaundant, or tenaunt, playntife, or defendaunt in the plee, in which the Baſtardie is or ſhall bee alleaged; reciting the iſſue that is ioyned in the ſame plee of Baſtardie, and certifying to the Chauncellor of the king of England for the tyme beeing, to the intent, that thervpon proclamation be made in the ſaid Chauncery by three moneths, once in euery month, that all perſons pretending any intereſt to obiect againſt

the partie, which pretendeth himſelfe to be mulier, that they ſue to the ordinarie, to whom the writ of certificate is, or ſhalbe directed, to make their allegations and obiections againſt the partie which pretendeth himſelfe to be Mulier, as the law of holie church requireth, and the ſayd chauncellor hauing notice of the ſayd remembrance and iſſue ioyned, and required by the ſaid demaundant or tenaunt, plaintife or defendant, hauing the ſaid remembrance to make the ſaid proclamatiō, as afore is ſaid, the ſame chancellor for the time being, ſhall do to make proclamation in forme aforeſaid, and the proclamation ſo made, ſhall certifie in the court where the ſaide plee, in which Baſtardie is alleaged one other time ſhalbe depending, and that the Iudges of or in the court where the ſame plee is, or ſhalbe depending, taken, or moued, before any proclamatiō ſo to be made in the chauncerie, make one time ſuch proclamation in the court, and alſo one other time, when the proclamation ſhalbe certified by the chauncellor of England, and made in forme aboue rehearſed; and then the ſaid Iudge ſhall award the ſaid writ of certificate to the Ordinarie, to certifie vpon the iſſue ſo ioyned, or to be ioyned; and if any writ of certificate be made or graunted before that all the proclamations in the forme aforeſayd be made, and certified, that then the the ſaid writ of certificat, and the certificate of the ordinarie therevpon made, or to be made, ſhall be void in law, and of none effect.
               Thus much touching the Statutarie antecedents, I haue thought good to deliuer verballie as I read and receiued the ſame from the Statute it ſelfe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII. 
               
                  The Ordinarie his office: and order in proceeding.
               
               
                  THe court chriſtian is poſſeſſed (now) of the cogniſance, the ſecular Plee in ſuſpence quouſque, i. till returne be made of the inquiſition againe: the Ordinaries office (in order) enſueth next: But firſt we wil define the Ordinary, then his office, and ſhew withall (as what) how manifold his office is.
               It requireth (this) a larger diſcourſe, and euerie branch it beareth, than is cōueniēt here, or poſſible to be related in ſo ſmall a content; it is therfore reſerued (this) to a treatiſe of it ſelfe, intituled The Ordinarie, as life, health, habilitie, and other opportunities may finiſh it, onely here, according to the nature of the proces, and this cognition which is ſummarie, it ſhall ſuffice to relate it ſummarily.
               The Ordinarie is he, Cui à lege vel ab imperiali culmine competit ius dicendi poteſtas. i. 
                  2. q. 6. c. in iud: c. To whom is power giuen, and auctoritie from the law, or from the Prince, to render iudgment: ad vniuerſaliter, i. Vniuerſallie. For there be many Ordinaries, according to the verſe, Illuſtris primus medius, ſpectabilis imus, but ſuch an Ordinarie here (by the title of Ordinarie) we muſt vnderſtand, that is to ſay, to whom is power giuen and auctoritie, from the law, or from the prince, to

render iudgement vniuerſaly, ſuch be the BB. of euery prouince: howbeit their iuriſdiction is not (in this cogniſance) ordinarie, but delegata: ſuch as the iuriſdiction is, quae demandatur à principe ſpecialiter ad vnam, vel plures cauſas. 
                  ff de iuriſdict. om. Iud. L. morte. de off. delegat. Quoniam. & Cap. ſuper. & cap. paſtoralis.
               
               The vnder or inferiour Ordinaries, principally ſuch as be ſurrogates abroad in exempted iuriſdictions, we will not handle here, but els where, and there in their places, Hi enim leuia tractant, i. Their iuriſdiction conſiſteth in lighter matters, as did the poteſtates and defenſores, Ciuitatum and municipales magiſtratus, 
                  x. Autent. de defenſor Ciuit. ¶. nos igitur, & ¶. audient. Colla. 3. whoſe cogniſance exceeded not three hundred ſhillings. Latiſsimè patet, his office is exceeding ſpatious, it is interpoſed ſometime in place of principall actions, as in caſe where auxilium ordinarium, i. reliefe 
                     y Autent. eod. d. ¶. audient ff. de iuriſdict. om. Iud. L. fin. by way of ordinarie action is wāting, but where ordinarie means may be had, there is no recourſe to his extraordinarie aſſiſtance, and this either at, or without the inſtance of any party, aut cis inuitis, ſometime it is interpoſed incidenter, incidently: it reiecteth ſomtime the action, ſometime it detracteth from it, quandoque deſeruit ei, i. It ſerueth other whiles the action, or ſubiecteth it ſelfe vnto it: this we cannot proſecute here particularlie. It is generallie his office two-fold, that is to ſay, Noble, or mere and mercenarie, they differ thus, (theſe offices) viz. His noble office is that, Quod per ſe ſubſiſtit nulli actioni vel exceptioni deſeruiens vel adhaerens, ſed ſui ſolius nobilitate gaudens, his Mercenarie that, Quod adhaerit actioni, vel exceptioni, impotens ſtare per ſcipſum, vnde famulando) deſeruit alij, ſicut faciunt mercenarij, that is to ſay, It ſubſiſteth his noble office of it ſelfe, relying neither to action nor exception, but

vpholden onely by the exellencie of it ſelfe, the mercenarie that, that ſerueth or ſubiecteth it ſelfe to the action, not able to ſtand of it ſelf, but dependeth, (as mercenaries or hirelings do) ſo termed. Quia nomina eſſe debent conſequentia rebus, i. Names muſt be appliable to their things.
               Touching their iuriſdiction, Pet. de ſerr. in form. lib. in act. confeſ. proſeruit. ver. Plenam & omnimodam. ll. ad haec vtitur & auctoritatibus maximis, & plurimis. the worde comprehendeth generally merum & mixtum imperium: theſe be included in the offices we haue mentioned heere. It comprehendeth alſo, modicam cohertionem, or, ſimplicem iuriſdictionem, as much to ſay as that quae commiſſa intelligitur, eo ipſo, quod cauſae alicuius commiſsio demandatur: 
                  Sp c. de iuriſdict. om. Iudicū. d
                        •
                     c. expedito. modica vero coertio. ſuch is the cogniſance of the trial of Baſtardy: that is to ſay, Committed to the Ordinarie from the Prince.
               Hence his iuriſdiction in this triall is not ordinaria (as I ſaid before) but delagata: Neuertheleſſe wee repute him generally, namely the B. a perpetuall and naturall Ordinarie. Prouinc ang. in glo. Lindw. ver. ord..
               Here we will leaue the Ordinarie and his generall office, and returne to the point, viz. His office in the triall of Baſtardie, and his order in proceeding there: but let no man vnderſtand (by order) the order iudiciarie, ſubſtantiall proces or regular ſolemnities required by the lawe: all which be diſcourſed in their places in the Ordinarie, according to that part of pollicie, and maner of gouernment of this land, & without which, a ſentence or iudgment hath no validitie: for that were nothing els in ſummarie cauſes, ſuch as this cognition is, but to peruert order: wee might ſpeake of heere plenarie, and ſummarie cauſes, their natures, cogniſance, and difference; but becauſe the

argument will not endure heerein their diſcourſe at large, we will alſo amongſt the reſt leaue them to the tractat of the Ordinarie.
               
                  Officium vero ordinarij: briefly the Ordinaries office is this, viz. Conuocatis conuocandis, &c. that is to ſay, The parties ſummoned that bee required to be called before him in this triall, in their preſence then and either of thē (if they appeare) that he proceed to a diligent and ſummarie inquiſition according to the tenor of his writ, Bracton. the order and ſcope whereof the law comprehendeth in theſe wordes, viz. Summariè & de plano ſine ſtrepitu & figura iudicij: that is to ſay, Summarily, plainly, ſine ſtrepitu, i. Without noiſe of aduocates, ſuch as was the finiſhing of Salomons Temple: wherein was neither hewing nor hammering heard. Reg. 3. 6. 
                  Figura importeth as much in iudgement, as a perfect ſimilitude or likeneſſe doth in any thing els, i. The verie apparant forme, picture, and face as it were of iudgement it ſelfe, framed of that ſubſtantiall iudiciarie order, and proces that wee haue mentioned.
               Hereof, viz. Of ſuch ſummarie cauſes, the plenarie cognition was reputed in the end a waſtfull prorogation, and grewe to be in proces of time both hurtfull, and hatefull. Such be the cauſes of Benefices, Tythes, Matrimonies, and Vſuries: from whence ſprang the conſtitution, Diſpendioſam. in the canons Diſpendioſam, in manner and forme ordained as followeth, viz. Diſpendioſam prorogationem litium quam interdum ex ſubtili ordinis iudiciarij obſeruatione cauſarum docet experientia prouenire reſtringere in ſubſcriptis caſibus cupientes: ſtatuimus vt in cauſis ſuper electionibus:
                  
                  poſtulationibus, vel prouiſionibus, aut ſuper dignitatibus, perſonatibus, officiijs, canonicatibus, vel prebendis, ſeu quibuſuis beneficijs eccleſiaſticis, aut ſuper decimis ad quarum etiam preſtationem poſsunt qui tenentur ad eas premoniti cenſura eccleſiaſtica coerceri: nec non ſuper matrimonijs vel vſuris & eas quoquo modo tangentibus ventilandis, procedi valeat (de cetero) ſimpliciter, & de plano, ac ſine ſtrepitu iudicij & figura: volentes non ſolum ad futura negotia, ſed ad preſentia & adhuc etiam per appellationem pendentia, hoc extendi.
               
               I muſt not omit the queſtion and doubt that aroſe in thoſe times, touching theſe wordes, ſummarie, de plano ſine ſtrepitu & figura iudicij: The queſtion and doubt was great, the Decretall therefore intituled Sepe contingit, enſued heereupon, to manifeſt and explane the conſtitution, the queſtion, and doubtes. Sed adhuc per ipſum decretalem (writeth a learned doctor of the lawe) non fuit plenè conſultum ſeu ſuccurſum auribus cauſidicorum: Neither (ſaith he) is that any maruaile; and his reaſon is, Quia ipſorum natura ad lites querendas eſt inclinata: & ſemper cogitant lites ex litibus ſuſcitare.
               
               The regular ſolemnities were abrogated in ſuch ſummarie cauſes, and reſerued, ſo farre forth, as they bee mentioned to be in that decretall abrogated and reſerued, and not otherwiſe. The Iudge is therefore freed from (in theſe cognitions) the obſeruation of iudiciall order and forme required in other cauſes in the bodie of the lawes, Canonici and Municipalis. Neuertheleſſe hee continueth, as alſo the decretall forbiddeth not, that obſeruation

in iudgement in theſe cauſes ſtill that nature and naturall reaſon ordained, citation c. Paſtoralis ext d
                        ••
                     ent. & re iudict. (for example) is one: obſerued after the canoniſtes in Adam, whom vppon his tranſgreſſion God called before him in the Garden, Gen. 3. 
                  Adam, Vbies? Where art thou Adam? &c. Another, though no regular libell, yet a petition or kinde of narration is naturall (at the leaſt) Oretenùs: This was obſerued in the queſtion of the women before Salomon: viz. Filius meus viuit, & filius iſtius mortuus eſt: 
                  c. Afferte. de preſumpt. Reg. 3. c. As alſo in the woman before Ieſus, Mulier, vbi eſt qui te accuſat? &c. Hir accuſation was heere required. The exception alſo is naturall (ſo termed) Rei iudiacatae, and the reaſon is, Ne ſepius iudicetur in id ipſum: But other exceptions, ſuch as rather tend to fruſtrate or delay the proceſſe, than informe the Iudge, bee repulſed, as oppoſite (more) than agreeable to nature. The Sacrament or oath, ſo termed Iuramentum calumniae, Howbeit deriued from the ciuill lawe, yet it ſauoureth ſo of naturall equitie, that it is retained amongeſt the reſt; for this doth bridle the malice of contenders. The ſecret examination of witneſſes, and regard of their depoſitions, viz. Howe they accord, and conclude, is another, obſerued in the Elders (before Daniel) againſt Suſanna. "Theſe naturall obſeruations be familiar to our reuerend Ordinaries, and their learned Officials, in their places, and the regular ſolemnities in theirs; it were to be wiſhed they were as familiar to the reſidue, our rurals inferior and peculiar Iudges.
               But with theſe we haue nothing to do in this trial: briefly our naturall ordinarie his Proceſſus, i. His order,

is this, viz. he proceedeth without ſolempnitie eyther of Libel, or Conteſtationis litis: Ordinarie vacatiōs he reſpecteth not, ordeined for mans neceſſities, dilations he abridgeth, cutteth off fruſtratorie and friuolous exceptions and appeales, the multitude he repreſſeth of witneſſes, aduocates, and proctors, natural and iuſt defences onely he admitteth: vrgeth the oath de calumpnia and veritate dicenda; Citeth vnto ſentence, and determineth his finall decrec in writing. This is the ſum of the Decretal, the ſubſtance of the text enſueth. viz. 
                  Sepe cōtingit. 
                  Sepe cōtingit quod cauſas committimus: & in earū aliquibus ſimpliciter ac de plano ac ſine ſtrepitu & figur a iudicij procedi mādamus; de quorū ſignificatione verborū à multis contēditur: & qualiter procedi debeat dubitatur. Nos autem dubitationem huiuſmodi (quantum nobis eſt poſsibile) decidere cupientes, hac in perpetuum valitura conſtitutione ſancimus, vt iudex cui taliter cauſam cō
                     mittimus, neceſsario libellum non exigat, litis cōteſtationem non poſtulet, in tempore etiam feriarum ob neceſsitates hominum in dultarum a iure, procedere valeat, amputet dilationum materiam litem quanto poterit ſaciat breuiorem, exceptiones, appellationes dilatorias, & fruſtratorias repellendo: partium aduocatorum, & procuratorum contentiones & Iurgia, teſtiumque ſuperfluam multitudinem refrenando, non ſic tamen Iudex litem abbreuiet: quin probationes neceſſariae & defenſiones legitimae admittantur.
               
               
                  Citationem vero, & praeſtationem iuramenti de calumnia velmalitia, ſiuè de veritate dicenda, ne veritas occultetur per commiſsionem huiuſmodi intelligimus non excludi.
               
               
                  Verum quod iuxta petitionis formam pronunciatio ſequi
                  
                  debet per partem agētis, et etiam rei (ſi quid petere voluerit) eſt in ipſo litis exordio petitio facienda: ſiueſcriptis, ſiue verbo, actis tamēcontinuo, vt ſuper quibus poſitiones & articuli for mari debeāt, poſſit haberi plenior certitudo, & vt fiat deſinitio clarior, inſerenda.
               
               
                  Et quod poſitiones ad faciliorem expeditionem litium propter partium confeſſiones & articulos ad clariorem probationem vſus longeuus in cauſis admiſit, nos vſum huiuſmodi obſeruari volentes, ſtatuimus vt iudex ſic deputatus a nobis (niſi aliud de partium voluntate procedat) ad dandum ſimul vtroſque terminum dare poſſit & ad exhibēdum omnia acta & munimēta quibus partes vti volunt in cauſa; poſt dationem articulorum diem certam quandocunque ſibi videbitur valeat aſſignare: eo ſaluo, quod vbi remiſsionem ſieri contingeret pro teſtibus producendis, poſsint etiam inſtrament a produci, aſsignatione huiuſmodi non obſtante: interrogabit etiam partes ſiuè ad earum inſtan tium ſiuè ex officio, vbicunque hoc equitas ſuadebit: ſententiam vero definitiuam citat ad id, licet non peremtoriè partibus inſcriptis & prout magis ſibi placuerit ſtans, vel ſedens, proferat: etiam ſi ei videbitur concluſione non facta, prout ex petitione & probatione & alijs actitatis in cauſa ſuerit faciendū. Quae omnia etiā in illis caſibus in quibus per aliam conſtitutionem noſtrā vel alias procedi poteſt ſimpliciter, & de plano ac ſine ſtrepitu & figura iudicij voiumus obſeruari. Si tamē in praemiſſis caſibus ſolemnis ordo iudiciarius in toto, vel in parte, non contradicentibus partibus obſeruetur, non erit proceſſus propter hoc irritus, nec etiam irritandus.
               
               The incident queſtion is now returned whence it came, and certified to the ſecular court: the ordinary Functus eſt officio ſuo, we leaue the natiuitie therefore diſcuſſed, by vertue of the kings tranſmiſſion, to the,

cenſure of the ſecular iudges, and deſcend continuing ſtil our ſtile (in natiuities) canonically to matrimony and legitimate iſſue.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Of matrimonie, and Legitimat iſſue.
               
               
                  OVr ſcope hath been hitherto tied to a limitted iuriſdiction, viz. The ſecular Tranſmiſſion from the king: we haue not therfore defined Baſtardie, and ſo we deeme it needleſſe ſtil, the legitimate iſſue may verilie ſuffice for this: that is to ſay (as contraries doe) the one to explane the other.
               But legitimat iſſue, let no man vnderſtand legitimate only, that is to ſay, ſuch as be adopted children, for there is in ſuch but a bare immitation of nature, neither haue we vſe (in this land) of adoption nor arrogation, but naturall and legitimat, that is the legitimate iſſue we ſpeake of here, viz. Naturall and Legitimate both: naturall, ſo termed, Quia naturalitèr generati; legitimat, ex Legitima parentum coniunctione approbata per leges, that is to ſay, Natural, of their naturall begetting; legitimat, of their parentes lawfull coniunction, approued by the lawes: this is the iſſue of the body lawfully begotten, other iſſue haſt thou none but Baſtards.
               What ſhal then become of the iſſue ſprong from

                  Clandeſtine marriages? Clandeſtine marriages we call them Quae clam contrahuntur, that is to ſay, That bee contracted ſo priuily that they cannot bee lawfullie proued by witneſſes, C 1. &C. Cū inhibitio ext. de Cland. desp. ſhall that be baſtarded? I ſaie not ſo without exception, but I counſell thee truſt it not, for I aſſure thee, (howſoeuer the matrimonie holdeth before God and the world) if the parties ſhall both of them acknowledge it, incurring onely a corporall pennance, and the clerke that ſhall celebrate the ſame, but 3. yeares ſuſpention from his office, yet if the one confeſſe it not, or that which is more, renounce the marriage, and the other proue it not, (for in this caſe the partie is enioyned to proue that pleadeth the matrimonie) d. c. 1. Cland. desp. verily proued, it holdeth, Coram Deo & Eccleſia, i. Before God and the congregation, otherwiſe, Coram Deo, qui corda ſcrutatur, &c. that is to ſay, Before God it ſhall ſtand; the ſearcher of the ſecreats of all hearts: but Eccleſia non iudicat de occultis, It is too ſecreat for the church to determine. Touching therefore this iſſue, to come to the determination of the church, i. The law of the church, Let vs wade but a little further, and ſuppoſe by the way but that that falleth out indeed often times: viz. Thou contracteſt thy ſelfe and marrieſt (priuely) with a woman, who afterwards contracteth and marrieth openly with another, whoſe wife ſhall ſhee be?
               Touching the reſurrection, our ſauiour Chriſt anſwered ſuch a queſtion to the Saduces Mat. 22. but thus the law doth anſwere this. viz. eyther it may (the Clandeſtine marriage) be proued, and then it ſhall preiudiſe the publique enſuing contract, touching firſt the

conſumation c. Quod nobis in ſin. de Cland. deſp. &c. quod nobis. qui fil. ſunt legitimi. of the publique, if it bee not conſumated: next, it ſhall preiudice it, if it be conſumate, touching the legitimation of children: but namely of ſuch as be borne of the publique matrimonie, poſt receptionem eccleſiae, that is to ſay, After the Church hath receiued and publiſhed the Clandeſtine: 
                  c. 2. Qui filſunt legit. and not otherwiſe: For from the publication of the clandeſtine marriage, the publique ſhalbe iudged vnlawfull, but the iſſue not diſabled of the publique that is ſprung before, d. c. 2. Eod. tit. though the marriage be diſolued afterwardes: ſo this danger thou contracteſt withall, whoſoeuer, that weddeſt thy wife in the darke: And more than that, if haply hee beget hir with childe (as ſuch miſchances fall, whether before or after publication of thy marriage) ſo it be borne in matrimonie, be aduiſed whether the law (in fauour of legitimation) groundeth not more vpon thy poſſible exceſſe, than the actual cohabitation of the other: preſuming him an adulterer Bald. in L. ſi à matre. Eod. de ſuis & legit. Ab. in c. accedens. de purg. Can. ext.; cōſequētly if thou verifieſt not the prouerbe, my cow, my calfe: the bull is not regarded.
               For touching the cohabitation of thy wife with an adulterer, whatſoeuer may be ſaide in the canon and ciuill lawes, conſider (for more ſuretie) after the lawes of this land, whether thou art within or without the foureſeas, at ſuch time as the child be conceiued. Bracton. De leg. & conſ. ang. lib. 1. c. 9. in fin. Brook. tit. Baſtardy. n. 4.
               
               A ſecond danger thou hazardeſt in Clandeſtine marriages, whether greater, leſſe, or equall with the other, I will not ſtand to prooue, but meaſure it, and take it as it is, viz. Thou taſteſt haply the forbidden fruit: Looke more for this in the figures and declaration of conſanguinitie and affinitie in the 6 and 7

chapters enſuing, there is pictured for thee the tree & the fruit: Well, thou taſteſt the forbidden fruit with good intent: for ſo the law intēdeth thou hadſt bonam fidem, if thou knewſt it not: i. Thou tookeſt her not to be of kinne, or at the leaſt ſo neere of kinne vnto thee: thy iſſue ſhalbe baſtarded (here) by reaſon of thy Clandeſtine marriage: Nec de parentum ignorantia, vllum eſt habitura ſubſidium, i. Excluded quite from the benefite of their parents ſimple ignorance: of whom the lawe preſumeth (in caſe of Clandeſtinitie) that they were not (thy parents) vnwitting of their impediment, or affectors rather of that ignorance: howbeit otherwiſe, that is to ſay, contracted in the face of the Church, their ignorance had relieued them. d. c. Cum inhibibitio ¶. Si quis. ext. eod. tit.
               
               Neuertheleſſe vnderſtand this in iſſue that is had ante latam ſententiam diuortij, i. Before the ſentence giuen of diuorce: for ſo conceiue withall, they muſt be diuorced howſoeuer. Si tamen infideles, qui ſecundū vetetis, vel propriae legis inſtituta, circa gradus cōſanguinitatis, vel affinitatis a canonibus notatos, coniūcti ſunt, domino inſpirante, conuerſi fuerint, matrimoniū anteà contractum non erit poſt baptiſmi lauacrum irritandum: cum per ſacramentum baptiſmi, non ſoluantur coniugia, ſed crimina dimittantur. Vnde & proles indenata legitima cenſibitur. c. de infidelibus. ext. de cōſang. & aff. Haec inſtit. iuris can. lib. 2. tit 13. ſi tamen. Lancelot.
               
               Touching legitimation, it is otherwiſe in theſe prohibited marriages, howbeit openly and ſolemnly had in the face of the Church where the parents be priuie to their impediments. d c. Cū inhibitio. eod. tit
               
               The like of him or her that marrieth a ſecond husband or wife, liuing the firſt: Bracton. in which caſe alſo as in the other before, Solemnitie, Clandeſtinitie, Priuitie, and Ignorance, haue their effects accordingly.
               Here we may remember (and not without cauſe) the diuorced husband and wife: but why do I terme them diuorced, if man & wife? or why man and wife, if diuorced? doe they not marrie againe with others (liuing the diuorced)? they do, but they doe not wel therein; the poſitiue lawes of the Church be againſt

it: and therfore I terme them the diuorced husband and wife, that is to ſay, diuorced onely a cohabitationè, i. From mutuall dwelling and cohabitation togither, and not (as ſome would haue it) a vinculo, from the band of marriage, which is indiſſoluble.
               They may read in the Epiſtle to the Corinthians 1. Cor. cap. 7 thus: Vnto the married I command, not I, but the Lord; Let not the wife depart from hir husband: but and if ſhe depart, let hir remaine vnmarried, or be reconciled to her husband: and let not the husband put away his wife. And againe, Art thou bound vnto a wife? ſeeke not to be looſed: they anſwere, Except Cap. eod. it be for whoredome: they ſay well; hereby they put her away: but doe they marrie (during hir life) with another, by the ſame exception? When Ieſus had ſhewed himſelfe to his diſciples at the ſea of Tiberias, which was the third time he appeared vnto them after he was riſen from the dead, hee communed there with Simon Peter, when they had dined, and ſignified in the end vnto him by what death he ſhould glorifie God. Lord (ſaid Peter) what ſhall this man do? meaning that diſciple whō Ieſus loued ſo, & that leaned on his breſt at ſupper. What is that to thee (ſaidour ſauiour) if I will that he tarrie till I come? follow thou me. Then went this word abroad amongſt the brethren, that this diſciple ſhould not die: yet our Lord ſayd not, hee ſhall not die, but if I will that hee tarrie till I come, what is that to thee? So, this is gone abroad, He may marry another: yet the Lord hath not ſaid, He may marrie another; no more than (when he ſpake, Thou ſhalt not take a wife with hir ſiſter during hir life) he ſaid, Thou mayſt marrie with

hir ſiſter, thy wife being dead: Baſilius therefore anſwered vnto this, Epiſt. ad Diodorum, Non temerè ex eo quod ſcriptum eſt, colligendum eſſe quod ſcriptum non eſt: that is to ſay, That that is not written, muſt not be vnaduiſedly gathered, from that that is written: no nor yet that thou ſhalt put away thy wife for whoredome art thou commmanded to it, nor commended for it: neuertheleſſe (for that) thou art permitted. Wilt thou be aſſured in this caſe, & walk where thou needeſt not wauer, but ground thy ſelfe on faith indeed, Auguſt. in coment. ſuo ad 
                        •
                     . Cor. cap 7. & in Hom. 49. de adulteritus coniu
                        •
                     is. quae ſententia allegatur in cap. 
                        •
                      Quemadmodum 32. Q 7. Idem tenet Hieron. ad damaſ praesbit. 
                        〈◊〉
                      cap. omnes. D. 32. Q. 7. vid. Q. per totum, & con
                     
                        〈…〉
                      allegat. and ſo to be free from ſinne? Abſteine, or els be reconciled: in no wiſe contract a new with anie other vpon diuorce, & ſeperation made by the Iudge for a time, the lawes yet ſtanding to the contrarie. Beſides diuerſe learned and moſt reuerend Fathers and Councels of the Church be againſt thee.
               But, Hinc illae lachrimae: Theſe contracts wee haue mentioned, affoord them the greateſt fauour the law preſumeth for them: the Scandal remaineth yet a blot (in perpetuitie) notwithſtanding: for, Poſt ſecutam copulam & ſufceptam prolem detectis quibuſdam impedimentis, non ſine graui ſcandalo contracta matrimonia retractari oporteat. Marriages (that is to ſay) confumat with bodily knowledge and children, detected afterwardes of certaine impediments, without great offence, cannot be diſſolued. Glo. in ſum. 30. Q 5 & can. Si quis 
                        〈…〉
                      5
                        •
                     . His itaque. diſt. 30 Q 5.
               
               A ſecond offence ariſeth exceeding this in a higher degree ſo termed, Reatus adulterij: as much to ſay, as the breach of the 6 commandement: and thus it falleth out, viz. Si alter coniugi
                        •
                      qui clam contraxerit coniugiū negauerit (legitimis probationibus deficiētibus) iudicis ſentētia ritè fuerit abſolutus; vter
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      alijs nubendo, incurrit reatum adulterij,
                  
                  i. If one of theſe priuie contractors ſhall denie the matrimonie, and conſequentlie (for want of proofe) be freed from the other by ſentence of the iudge, they incurre eyther of them, by marrying vnto others, the daunger of adulterie. De clandeſt. desp. Iud. iuris Canon Lancelot.
               
               Hence it was prouided, Conſultiſsimè by the law, C. 2. 30. Q 5. 
                  vt nullus fidelium occultè nuptias contrahat. i. That Chriſtians ſhould not ſo priuely make their marriages, but that the miniſter of the Church ſhould againſt the cōſumation of the ſame, proclaime or publiſh (as we terme them) the bans to this effect, that if any man or woman could alleadge any lawfull impediment why ſuch and ſuch, &c. ſhould not be ioyned in lawfull matrimonie, they ſhould then alleadge it, &c. at the firſt, ſecond, third, or laſt publication, &c. the miniſter is alſo inioyned, vt ipſe inueſtiget vtrum aliquod futuro matrimonio obſiſtat impedimentum, as much to ſearch, as in him may lie, if any obſtacle (or not) may repulſe the matrimonie approching. D. c. cum inhibitio in princip. ext. eod. tit.
               
               This law is more preciſely obſerued in other countries than in many partes of ours, eſpecially our exempted iurisdictiōs, for there it wil not ſerue, I mean where this obſeruation is, to dwell a yeare or two in a place (hauing been a ſtranger els all the daies of his life) to make him of that pariſh onely where he dwels in reſpect of matrimonie, if he contracteth there: but ſhalbe ſent to ſeeke the places whence he came, and letters teſtimonial frō thence, namely from the miniſters of thoſe remote & far diſtant places, to teſtify of him, (touching mariage there) whether he be bound or free; Abbas reporteth this obſeruation in his time, the which Panormitā
                   relating, two learned doctors, of

great authoritie of opinion is cleare touching the minde of the letter of the law, that ſo it ought to bee in ſuch caſes: and for mine owne parte, (Saluo ſemper meliori iudicio) if the law be not ſuch with vs, it ſhal lie open to a manifeſt fraud, for what is that to Barwicke where I was borne, and liued thirty yeares together, the bannes ſhould be publiſhed two yeares after at Iſlington or S. Iohns pariſh, by London, where I dwelt and am dwelling, in the one and in the other, but two bare yeares, happily two monethes, yea why ſhould not two daies ſerue my turne? I flye from Barwicke, & am entertained at Iſlingtō, wher I reſt a winters night, and hauing contracted my ſelfe with my Miſtris, or hir maide, for ſome cauſes beſt knowne to our ſelues, I take my leaue honeſtly in the morning, & am entertained again freſh & faſting in S. Iohns pariſh, there I pray (the morrow after) publicatiō in the pariſh church of matrimonie, betwixt me and I know not whom, for my accquaintance was but ſmal, yet I can name my ſelfe, my miſtris (you muſt ſuppoſe her a wyddowe) or her mayde, or if my memorie fayles me, I haue their names in writing; Iſlington is a common name known farre and neere, there dwels mine old miſtres and my fellow, & there dwelt I for a long winters night togither: as for S. Iohns pariſh, I ſhal not need to charge my memorie with it, it is ſufficient I tender the bannes there, and ſay whoſe man I am; we ſhalbe thus denounced, my new wife and I together, at theſe two pariſhes, and my poore old wife at Barwicke, ſhalbe neuer the wiſer.
               This (ſaith Panormitan) he hath ſeen, De facto, in his time, and ſurely iniquitie is riper in ours, yea rotten

ripe, it is but needleſſe to faine an example, for let him ſay that hath not ſeene, or crediblie heard of, (in this age of ours) as great experience as this: and whence cōmeth it? verily, after Clandeſtine marriages alwaies premiſed firſt, next from the inconſiderat examining the condition and ſtate of the perſon, and certifying with the like diſcretion, and receiuing their certificates together, whoſe bannes and mariage they publiſh and ſolemniſe.
               This I could counſel them whom it concerneth in that behalf, to looke vnto, for two cauſes; the one, the open ſcandal that may enſue ſuch marriages & contracts; the iminent danger the other, of the Canon; that pointeth at the world, this at themſelues: the law hath Duplicem mentē, not a double meaning, ſuch as is their excerciſe that fold them as they liſt, but the ſame vnderſtanding in both, the onely difference is, the one is nearer, the other further off, viz Extenſiuā, and comprehenſiuam, of theſe in the tractat of the ordinarie. In the meane time (touching the mind I haue deliuered here of the canon in Clandeſtine marriages) ſuch as be diſpoſed, and whom it concerneth beſides, let them learne if they pleaſe, and ſure it is worth the knowledge, whether it comprehendeth, or we haue extended vnto it.
               And touching Clandeſtine marriages generallie, ſuch be moreouer ſayd to be ſo, in which be omitted Solemnitates quas eccleſia de honeſtate requirit. 
                  D. c. cum inhibitio. eod. tit. that is to ſay, Such decent ſolemnities as the church hath ordeined, as Publicū proclama, traductio in eccleſiā, benedictio ſacerdotis, annulus, &c. Neuertheles they ſhall not, the defect of theſe, fruſtrate the marriages had, if no

other impedimēt enſue, only it hindreth the cōſumatiō of the contract not had, and as we haue ſayd, they agrauate the paine, they be not otherwiſe reputed for ſubſtance, but decēcy, according to the text, Omnia decenter & ſecundū ordinem fiant &c. Neuertheleſſe concurring with lawfull impediments and detected (as in other caſes of Clandeſtinitie) they diſable alſo the iſſue. Glo. in d. c. cum inhibitio ver. Clandeſtina. eod. tit.
               
               
                  Hoſtienſis, of no leſſe authoritie thā learning, cōcludeth generally that euery matrimony had againſt the churches prohibition general, or ſpecial, expreſſed, or not expreſſed, ſhalbe deemed Clandeſtine & ſubiect to the Canon. Hoſt. ſuper c. cum inhibitio Pan. eod.
               
               Here I might ſpeake of the prohibited times to marrie, that is to ſay from the firſt ſunday in aduent, to the octaues of the Epiphanie incluſiuely, the firſt prohibition. The ſecond from the Lxx. ſunday, to the octaues of Eaſter incluſiuely. The third, from the firſt Rogatiō day, till the ſeuenth of Pentecoſt, that is to ſay, till Trinitie ſunday: vpon which day it is lawfull to ſolemnize De ferijs c. capellan. exc. 
                        ••…
                     nd. de dec. & oblat. ver. nubentium..
               This hath beene, and is the obſeruation of the Church at this day, namely to ſuſpend in theſe times not the beginning, nor ratification of matrimonie, Patrimonium initur. per ſpōſionem, ratificatur per conſēſum, cō
                     ſumatur per copulam. but the acceſſorie ſolemnities onely, and the conſumation of the contract; neither can I finde it ſo ſtrict, this temporall prohibition, as it is (for the moſt part) interpreted to be, for thus I find it qualified, viz. Haec autem ſeruanda ſunt, ſi vxor conſenſum adhibere voluerit, the gloſſe addeth & contra: that is to ſay, This abſtinence taketh place, if the wife ſhall conſent thereunto: and likewiſe if the husband, for they haue not

power of their bodies in themſelues, but either ouer other in due beneuolence: this the canons terme Debitum coniugale, wherin they be prohibited to defraud one another, except it be by conſent for a time 1. Cor. 7. 3. 4. 5.; no reaſon then the Church ſhould defraud them both. Let me not offend, in ſhewing the ſignifications I haue read of theſe prohibited times to marrie, leauing the ſame vnto them, that beſt be able to iudge them.
               The time of Aduent, repreſented Tempus abſentiae ſponſi, i. The abſence of the bridegrome, in the which his ſpouſe moſt of all deſireth, Aduentum, i. The comming of hir husband, and which ſhee importuneth daily. This ſhe inquireth of paſſengers too and fro, abandoning all delightes, ſo ſaith a father, Sponſa eccleſia tempore aduentus querit in lectione prophetarum quos tunc legit & qui de hoc certam habuerunt reuelationē: Ideo in memoriam ſponſi abſentis, ſed deſiderati, eccleſia tunc temporis ordinat filios ſuos a nuptijs abſtinere. The ſpouſe (ſaith hee) the Church, euen ſeeketh ſo this time, the comming of her bridegrome in the Prophets, which then ſhe readeth and who haue had thereof certaine reuelation; and therefore ſhee hath this time of Aduent in remembrance of hir abſent, but moſt deſired bridegrome, ordained that her ſonnes ſhould abſtain from marriage Itinerar. Paradiſ. de mat. ſer. 2..
               The ſecond prohibition repreſented Tempus luctus in quo lugemus caſum Ad
                        •…
                     : & caſum noſtrum in ipſo. The ſecond prohibition, that is to ſay, the time of lent, it repreſented a time of mourning; wherein we bewailed the fall of Adam, and (in him) our owne: and the dangers conſequētly herein we haue fallen into. We

ſhould not therefore in theſe dangers reioyce, but lament rather and pray: it hath not therefore in this time, the Church, wherin ſhe bewailed hir ſinnes, in dread of ſuch imminent dangers, giuen libertie to hir children to marrie.
               Here they haue inferred, that Noah whileſt he was in the Arke, knew not his wife, nor his ſonnes theirs; but liued there apart, yea and all other creatures beſides, both male and female: for hauing continued in the arke, by the ſpace of a yeare, they are not read any of thē to haue multiplied. Againe the ſcripture Gen. 7. 7. ſpeaking of the entrance of Noah into the Arke mentioneth it thus; Noah entred, and his ſonnes: and afterwardes (as though they went apart) and his wife, and his ſons wiues: but otherwiſe of his going forth, viz. Go forth of the Arke, thou and thy wife, and thy ſons & thy ſons wiues with thee: 
                  Gen. 8. 16. So that the words which were in their entrāce vſed apart; were vſed togither in their going forth. Hence Hierome writeth vpon Zacharie, Temporibus tribulationis & luctus non debere ſapientem inſerutre operibus nuptiarum, that is to ſay, That they ought not, the actes of marriage, to be yeelded to (of him that his wife) in the times of tribulation and mourning.
               
                  Plangent terrae, &c. And the Prophet Zecharian. 12 writeth thus of the ſiege of Iudah againſt Hieruſalē. In that day ſhall there be a great mourning in Hieruſalem, &c. And the land ſhall bewaile, euerie familie apart: the familie of the houſe of Dauid apart, and their wiues apart; the familie of the houſe of Nathan apart, and their wiues apart; the familie of the houſe of Leui apart, and their wiues apart; the familie of Shimei apart,

and their wiues apart: all the families that remaine, euerie familie apart, and their wiues apart.
               The third prohibited time, including the Aſcention and Penticoſt, (hereunto were added the 8 daies after Eaſter) repreſented Tempus glorificationis, wherin (ſaith the Lord) Luke 20. 36. we ſhalbe Sicut angeli Dei, i. Equall with the angels of God, which neither marry, nor are married. Briefly, the firſt prohibited time mentioned here, repreſented the time of reconciliation: the ſecond of tribulation: the third of glorification.
               This for the prohibitiōs (I haue read) of the times; but where we haue mentioned De legitima parentum coniunctione approbata per leges, in the beginning of this chapter, that is to ſay; Of the lawful coniunction of man and woman approoued by the laws: it reſteth of the prohibition of the perſons: for ſo wee ſhall iudge of lawfull coniunctions, and ſo of lawfull iſſue. And touching theſe perſons ſithens they be in neareneſſe in thēſelues, diſcerned by conſanquinity, and affinitie; & conſequently whether prohibited (there) to marrie or not, we haue next declared conſanguinitie and affinitie in their orders, to manifeſt the prohibitions the better.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. 
               
                  Of conſanguinitie or bloud: the figure and declaration thereof.
               
               
                  COnſanguinitie is a bond or linke of perſons deſcended of the ſame ſtocke, deriued from carnall propagation: ſo called, Conſanguinitas, quaſi ſanguinis vnitas:
                  
That is to ſay, Conſanguinitie of the vnitie or communitie of bloud. Io. And. in decla. arb. conſang. And this, whether it be lawfully contracted or otherwiſe: that is to ſay, Carnall knowledge and iſſue had in fornication, equally contracteth conſanguinitie with matrimoniall knowledge, touching the prohibition of marriage. De preb c. per tuas. 28. 11. 8. c. 7 ſtatute.
               
               Now to diſcerne prioritie or neereneſſe in bloud, two things muſt be regarded principally, ſo called, Linea, and Gradus: as much to ſay as the line and degree: whoſe vſes the figure here enſuing ſhall declare at large, viz. to be the one of them, namely the line that, that gathereth togither the perſons, conteining their degrees, and diſtinguiſhing them in their numbers, this is called Collectio perſonarum: the other the ſtate or condition of the diſtant perſons, ſhewing them how neere they be, or how farre aſunder (in themſelues) from their common ſtocke, or either from other: This is called Habitudo diſtantium perſonarum: & dicitur gradus ad ſimilitudinem ſcalarum graduum, ſiuè locorum procliutum, quia ita gradimur de proximo ad proximum. 
                  L. Iuriſconſultus. ft. de arb. aff.
               
               It is alſo to be noted, this line to be threefold; that is to ſay, Aſcending, Deſcending, and Collateral. L. 1. aff. de grad. aff. c. 1. 26. Q. 5.
               
               The aſcending line is from me to my father, to my grand-father, great graund-father, and ſo vpwardes: in this figure from ✚ to A. B. C. D. Contrariwiſe, the deſcending line from me to my ſonne, nephew, his ſonne, downwards: in this figure, likewiſe from ✚ to a. b. c. d.
               The collateral line is placed on either ſide: this is alſo noted to be twofold, viz Equall & vnequall. The equal colleteral is that, where equally they differ, the

perſons, from their common ſtocke: as brothers and ſiſters be equally diſtant from their father, as alſo be brothers & ſiſters children from their graundfather.
               The vnequall, where one precedeth or goeth before or after another, ſuch be brothers, and their brothers or ſiſters children, and others apparant in this preſent figure, as alſo in the Legal figure before, eaſely diſcerned by their equal or vnequal diſtance, by relation from thēſelues to their cōmon ſtocks. Common ſtocks vnderſtand ſuch as be placed in this figure frō 
                  ✚ vpwardes in the aſcending line, A. B. C. D. there is proceeding from theſe, on eyther ſide, a generation manifeſt in this figure; ſuch be Collaterals, equall or vnequall, diſtinguiſhed by their places: for example, Let vs make A the firſt ſtocke in the aſcending line, for ſo it falleth out by order and courſe of nature, ✚ is deſcended from him, who pointeth at his equall collaterals b 1. b 1. on either ſide: behold then the diſcent from b 1. is c 1. from thence d 1, from thence e 1; now b 1 is in the firſt degree to ✚, c 1 in the ſecond, d 1 in the third, e 1 in the fourth; theſe be all from the ſtocke A. viz. b 1, c 1, d 1, e 1, collaterals vnto ✚, i. one equall on either ſide, at whome hee pointeth equilaterally, namely b 1; the other three vnequall, eache further diſtant from him than other: for ſo they exceed (firſt) the equall collateral line of ✚, and next they exceed themſelues in deſcending as they goe.
               The ſecond ſtock is B, A is deſcended from him in this figure, and c 2. on eyther ſide: from c 2. is deſcended d 2, from d 2 e 2, from e 2 f 2. B is here in the ſecond degree aſcending vnto ✚, and b in the ſecond degree deſcending vnto him, vnto whom vpwards

and downwards he pointeth directly, he pointeth alſo at d2. and d2. collaterally, theſe be all from the ſtocke B. viz. c2. c2. d2. d2. e2. e2. f2. f2. collaterals vnto ✚ as the other were in the ſtock before, that is to ſay d2. and d2. equals, c2. and c2. extend not to his line, and e2. e2. f2. f2. exceed it. Here is likewiſe one equal collateral vnto ✚ on either ſide, & three vnequals, exceeding (as the other did) themſelues, in their deſcending as they goe.
               And they be thus in degree vnto ✚ 
                  viz. c2. and c2. in the ſecond degree, d2. and d2. in the ſame ſecond degree, e2. and e2. in the third, f2. and f2. in the fourth, not encreaſing in the collaterals from the ſtocke til they exceed the equall collaterall line of ✚, ſuch be from the firſt ſtocke c1. d1. e1. which encreaſe in euery perſon, from the equal line vnto ✚ one degree.
               Such be alſo from the ſecond ſtocke e2. f2. from the third ſtocke g3. The fourth generation determineth in this figure at the collateral equal line, viz. h4: from the fourth and laſt ſtocke in the fourth degree vnto ✚. This is after the Canons, and not the ſecular lawes, whoſe reaſon and difference we haue handled in the ſecond chapter before, neuertheleſſe it ſhall not be ſuperfluous to deliuer (as they tearme them) ſuch Magiſtral rules as the autenticall maiſters, fathers and doctors of the law haue determined in theſe lines to diſtinguiſh as well the degrees, as to ſhew the difference we haue mentioned betweene the lawes and the Canons, the firſt wherof is this, viz.
               
               In the right or ſtraight aſcending and deſcending lines, how many perſons there be (computation had The firſt rule
                  
of themſelues & the perſons that be placed betwixt them) whoſe diſtance is demaunded, ſubſtracting but one, there be ſo many degrees. For example, if Vna dempta. thou wilt know how many degrees D. differeth in this figure from ✚, thou ſhalt find (with themſelues and thoſe together betwixt them) fiue perſons, conclude there be foure degrees, and that they differ conſequentlie, ✚ and D, either from other, in the fourth degree.
               The ſame concluſion is of ✚ and his deſcending d. for there be numbred likewiſe fiue perſons, and ſo concluded foure degrees.
               If thou wouldſt know how they differ, D. from d, thou ſhalt finde there be numbred nine perſons, conclude eight degrees, & that they differ conſequentlie D. and d. either from other in the eight degree: the rule holdeth in this line in the reſidue, all one here after the laws and Canons, onely their difference is in the Collaterals, whoſe Magiſtral rules be theſe, viz. Collaterals in the equall line, how many perſons The ſecond rule. there be from either of them to their common ſtock, ſo far they differ either frō other; from ✚ (for example) to D. there be foure perſons, from h4. likewiſe to the ſame ſtocke D, be foure perſons, ✚ and h4. ſhall differ therfore, and be diſtant from themſelues in the fourth degree. This is after the Canons.
               After the laws it is otherwiſe, viz. collaterals in the equal line, how far they differ either of thē from their ſtock in number of perſons, in that number doubled they be diſtant from thēſelues; this is apparant in the Legal figure, in the 2. Chap. before, for example, ✚ in that Legal figure differeth as it doth here in the ſame number

of perſons from D and from h 4 to the ſame D there, there be numbred likewiſe foure perſons; either of theſe numbers doubled from the perſons to their common ſtocke, that is to ſay, either from ✚ to D, or h 4 to the ſame D, in that Legal figure maketh the number of eight: ſo many degrees ſhall the perſons be a ſunder, and this diuerſitie ariſeth as we haue touched in the 2. Chap. before, in that euery perſon addeth a degree in the collaterals, after the laws: as two brothers make two Legal degrees, which after the Canons do make but one. Their computations be diuers, as alſo their cauſes be diuers, whoſe reaſons and difference we referre to the ſaid 2. chapter before, only this differēce we may note in this place, becauſe it is not mentioned there, viz. In the equal collaterall line, whether the line conſiſteth of euen or odde numbers, the degree falleth alwaies out (in number) to be euen, after the lawes: this may be ſeen in the Legal figure in the 2. and 4. and 1. and 3. ſtocks there, for 2. make 4. and 4. make 8. in the equal collateral line, as alſo do 1 make 2, & 3, 6, in the ſame collateral line: this appeareth in this Canonicall figure otherwiſe, for 1 maketh one, 3 three, 5. fiue, &c.
               The rule remaineth now to be ſpokē of, touching The third rule. collaterals in the vnequall line, which after the Canons is this, viz. Collaterals in the vnequal line, how far they differ (the furdeſt of thē) from their ſtocke, ſo farre they be either of them diſtant from themſelues: for example, D is the ſtocke to ✚ and f4 in this figure, to know their diſtance in bloud, we muſt make our computation from the furtheſt: this appeareth in the figure to be ✚, which differeth in the fourth

degree from D, ſo many degrees therefore ſhall hee differ from f4 and conſequently ✚ and f4 either from other. The ſame in the other deſcending collaterals vnto ✚, Vſquè ad lineam aequalitatis: that is to ſay, The ſame computation that is had from ✚ to the ſaid common ſtocke, the ſame computation ſhall hold betweene ✚ and euery deſcending perſon from the ſame ſtocke collaterall vnto ✚, euen to his equall collaterall line: for they increaſe not (as we haue ſaid before) one degree vnto ✚, till they ſhal haue exceeded his equall collaterall line.
               This (if wee proſecute our example in the ſame ſtocke, D) ſhalbe manifeſt: for ✚ differing from this ſtocke in the fourth degree, differeth therefore from e4 in the fourth degree, from f4 in the fourth, from g4 in the fourth: and from h4 in the fourth. Hence it is holden an infallible rule in the canons, that a perſon begotten, begetteth not a degree, till the equall line be exceeded: and then (and not before) they increaſe in euery added perſon.
               It is otherwiſe after the legall computation, for after the lawes it is thus: viz collaterals in the vnequal line, how many perſons there be, (ſubſtracting the ſtocke) ſo many degrees. This appeareth in the ſame ſtocke and perſons that wee ſuppoſed in the canonicall computation before: for ✚ differeth heere (as there) from D in the fourth degree: but e 4 (heere) in the fift, f4 in the ſixt, g4 in the ſeuenth, and h4 in the eight, and ſo euery perſon without exception (after the lawes) doth increaſe a degree. I referre thee for example to the legal figure.
               It ſhalbe needleſſe to proſecute euery particular

ſtocke in this figure at large, for the ſame reaſon holdeth This figure is placed at the end of the next chapter here enſuing: togither with the figure of affinitie there. Secundum, Ioh. An. of thoſe we haue touched, and the reſidue: We leaue them therefore (with this relation) to the figure inſuing here of Conſanguinitie, deſcending to the figure and declaration of affinitie, according to our promiſed order.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Of affinitie or alliance by marriage. The figure and declaration thereof.
               
               
                  AFfinitie is (after the Lawes) perſonarum proximitas proueniens ex iuſtis nuptijs: as much in effect, as a neereneſſe of perſons proceeding frō lawful marriages Non facile. ¶. affines. & ¶. ſciendum ff. de grad. affinit.: for ſo it is contracted, and not otherwiſe, after the ciuil lawes: howbeit the canons haue and doe alſo, reſpect affinitie in this place, as wee haue mentioned of conſanguinitie in the chapter going before, that is to ſay, Equally contracted in matrimonie, and otherwiſe De prob. d. c. per tuas. ſtatut. praeal. H. 8. Anno. 28. c. 7.: for after the canons, it is (Affinitie) perſonarum proximitas ex quocunque coitu proueniens: owni carens parentela, A ncereneſſe of perſons proceeding from euerie carnall knowledge, without any maner of parentage, or aunceſtrie. And of that affinitie we ſpeake of here: ſo called (Affinitas) quaſi duorum ad vnum finem vnitas: As much to ſay, as an vnion or conſolidation of two, viz. that be diuerſe in one: for ſo

they be, diuerſe kinreds, by marriage or other copulations conioyned.
               By this, it is contracted (Affinitie) two manner of waies; Firſt by lawfull marriages; next by vnlawfull knowledge c. Diſcretionem. c. penult. ext. de eo qui cog. conſang. vx. ſuae.: And hereof there be three ſortes or kinds. The firſt is contracted thus, viz. My brother & I be Conſanguins in the firſt degree, he taketh a wife, hir they call Perſonam additam perſonae per carnis copulam, as much in effect as, a perſon added to another by carnall or fleſhly knowledge: this is the firſt kind of affinitie, contracted by meanes of my brother; that is to ſay, betweene his wife and me: and the firſt degree: for thus they be (the kinds and degrees) diſcerned in affinitie, viz. By the perſons that be in conſanguinitie or bloud, neerer or further off: diſtinguiſhed in the figure before, by their ſeuerall diſtance. For example, my brother is the firſt degree to me in conſanguinitie: his wife in affinitie: my brothers ſonne, in the ſecond: his nephew in the third: his nephews ſonne, in the fourth, they in conſanguinitie: their wiues in the ſame degrees; ſecond, third, or fourth vnto me, but they in affinitie: they alter verily attinentiam, theſe added perſons: that is to ſay, They attaine not to (in me) by their addition that, that I haue attained (by bloud) in the perſons they be added vnto: for herein (that is to ſay, in attinencie) we be diſtinguiſhed by conſanguinitie, and affinitie: briefly (that I may vſe the termes) my brother is my conſanguine, his wife my affine, onely they retaine and participate with me the degree, be it firſt, ſecond, third, or fourth, that I haue with the perſons they be carnally known by, the which they alter not.
               
                  
Conſequently they ſhalbe, euerie perſon in conſanguinitie to my wife, in affinitie vnto me; in what degree in the one, in that degree in the other; but alwaies in the firſt kinde, be they brother, ſiſter, nephew, neece, or any other perſon mentioned in this figure: for note, it conteineth not (this figure) but onely affinitie in the firſt kinde, and that to the fourth degree: foraſmuch as the prohibition of marriage, by the canons (now) exceedeth not the ſame in kind, nor degree. c. Non debet conſan. & aff.
               
               It ſhalbe neceſſarie heere, wee further declare the force and operation of affinitie (touching this prohibition of marriage) that is ſprung by vnlawfull knowledge, either in matrimonie, or without: for ſo it may be as vnlawfully contracted in the one, as in the other; as if Titius ſhall haue knowledge with Berta, whoſe mother hee marries afterwardes, and knowes hir likewiſe carnally, in this caſe ſhall Titius be diuorced from Bertas mother, and prohibited to contract with Berta hir ſelfe; and the reaſon is, Titius ſhall not dwell with the mother whom he married, becauſe hee contracted affinitie with her before, in his knowledge had with hir daughter. And he ſhall Stat. anno 28. Hen. 8 cap. 8. verſe, and further to dilate. &c. Haec etiā per can per iſsin.i iuris. not marrie with Berta, becauſe he contracted affinitie alſo with hir, in his knowledge had with hir mother: and therefore (in this caſe) the firſt affinitie diſſolues the marrimonie had with the mother: the ſecond hinders the matrimony to be had with the daughter.
               Briefly thus the law conſiders in theſe caſes, viz. which goeth before, or followeth, the affinitie, or the contract; if affinitie, then the contract is diſabled that is had afterwardes; but if the contract, that affinitie

preuaileth nothing that is ſubſequent. We ſhall not C. diſcretioneme. tuae, c. fin. de eo qui cog. conſ. vxoris ſuae. greatlie ſeeme to digreſſe from our purpoſe briefly to rehearſe the other two kinds of affinitie, if but to diſtinguiſh the later frō the repealed Canons: for note, the prohibition alſo extended vnto them 35. Q. 3. c. de affinitate, & ext. de cland. desp. c. inhibitio..
               The ſecond kind therfore of affinitie is this, viz. Ad to the firſt kind therof a perſon carnallie, as to thy brothers wife (ſuppoſing thy brother to be dead) a ſecond husband, a ſecond husband I tearme him, in reſpect of thy affinitie with hir; for happilie ſhe had vttered a double ſecond before, with theſe thou haſt nothing to do, but this ſecond to thy brother, more properly thy brothers ſucceſſour, is the ſecond kinde of affinitie vnto thee 35. Q. eod. de propinquis..
               If thou wilt haue the third breefly, it is this, ad to thy ſecond affinitie a perſon likewiſe carnallie, as to thy brothers wiues husband (ſuppoſing hir to bee dead as thy brother was before) another wife this is, Quid pro quo, one for another, merrily engliſhed. For a reed a Rams horne; but in earneſt take hir and thy third affinitie together.
               So it is ſaid to be Primum genus, i. The firſt kind of affinitie, Quia primo emanat de conſanguinitate: vel quiae (vna perſona mediante) contr ahitur. Secundum, i. The ſecond kind of affinitie, Quia ſecundo loco emanat, poſt primum, vel quia duabus perſonis mediantibus contrahitur. Tertium, i. the third kind of affinitie, Quia in tertio loco, vel quia (tribus perſonis mediantihus) emanat.
               
               The effect we haue explaned hereof, in theſe three ſeueral kindes already, briefly they be ſo called, the firſt of one, the ſecond of two, the third of three; but we proſecute onely the firſt, for the other we haue related

them to manifeſt the better this firſt, as alſo to giue a light (as I haue ſayd) of the former Canons, and otherwiſe they haue no being here.
               Touching therefore this firſt kind of affinitie, it is to be noted, and ſo it may be gathered by that we haue ſayd before, viz. It is contracted inter ſp onſum & conſanguineas ſponſae, and againe, inter ſponſam & conſanguineos ſponſi, as much to ſay, It is contracted (this firſt kind of affinitie) reciprocally, i. between the huſband and conſanguines of the wife; and è conuerſo, betweene the wife and conſanguines of the husband, howbeit betweene the conſanguines themſelues, by this marriage, there is no affinitie contracted, more than was betweene Hobſon and Iobſon, by looking through a hedge when they ſpyed one another: ſomewhat nearer, but Hoc aliquid nihil eſt, i. ſo far from this attinencie, that it hath no conſequence at all.
               Hence it is that the father and ſonne may contract and conſumate marriage with the mother & daughter, as widdows & widdowers do; & may do, & their ſons and daughters, ſuch as be ſo prouided for their children, when they couenant for themſelues: hence may alſo two brothers contract and conſumate marriage with two ſiſters C. quod ſuper his ext. de conſ. & aff., the like of the vncle and nephew C. r. & 2. eod. tit. xxxv. q. v. ſanè..
               Many attinencies may hereby be ſprung between the ſame perſons: this may be ſeen in children of diuers families, that be ſons either of them to their mothers; to their husbands, ſons and brothers; and vncle and nephew, to themſelues. And thus it falleth out, I marrie a wife that hath a ſonne that marrieth

with my mother, tearme me (for examples ſake) Ambroſe; my wife, Mary, who had to ſonne Theodor, who married (as I did his) with Martha my mother; I haue iſſue Peter; he hath iſſue Iohn: theſe attinencies happen (here) between Peter and Iohn; for firſt, ſonnes they be reciprocallie, that is to ſay, to their mothers, Iohn to Martha, mother to Ambroſe; and Peter to Mary, mother to Theodor; and ſo they be ſonnes to their husbands; Iohn to Theodor, Peter to Ambroſe; brothers to the ſame, i. either to others father; Iohn to Ambroſe, father to Peter; Peter to Theodor, father to Iohn: for ſo it is in this example, Iohn and Ambroſe had one mother, Martha; and Peter and Theod. the ſame mother, Mary; hence they be brothers, Peter is therefore Iohns brothers ſonne; and Iohn, Peters brothers ſonne; conſequently Iohn ſhalbe vncle to Peter, and Peter vncle to Iohn; how they be nephewes it followeth by this. Conclude them therefore briefly, eache others mothers ſonne, eache others fathers brother, eache others vncle, eache others nephew. The figure may be formed, as followeth in the page next enſuing.
               
                  
                  
                     Peter. Marye. had T. O. ſonne Theodor. who married wt Martha.
                     Iohn. Martha. had T o ſonne. Ambros. who. married wt. Marye.
                  
               
               The computatiō it hath of degrees, (I meane this affinitie) it borroweth of Conſanguinitie before, Non habet ſuam ſpecialem computationem graduum, It hath no computation of it ſelfe in degrees; this we haue ſufficiently mentioned in this chapter alreadie, only we may deſcribe the figure, the better to conceiue it formed.
               Firſt there be placed in the ſame (in the middeſt) foure compaſſes with ſeuerall ſuperſcriptions, viz. In the firſt, the firſt degree, in the ſecond, the ſecond degree, in the third, the third, & in the fourth, the fourth.
               On the right ſide to theſe be placed likewiſe foure compaſſes, written in the firſt, brother; in the ſecond, brothers ſonne; in the third, brothers nephew; in the fourth, brothers nephews ſonne: againe on the ſame ſide

of theſe be placed foure other compaſſes, written in the firſt, brothers wife: in the ſecond, brothers ſonnes wife: in the third, brothers nephewes wife: in the fourth, brothers nephewes ſonnes wife.
               
               On the left ſide of the firſt foure middle cōpaſſes, be placed likewiſe foure other compaſſes with ſeuerall ſuperſcriptions, viz. In the firſt, ſiſter: in the ſecond, ſiſters daughter: in the third, ſiſters neece: in the fourth, ſiſters neeces daughter. Likewiſe on the ſame ſide of theſe, be foure other compaſſes, and written in the firſt, Siſters husband: in the ſecond, ſiſters daughters husband: in the third, ſiſters neeces husband: in the fourth, ſiſters neeces daughters huſband.
               
               There be added (to theſe) two other compaſſes, on the rightſide one, on the left ſide another: the rightſide compaſſe, conteineth; Brothers wiues huſband: the left, Siſters husbands wife. In theſe the doctors agree they be added for ornament and demonſtration beſides, of the not prohibited kindes (in affinitie) to marrie at this day, they are not otherwiſe of the ſubſtance of the figure.
               There be yet obſerued two bending lines; one beginneth at the compaſſe of brother, and endeth at the compaſſe of ſiſters husband: wherein is written; The firſt kind of affinitie prohibited at this day to marry.
               
               The other beginneth at the compaſſe of ſiſter, and endeth at the compaſſe of brothers wife: wherein is written the ſame. This forme was firſt inuented, as alſo the figures of conſanguinitie (before) by the famous learned doctor, Iohan. Andre. and autenticall in the canons Can. Iſidor. & Alex. 35. Q. 5. c. 1. 2. & vlt.: for after diuers contentions in his time

had, touching the naturall forme of the figure, and the deſcription thereupon of Iohan. de Deo. Hiſpan. who ſeemed by his metrical rules, to open thereunto the right vnderſtanding indeed, howbeit the multitude of the ſame, and obſcuritie hee begat in his rules and verſes, brought forth another effect: Attendens ipſe Iohan. Andr. For ſo he writeth of himſelfe, Antiquorum ſcripta, &c. Recounting with the canons, the auncient and autenticall writers, hee compoſed it: handling therewithall theſe three points beſides amongſt the reſt, viz. The neceſſitie of it: the authoritie: the often repetition.
               For the firſt, Probatio ad oculum: as much to ſay, as an eie witneſſe: the neceſſitie of it appeareth both in the lawes and canons; this wee haue touched in the ſecond chapter before. For the ſecond, the canons we haue cited here alreadie of Iſidor. and Alexander, viz. 35 Q. Cap. 1. 2. & vlt. may ſuffice. And for the third, that I may vſe my learned authors words: nomini venit in dubium: id ſatis eſſe validum, ſatiſque famoſum, quod repitita lectio probat: Let this ſuffice for affinitie: the figure whereof enſueth.
               
                  
                  
                  
                     THE CANONICAL FIGVRE OF CONſang.
                     
                        
                           
                              Great grandfathers father. The ſame mother. iiij D 4
                           e Great vncles vncle. The ſame aunt. iiij. 5
                           f his, hir, ſonne daughter. iiij. 6
                           g his, hir, nephew neece. iiij. 7
                           h his, hir, nephews neeces ſonne daughter. iiij. 8
                        
                        
                           
                              Great grandfather, Mother. iiij C 3
                           d Great vncle. The ſame aunt. iiij. 4
                           e his, hir, ſonne daughter. iij. 5
                           f his, hir, nephew neece. iij. 6
                           g his, hir, nephews neeces ſonne daughter. iiij. 7
                        
                        
                           
                              Grandfath. grandmo. ij B 2
                           c Vncle. Aunt. ij. 3
                           d his, hir, ſonne daughter. ij. 4
                           e his, hir, nephew neece. iij. 5
                           f his, hir, nephews neeces ſonne daughter. iiij. 6
                        
                        
                           
                              Father, mother. j A 1
                           b Brother, Siſter. j. 2
                           c his, hir, ſonne daughter. ij. 3
                           d his, hir, nephew neece. iij. 4
                           e his, hir, nephews neeces ſonne daughter. iiij. 5
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           THE FIGVRE OF AFFITIE.
                           
                               
                              The fiſt kinde of affinitie prohibited at this day to
marry.
                              The firſt kinde of affinitie prohibited at this day to
marry
                              Theſbe be added for ornament only and demonſtration of
the kinde of affinitie but they be not prohebited to marrie.
                           
                           
                              firſt deg.
                              brother.
                              siſters huſband
                              siſter.
                              brothers wife
                              brothers wiues huſbande
                              siſters huſbands wife.
                           
                           
                              ſecond deg
                              brothers ſonne.
                              siſters daughters husb.
                              ſiſters daughter
                              brother ſonnes wife
                               
                               
                           
                           
                              third deg.
                              Brothers nephew
                              Siſters neeces huſband
                              Siſters neece.
                              Brothers nephewes wife
                               
                               
                           
                           
                              four deg.
                              brothers nephews ſonne.
                              Siſt. nee. daughter huſ-bād
                              Siſters neeces daughter
                              bro. nep. ſonnes wife
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               This figure ſheweth onely the firſt kinde of affinitie, in the firſt collaterall deſcendents, by carnall addition, that is to ſay, to thy brother a wife, tothy ſiſter a husband, and ſo to the fourth degree.
               The ſame affinitie thou haſt that is to ſay, in the firſt kinde, by the ſame addition, to euery other perſon in this figure of conſanguinitie.
               The degrees ſhall be more or leſſe, according to the diſtance of the perſons they be added vnto: but alwaies in the firſt kinde, the which the prohibition of the Canons at this day exceedeth not.
               
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Of the Prohibition Leuiticall.
               
               
                  
                     HAc itaquè conſuctudine quae ab ipſo exordio humanae propagationis originem habuit, quam nulla lex contra iubendo euacuauerat, excuſantur Abraam, Iſaac, & Iacob, & ceteri qui de propria cognatione ducebant vxores 
                  35. q. 2. & 3 c. igitur. §. hac itaque.. The queſtiō of their ages prouoked (in their times) the makers of the poſitiue canon lawes to anſwere ſuch obiections had againſt the Patriarches and others that had married in their kindreds and tribes of the families of their fathers. They concluded (therefore) they were excuſed (Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob) by that cuſtome that had growen from the beginning of humane propagation; and that, which no law (then) had aboliſhed.
               The premiſſes, or reaſons that they vſed (before) were theſe, viz. They were not prohibited d. c. cum igitur: in princip.: that Idolatry might be auoided Eod § eſt: that the Church might be inſtituted in the peculiar people of God Eod. § autem.. Deus enim 
                  quamuis. 
                  ſic ab initio ſalutem humani generis diſpenſauit, vt primitiuam eccleſiam in illo populo inſtitueret, qui ſibi carnis conſanguinitate erat propinquus: Hence the Apoſtles were choſen firſt of the Iewiſh nation, whom God appointed (then) the foundation (as it were) of the Church. Deinde (in cecitate ſuae perfidiae Iudaica plebe relicta) It was tranſlated afterwardes (the preaching of the goſpel) vnto ſtrangers: Tam fide, quam cognatione carnis à Chriſto: Deſpiſing as it were the companie and conuerſation of his cōſanguine, choſe him a wife of another

familie: fulfilling theſe prophecies Oſeae. c. 4 Iſaiah. 5 c.: In peccatis veſtris dimiſi matrem veſtram quaſi adulteram & repudiatam, &c. Vocabo plebem meam, non plebem meam. The canons haue enferred hence, that they were permitted firſt (theſe marriages) but now prohibited.
               What the Lord commaunded concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, Mahlah, Tirzah, Hoglah, Milah, and Noah, they did; that is to ſay, they married to their fathers brothers ſonnes Nomb. 36.
               But this was after the commandements and laws which the Lord had commanded by the hand of Moſes vnto the children of Iſrael in the plaine of Moab by Iorden, towardes Iericho: theſe be handled more at large in the table at the end of this treatiſe, Sect. 8. Vide tab. ſect. 8 we leaue them therfore here, and to our purpoſe, the Leuiticall prohibition, viz.
               
               6 None ſhall come neere to anie of the kindred of his fleſh to vncouer hir ſhame. I am the Lord. Leuit. 18. & 20.
               7 Thou ſhalt not vncouer the ſhame of thy father, nor the ſhame of thy mother, for ſhe is thy mother, thou ſhalt not diſcouer hir ſhame.
               8 The ſhame of thy fathers wife thou ſhalt not diſcouer, for it is thy fathers ſhame.
               9 Thou ſhalt not diſcouer the ſhame of thy ſiſter, the daughter of thy father, or the daughter of thy mother, whether ſhe be borne at home, or born without; thou ſhalt not diſcouer their ſhame.
               10 The ſhame of thy ſonnes daughter, or of thy daughters daughter, thou ſhalt not I ſay, vncouer their ſhame.
               
                  
11 The ſhame of thy fathers wiues daughter begotten of thy father (for ſhe is thy ſiſter) thou ſhalt not (I ſay) diſcouer her ſhame.
               12 Thou ſhalt not vncouer the ſhame of thy fathers ſiſter: for ſhe is thy fathers kinswoman.
               13 Thou ſhalt not diſcouer the ſhame of thy mothers ſiſter, for ſhe is thy mothers kinswoman.
               14 Thou ſhalt not vncouer the ſhame of thy fathers brother, that is, Thou ſhalt not goe into his wife, for ſhe is thine aunt.
               15 Thou ſhalt not diſcouer the ſhame of thy daughter in law, for ſhe is thy ſonnes wife, therefore ſhalt thou not vncouer hir ſhame.
               16 Thou ſhalt not diſcouer the ſhame of thy brothers wife, for it is thy brothers ſhame.
               17 Thou ſhalt not diſcouer the ſhame of the wife & of hir daughter, neither ſhalt thou take hir ſonnes daughter, nor hir daughters daughter, to vncouer hir ſhame, for they are thy kinsfolkes, and it were wickedneſſe.
               18 Alſo thou ſhalt not take a wife with her ſiſter, during hir life, to vexe hir in vncouering hir ſhame vpon her. Theſe in the gloſſe be briefly collected thus viz.
               
               
                  
                     Nata, Soror, Neptis, Matertera, Fratris', & vxor.
                  
                  
                     Et patrui Coniux, Mater, Priuigna, Nouerca.
                  
                  
                     Vxoris quae ſoror, Priuigni Nata, Nuruſquè.
                  
                  
                     Atque ſoror patris Coniungi lege vetantur.
                  
               
               As much in effect amongſt the reſidue in the admonition or table of prohibited marriages, ſet forth by the moſt reuerend father in God, Mathew, Archbiſhop of Canturburie, primate of England, and Metropolitan. An. 1563. as followeth; that is to ſay.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        A man may not marrie his
                        Mother.
                        The right aſcending line, and firſt degree.
                     
                     
                        Stepmother.
                     
                     
                        Wiues mother.
                     
                     
                        Sonnes daughter.
                        The right deſcēding line and ſecond degree.
                     
                     
                        Daughters daughter.
                     
                     
                        Wiues ſonnes daughter.
                     
                     
                        Wiues daughters daughter.
                     
                     
                        Daughter.
                        The right deſcending line and firſt degree.
                     
                     
                        Wiues daughter.
                     
                     
                        Sonnes wife.
                     
                     
                        Siſter.
                        The equall collateral line, and firſt degree.
                     
                     
                        Wiues ſiſter.
                     
                     
                        Brothers wife.
                     
                     
                        Fathers ſiſter.
                        The vnequall collaterall line, and ſecond degree.
                     
                     
                        Mothers ſiſter.
                     
                     
                        Fathers brothers wife.
                     
                  
               
               30 Therfore ſhall ye keepe mine ordinances, that ye doe not any of the abhominable cuſtomes, which haue been done before you.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Of the Prohibition Canonicall.
               
               
                  THe Egyptians were condemned & the Canaanites, in theſe wicked and inceſtuous marriages before, the Iſraelites forewarned therin (by Moſes) to whom the former prohibition was giuen, for ſo they were commaunded, the children of Iſrael, that after the doings of the land of Aegypt, wherin they dwelt, they ſhould not doe; and after the maner of the land of Canaan, whether then the Lord would bring them, they ſhould not doe, nor walke in their ordinances Leuit. 18. 3.; for in all theſe the nations were defiled, which then the lord had promiſed to caſt out before them Leuit. 18. 34.. This condemnation therfore of the Aegyptians, and the Iſraelites warning, may be ſpectacles vnto vs.
               The poſitiue conſtitutions of the church of England In tabula quadam a reuerendisſimo patre ac domino Archiepiſcopo Cantuar. ſcripta. publicata, & poſte à ab Archiepiſcop & Epiſco, reſcripto imperiali. Anno Elizabethae. congregat. app
                        •
                     o
                        •
                      at. & confirmat., it falleth out to handle the poſitiue Canon law, but becauſe Eccleſia anglicana, i. the Engliſh church, is neareſt vnto vs, we will handle it firſt, and the rather, that this order hath ſeemed the neareſt to manifeſt (in this chapter) our purpoſe, the Canons ſhal enſue afterwards.
               The poſitiue conſtitutions therfore of the church of England haue added certaine perſons vnto theſe; that is to ſay, onely in names and tearmes, but not in

degree, for though they be not found to be mentioned in the Leuitical, in their names and tearms their nearneſſe (notwithſtanding) in the ſame degrees, is as manifeſt as the reſt, & whoſe ſhames thou diſcouereſt equally with theirs, & thine owne abhominatiō together. Be not therfore deceiued, it is not the name of Conſanguinity, or affinity, wherin the ſubſtance cōſiſteth of this prohibition, but the degree. I might cite many laws, but let the ſtatutes ſuffice, they follow in their orders, viz. in the chapter next enſuing, there thou ſhalt find them mentioned, not the Leuitical names, but degrees.
               Such be in the aſcending line, thy grand-mother, grand fathers wife, wiues grand-mother; not mentioned (there) in their names and tearmes, equallie (notwithſtanding) diſtant in degree from thee, with thy ſonnes daughter, daughters daughter, wiues ſons daughter, wiues daughters daughter, whom the prohibition comprehendeth, in their ſeueral names and tearmes: adde vnto theſe thy ſons ſons wife, daughters ſonnes wife, whom the church hath decreed the ſame prohibition extends to. For note, their difference is in their lines, viz. They be diſtinguiſhed by aſcending and deſcending lines: that is to ſay, Of thy grand-mother and thy ſonnes daughter, and daughters daughter, which be only of the perſons we haue mentioned laſt, conſanguines vnto thee, and in the ſecond degree.
               The ſame reaſon (in affinitie) is of the reſt, that is to ſay, Thy grand-fathers wife, thy wiues grand-mother, be equallie (from thee) diſtant with thy wiues ſonnes daughter, & wiues daughters daughter theſe

in affinitie, the other in conſanguinity, as for thy ſons ſons wife, daughters ſons wife, they be equals vnto thee with thy wiues ſons daughter, wiues daughters daughter, i. They differ not in line nor degree: only as before is ſaid, they be diſtinguiſhed from the perſons we haue mentioned before by conſanguinitie, & affinitie: otherwiſe the prohibition equally holdeth in them all. Such perſons be alſo in the vnequall collaterall lines, viz. Thy brothers daughter: thy ſiſters daughter; brothers ſonnes wife; ſiſters ſonnes wife; wiues brothers daughter; wiues ſiſter daughter: that is to ſay, equally diſtant from thee in conſanguinitie, thy brothers and ſiſters daughters, with thy fathers and mothers ſiſters: adde vnto theſe in affinitie thy fathers brothers wife, thy mothers brothers wife, wiues fathers ſiſter, wiues mothers ſiſter: Theſe in the aſcendents. In the deſcendents, to the other; that is to ſay, to thy brothers and ſiſters daughters, conſanguines vnto thee, and deſcendents, adde (in affinitie) thy brothers and ſiſters ſonnes wiues, and thy wiues brothers, and hir ſiſters daughters.
               Theſe be all in conſanguinitie and affinitie vnto thee in the vnequall collaterall lines, aſcending and deſcending, aſwel mentioned as not mentioned expreſly in the Leuitical law in their names and termes, in the ſame ſecond degree. This may appeare more plainly in the table of prohibited marriages, comprehended within that table annexed at the end of this booke.
               Touching now the canons, i. The poſitiue canon lawe, I referre thee to the figures of conſanguinitie and affinitie before, as alſo to this table mentioned.
               
                  
It ſhal be therefore needleſſe, further to ſpeake of the prohibition of the canons, than briefly that deſcription and computation canonicall wee haue mentioned alreadie may declare it: for that vnderſtood, vnderſtand withall the prohibition of the canons; that is to ſay, to the fourth degree: for ✚ in that example, may not marrie with any letter in the figure. This exceedeth the poſitiue conſtitutions of the Church of England, in euerie line two degrees, viz. Firſt in conſanguintie in the right aſcending line two degrees, i. C and D, in the deſcending line likewiſe two degrees, i. c. d. in the collaterals, from A two degrees, i. d 1. e 1. In the collaterals from B. three degrees, d 2. e 2. f 2. In the collaterals from C and D, euerie perſon that is mentioned; theſe in conſanguinitie.
               The prohibition in affinitie is extēded thus, that is to ſay, beyond the poſitiue conſtitutions of the Engliſh Church: frō the firſt ſtocke in the ſame figure vnderſtanding the perſons to be added carnally, for that is the vſe of the figure, as may be gathered by that we haue ſaid in the 7. chapter before, to thy brothers nephews wife▪ brothers nephews ſonnes wife: ſiſters nephews wife: ſiſters nephews ſonnes wife: brothers neeces ſonnes wife: ſiſters neeces ſonnes wife. From the ſecond ſtocke, to thy fathers brothers ſons wife: fathers brothers nephewes wife: fathers brothers nephews ſonnes wife: mothers brothers ſonnes wife: mothers brothers nephewes wife: mothers brothers nephews ſonnes wife. From the third and Vndeſtand (with theſe) their neeces ſonnes wiues. fourth ſtocks, to the carnall additions, in either ſex, that be mentioned in their lines. Theſe we haue placed

ſeuerally in their ſections, for the plainer demonſtration thereof in that table at the end of this booke. The reaſons that the canons haue yeelded of this extenſion is this, viz.
               
               
                  Habita eſt enim illis ratio certiſsima charitatis, vt homines quibus eſſet vtilis atque honeſtiſsima concordia, diuerſarum neceſsitudinum vinculis necterentur: nec vnus in vno multas haberet neceſsitudines, ſed ſingulae ſpargerentur in ſingulos ſi ad ſocialem vitam diligentius plurimos obtinerent. Pater quippe & ſocer duarum ſunt neceſsitudinum nomina; dum ergo habet quis alium patrem, alium ſocerum, numeroſius ſe charitas porrigit: vtrumquè autem vnus ſc. Adam eſſe cogebatur, & filijs, & filiabus ſuis, quando fratres ſorores què iungebantur coniugio; ſicut Eua vxor eius vtrique ſexui filiorū, fuit & ſocrus, & mater. Quae ſi duae feminae fuiſſent, altera mater, altera ſocrus, copioſius ſe dilectio ſocialis colligaret. Sed hoc vnde fieret tunc non erat, quando niſi fratres & ſorores ex illis duobus primis nulli homines erāt. Fieri ergo debuit quod potuit, vt exiſtente copia vnde ducerentur vxores, quae iam non erant ſorores, non ſolum illud non ſicret, vbi nulla neceſsitas eſſet, verumetiam ſi fieret, nefas eſset: quod humano genere creſcente, etiam inter impios deorum multorum falſorumque cultores, ſic obſeruari cernimus: vt etſi legibus permittantur fraterna coniugia, melior tamen conſuetudo ipſam malit exhorrere licentiam: ſic què aduerſetur quaſi licere nunquam potuer it. Copulatio ergo maris & feminae (quantum attinet ad genus humanū) quoddam ſeminarium eſt charitatis; That is to ſay, in ſumme, though not in literall conſtruction, (beſides other arguments of greater conſequence in the lawes of God and of nature) they grounded thereupon an infallible argument to enſue of loue and charitie, if

men and women Diuerſarum neceſsitudinum vinculis, as much to ſay, ſhould knit themſelues togither with bonds of ſundry friendſhips, and not that one in one ſhould haue many: ſuch be the perſons mentioned in their ſeuerall ſections in the table heere enſuing from thy grandmother, Sect. 1. Num. 1. to thy wiues mothers ſiſters daughter, Sect. 8. num. 42. And euery aſcending perſon and deſcending rightly in euery ſection after; namely from thy great grandmother, Sect. 9. num. 43, to thy daughters neeces daughter. Sect. 17. num. 106. Father is a name vnto thee of tender kindneſſe; none neerer, none deerer: thou makeſt of him thine vncle: and again of him (I mean thine vncle) thou makeſt thy father in-law, whilſt thou matcheſt in that kindred, ſee Sect. 8. It is needleſſe to wade through euery particular ſectiō; the table is at hand, and the ſame reaſon holdeth in the reſt: the neerer therfore thou cōmeſt to the kindred of thy fleſh, the further off thou art frō friendſhip that is expedient, that amitie (I mean) and loue, that all mankind vpholdeth, and is vpholden by it: for what is that coniunction we ſpeake of, of man and woman? Quantum attinet ad genus humanum? It is anſwered thus, That is to ſay; So farre as it toucheth humane kind, it is nothing els but quoddam ſeminariū charitatis. And how behoofefull & expedient is this, there is none that cannot diſcerne: the which how it riſeth and ſpreadeth abroad it ſelfe, we haue declared in the chapter of affinitie before.
               
               
               
                  PROHIBITIONVM, CAVSARVMVE MATRImonium dirimentium in cap. 8. & 9. praecedentium, aliarumquè (ſaepè in iure contingentium) Tabula.
                  Prohibitio matrimonij aut eſt

                        Abſoluta & ſimplex, eaquè eſt vel

                              Ad tempus, veluti ſi quis matrimonium contraxerit

                                    Qui per aetatem matrimonium contrahere non poteſt, nam vel quis eſt

                                          Minor ſeptennio, & non poteſt neque matrimonium, neque ſponſalia contrahere. c. literas. de deſp. impub. Maior ſeptennio, ſed impubes, & ſponſalia contrahere poteſt. c. 2. de deſp. impub. matrimonium non poteſt. Proximus pubertati, & ſi coire poſsit. c. de illis eod. quoniam malitia aetatem ſupplet, contrahere matrimonium poteſt.
                                          Pubes, & licet vir non ſit, nequè coire poſait, niſi tamen perpetuum ſit impedimentum, contrahere matrimonium poteſt. Ioh. And. & Pan. & d. c. Puberes. de deſp. impub.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Qui vxorem ſuperſtirem habet (ea viuente) alteram ducere non poteſt. quiſi

                                          Cum altera ſponſalia inierit, nulla ex ijs naſcitur obligatio, quin vt poſsit (mortua vxore) aliam ducere.
                                          Matrimonium cum altera contraxerit de facto, eaque ſit

                                                Neſcia eius rei, & non valet quidem matrimonium, ſed (vxore mortua) cogi poterit vt ſecundam ducat, ſi modo illa hoc petierit. Et tunc ex nouo conſenſu, etiam tacito, conſtabit matrimonium. c. 1. de eo qui duxit in vx.
                                                
                                                Sciens quod alteram habet, & non poteſt etiam ex nouo conſenſu iſtam ducere, modo eam (viua prima vxore) cognouerit. cap. fin. de eo qui duxit.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Qui dilueida furoris interualla habet, non poteſt, dum furore tenetur, matrimonium contrahere.
                                 
                              
                              Perpetuò, & prohibentur alij, vel ratione

                                    Ordinis, & vel ordines ſunt

                                          Maiores, Sed in hijs omnibus, notandum eſt, prohibitio abſoleta eſt. Anno. 28. H. 8. cap. 7.
                                          Minores, Sed in hijs omnibus, notandum eſt, prohibitio abſoleta eſt. Anno. 28. H. 8. cap. 7.
                                       
                                    
                                    Voti, eſt què votum vel

                                          Solemne, Sed in hijs omnibus, notandum eſt, prohibitio abſoleta eſt. Anno. 28. H. 8. cap. 7.
                                          Simplex, Sed in hijs omnibus, notandum eſt, prohibitio abſoleta eſt. Anno. 28. H. 8. cap. 7.
                                       
                                    
                                    Frigidtaris, & impotentiae coeundi, ea vero eſt vel

                                          
                                             
                                                •
                                             aturalis, & vel in

                                                Marem incidit, & dicitur frigiditas, quae quidem matrimonium de facto contractum, oſtendit ab initio nullum fuiſſe. Aut. de nupe. §. Si vero. Col 4.
                                                Foeminam, & arctatio eſt, quae ſi huiuſmodi ſit, vt non niſi ope medicorū & cum periculo vitae cognoſci poſsit. ditimit matrimonium. c. ex literis. c. Fraternitatis. de Frigid. & mal. Si verò cognoſci poteſt, licet abortum faciat, vel fine miraculo aperiri poſsit, tenebit matrimonium. Hoſt. in ſum. Hoc tit.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          Accidentlis & vel

                                                Aperta, vt in ſpadonibus quibus detracta ſunt virilia, & ſi praeceſsit impedimentum, ſlatim ſóluitur.
                                                Occulta, veluti cum quis ita faſcinatus ſit. vt cum vxore nequeat, cum alijs vero rem habere poſsit, quod malificium dicitur. Et ſi

                                                      Temporale fuerit impedimentum, non eſt impedimento matrimonio.
                                                      Perpetuum, expectandū erit ad tempus quo effluxo, poterunt (Preſtitis quibuſdam propinquorum iuramentis) ſeparari. c. Fin. eod.
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Perpetuo furore detentus contrahere matrimonium non poteſt.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Reſpectiua, cum quis matrimonium cōtrahere poteſt, ſed hane, vel illam, ducere non poteſt: huius prohibitionis cauſae ſunt

                              Conſanguinitas, ea eſt vel

                                    Spiritualis, eaque ex Baptiſmo & confirmatione oritur inter leuantem & leuatum, ac parentes leuati: Iter
                                          •…
                                        inter leuatum, & filias & coniugem prius cognitas leuantis; poſtremo inter parentes leuati, & vxorem leuantis: idem de confirmante & baptizante. Notandum etiam eſt in hijs, prohibitionem eſſe & fuiſſe abſoletam, H. 8. ſtatut. praeal. c. eod.
                                    
                                    Legalis, quae ſit per adoptionem. Notandum etiam eſt in hijs, prohibitionem eſſe & fuiſſe abſoletam, H. 8. ſtatut. praeal. c. eod.
                                    
                                    Naturalis eaquè inter

                                          Aſcendentes & deſcendentes perpetuò prohibet.
                                          Collaterales vſque

                                                Ad certos gradus lege diuina prohibet.
                                                In quartum gradum lege humana. c. Fin. de conſang. & aff.
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Affinitas quam ſecundum canones etiam illitita facit copula. c. deſcretionem: De eo quia cog. conſ. Et quidem

                                    Inter maritum & vxoris conſanguineas, & è contra oritur affinitas: c. Fin. de conſ. & aff. & ſi

                                          Antecedat affinitas matrimonium, veluti ſi quis prius cum conſanguinea rem habuerit eius quam poſtea ducit, tam impedientur nuptiae, quam dirimentur, in prohibitum gradum. c. Fin. de con. & aff.
                                          
                                          Sequatur matrimonium affinitas, veluti ſi quis poſtquamvxorem duxerit, eius conſanguineam nouit: extali affinitate

                                                Sponſalia quidem praecedentia dirimentur. c. 2. de eo cog. conſ. vx.
                                                
                                                Matrimonium autem, vel (de preſenti) ſponſalia. cap. diſcretionem eod. vel praeſumptum c. Fin. eod. non dirimitur.
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    Inter maritum & vxorem nulla orritur affinitas, hij enim vna caro ſunt, & cauſa affinitatis, non affines.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
            
            
               
               
               CHAP. X.
               
                  Of the ſucceſsion of the ſtatutes in marriage: and their force at this day.
               
               
                  TOuching the ſucceſſion & their force, (of the Statutes) it followeth as it was enacted in An. xxv. of king Hen. 8. cap 22. viz. Since many incōueniēces haue fallen aſwell within this Realm, as in others, by reaſon of marrying within the degrees of mariage prohibit by Gods laws, i. The ſon to marrie the mother or the ſtepmother, The brother the ſiſter, the father his ſons daughter, or his daughters daughter, or the ſon to marry the daughter of his father, procreate and borne by his ſtepmother, or the ſonne to marrie his aunt, being his father or mothers ſiſter, or to marrie his vncles wife, or the father to marrie his ſonnes wife, or the brother to marrie his brothers wife, or any man to marrie his wiues daughter, or his wiues ſonnes daughter, or his wiues daughters daughter, or his wiues ſiſter, which marriages albeit they be plainly prohibited, and deteſted by the laws of almighty God, yet neuertheleſſe at ſome times they haue proceeded vnder coloures of diſpenſations by mans power, which is but vſurped, and of right ought not to be graunted, admited, ne allowed, for no man, of what eſtate degree or cōdition ſoeuer he be, hath power to diſpence with Gods laws, as all the cleargie of this realme, and the moſt

part of all the famous vniuerſities of Chriſtendome, and we alſo do affirme and thinke.
               Be it therefore enacted by auctoritie, aforefaied, that no perſon or perſons, ſubiects or reſiants of this Realme, or in any your dominions of what eſtate, degree or dignitie ſoeuer they be, ſhal from henceforth marrie withn the ſayd degrees afore rehearſed, what pretence ſoeuer ſhalbe made to the contrarie thereof.
               And in caſe any perſon or perſons of what eſtate, dignitie, degree, or condition, ſoeuer they be, hath beene heretofore, married within this Realme or in any the kings dominions, within any the degrees aboue expreſſed, and by any of the Archbiſhops, Biſhops, or miniſters of the church of England, be ſeparate from the bonds of ſuch vnlawfull marriage, that then euerie ſuch ſeparation ſhalbe good, lawful, firme, and permanent for euer, and not by any power auctoritie or means to be reuoked or vndone hereafter. And that the children proceeding or procreate vnder ſuch vnlawfull marriage, ſhall not be lawfull ne legitimate: any forreine laws, licences, diſpenſations, or other thing or things to the contrarie therof notwithſtanding. And in caſe there be any perſon or perſons, within this Realm, or in any the kings dominions, already married within any the ſaid degrees aboue ſpecified, and not yet ſeparate from the bonds of ſuch vnlawfull marriage, that then euerie ſuch perſon ſo vnlawfullie married, ſhalbe ſeparate by the definitiue ſentence & iudgements of the Archbiſhops, Biſhops, and other miniſters of the church of England, and in other your dominions within the limits

of their iuriſdictions and authorities, and by none other power or authoritie.
               And that all ſentences and iudgements giuen, and to be giuen, by any Archbiſhops, Biſhops, or other miniſter of the church of England, or in any other the kings dominiōs, within the limits of their iuriſdictions and authorities, ſhalbe diffinitiue, firme, good, and effectuall to all intents, and be obſerued and obaied without ſuing any prouocations, appeals, prohibitions, or other proceſſe from the court of Rome, to the derogation thereof, or contrarie to the Acte made ſince the beginning of this preſent Parlement, for the reſtraint of ſuch prouocations, appeals, prohibitions, and other proceſſes.
               And Anno xxviij. of king Hen. 8. Chap 7. it was enacted to the ſame effect, and in the ſame forme of wordes with this addition onely, viz.
               
               And further to dilate and declare the meaning of theſe prohibitions, it is to be vnderſtood, that if it chaunce any man to know carnallie any woman, that then all and ſingular perſons being in any degree of conſanguinitie or affinitie as is aboue written to any of the parties ſo carnallie offending, ſhalbe deemed and adiudged to bee within the caſes and limmits of the ſaid prohibition of marriage.
               There enſued after this Anno, xxxij. Hen. 8. cha. 38. an act concerning precontracts of marriages, and touching degrees of conſanguinitie, the occaſion whereof (as by the proheme of that Statute appeareth) was this, viz.
               
               It was ſuppoſed that no marriage ſo ſurelie could be knit & bounden, but that it ſhould lie in either of the

                     ••
                  
               
               
                  
and adminiſtration thereof, by the vetuous and moſt noble Queene Elizabeth, natural & legitimate daughter to king Hen. of famous memorie the eight, the author is imperfect, whoſe weakeneſſe if thy skil ſhall ſupply, or thy patience beare for a ſeaſon, he craues no more, in the meane time his labours he commendeth vnto thee, and thy ſelfe to the author of all perfection.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
               
A TABLE OF THE Leuiticall, Engliſh, and poſitiue Canon Catalogues: THEIR CONCORDANCE, and difference.
            
               IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA NULLA.
            
            
               Anno. Dom. 1594.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ Of the Table and Catalogues heerin contained of degrees.
            
               COnferring theſe Catalogues in the table that enſueth together, that is to ſay, the Engliſh and Canonicall with the Leuitical, ſome perſons there ſhall appeare within the Leuiticall names and degrees; ſome without the Leuiticall names, but in the degrees; others there ſhall appeare without the Leuiticall names and degrees; the due conſideration whereof is this, viz.
            
            Firſt of the aſcendents and deſcendentes, ſuch no doubt, though they exceed the Leuiticall names and degrees, yet they be prohibited infinitelie to marrie, in ſo much that Adam if he had liued to this day, could not haue married againe.
            The ſecond conſideration, viz. of the Collaterals, ſuch (with the Leuitical in name and degree) no man doubteth of their prohibition; otherwiſe, that is to ſay, If they differ but in name, Communi cōſenſu & iudicio putantur in Leuitico prohiberi, thou art (for example) expreſly in the Leuiticall forbidden to marrie thy brothers wife, thy wiues ſiſter is not mentioned there in name, otherwiſe than thus, viz. Thou ſhalt not take a wife with hir ſiſter (during hir life) to vexe hir in vncouering hir ſhame vpon hir; but thy brothers

wife neuertheleſſe comprehendeth hir degree, and whom equally thereforethou art prohibited to marry, that is to ſay, as with thy brothers wife, ſo with thy wiues ſiſter, this vnderſtand of the reſidue in this table, viz. Mothers brothers wife, wiues fathers ſiſter, &c. For the third, that is to ſay, ſuch collaterals as exceed both the name and degree Leuitical, doe alſo exceed this prohibition, i. they may marrie without queſtion or ſcruple, conſideration had of ſuch collaterals as doe ſauour ſo of the aſcendent and deſcendent lines, that they be parents, or in loco parentum the one to the other, ſuch be in names collaterals, becauſe we haue no other tearms to cal them by, Plures enim ſunt res quàm vocabula, ſuch is the ſcarſity of our ſpeech, that more things there be, than wee haue names to call them by; ſuch be thy brothers line, ſo neere thine own as may be, we muſt not call them deſcendents, for confounding of lines, nor yet allow them that laterall libertie to make them outward degrees, Laterall they be tearmed or Collaterall à latere, as much in effect as ſideward of the ſide wheron they be placed, as by the figure it may appeare and other deſcriptions in the treatiſe: but ſo neer they be the ſide, that they warme it, and be warmed by it, ſide by ſide, and bloud by bloud; and yet we muſt call them Collaterals, and yet I exhort thee beware of them, they be not forbidden expreſlie, and by name by the law, the Leuiticall law I meane, no more thou ſhalt finde it forbidden expreſly to marrie with diuers other perſons of thy kinred beſides, thou wilt not therfore ſay it is lawful, god forbid thou ſhouldſt. This I haue red in the works of learned men, it is for

bidden by the right of nature, it is forbidden, by the law that is written in euerie mans heart and conſcience, it is forbidden by loue and charitie, the which we haue handled in this treatiſe before, it is forbidden by title and right of nigh kinred: to conclude, many great things ſhalt thou finde, if thou lookeſt about thee, not forbidden expreſly by the law that Moſes made, and yet the ſame be forbidden by a certaine plaine expreſſe commaundement of nature, and conſequently by the law of God: for what commaunded Moſes from the Lord, as lawfull to be done, that was not expedient? Shall we ſeeke a prohibition then by name, for euerie perſon, and do the thing (if we finde it not) that is neither expedient nor honeſt? God forbid. I finde it written of S. Ambroſe, that he affirmed plainlie, The lawe of God forbiddeth that brothers children ſhould marry, and yet I cannot finde it there expreſly; the occaſion grew by one Patern, that had a ſonne by one woman, and a daughter by another, which daughter had a daughter, whom Patern would haue married to his ſonne, the maidens halfe vncle, wherein conſulting with Ambroſe in this caſe, receiued this aunſwere; I neither thinke nor iudge, ſaith S. Ambroſe, that your biſhop an holy man doth ſo much as looke after my ſentence and iudgement in this matter, for if he had, he would haue written to me of it, and in ſomuch that he writeth not, he ſheweth plainly that he iudgeth this no matter to be doubted on: for what doubt may there be in this caſe, whether thy ſonne and thy daughters daughter, or thy neece by thine owne daughter may marry together, ſeeing the law of God

forbiddeth, that thy ſon ſhould marrie with thy brothers daughter. And what (faith the ſame author) is moreſolemne, accuſtomed, or more reuerentlie obſerued, than the charitable kiſſe betweene vncle and neece, which he oweth to hir of duety, as to his daughter, & ſhe to him as to hir father? ſhalt thou then go & make this innocent kiſſe of loue and charity, in which is none offence nor ſuſpitiō of euil, to be ſuſpected, whilſt thou intēdeſt ſuch a mariage? as if he ſhuld ſay, Wilt thou betray (as Iudas did his maiſter) the holy law of nature, & take away from thy dear pledges or children ſo deuout & religious (a ſacrament) he tearmeth it, but a token of pure and naturall loue, as alſo he doth, wee may terme it ſtil.
            And touching the furtheſt diſtant of the perſons we haue mentioned laſt, viz. Brothers children, becauſe in a maner, they be brothers and ſiſters, cōming all of one parent, grandfather grandmother, or both; but the ſecond ſtocke of the tree, or figure of Conſanguinitie, in this treatiſe before, if it were for nothing elſe, yet for the reuerence that they owe to the ſame parēts, Theodoſ the Emperour would haue them abſtain from marriage the one with the other. But to leaue the Emperours law, there is a law of this land, (the Lord preſerue it and the life of the ſame) this we haue touched in the diuiſion of this table hereafter; but there is a law, and this we haue touched too, the Lord write it in our minds and in our hearts, that he may be our God, and we may be his people.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            A Table of the Leuiticall, Engliſh, and poſitiue canon catalogues: their concordance, and difference.
            
               
                  1. Section.
                  2. Deg. The right aſcending line, and ſecond degree.
                  
                  
                     
                        Can. Eng.
                     
                     Grandmother.
                     1
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Grandfathers wife.
                     2
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues Grandmother.
                     3
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
               
               
                  2. Section.
                  2. Deg. The vnequall collaterall line aſcending, and ſecond degree.
                  
                  
                     
                        Can. Eng. Leu.
                     
                     Fathers ſiſter.
                     4
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mothers ſiſter.
                     5
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Fathers brothers wife.
                     6
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Can. Eng.
                     
                     Mothers brothers wife.
                     7
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues fathers ſiſter.
                     8
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues mothers ſiſter.
                     9
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
               
               
                  3. Section.
                  1. Deg. The right aſcending line, and firſt degree.
                  
                  
                     
                        Can. Eng. Leu.
                     
                     Mother.
                     10
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Stepmother.
                     11
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues mother.
                     12
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  4. Section.
                  1. Deg. The right deſcending line, and firſt degree.
                  
                  
                     
                        Can. Eng. Leu.
                     
                     Daughter.
                     13
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues daughter.
                     14
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sonnes wife.
                     15
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
               
               
                  5. Section.
                  1. Deg. The equall collaterall line, and firſt degree.
                  
                  
                     
                        Can. Eng. Leu.
                     
                     Siſter.
                     16
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Brothers wife.
                     17
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues ſiſter.
                     18
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
               
               
                  6. Section.
                  2. Deg. The right deſcending line, and ſecond degree.
                  
                  
                     
                        Can. Eng. Leu.
                     
                     Sonnes daughter.
                     19
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Daughters daughter.
                     20
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Can. Eng.
                     
                     Sonnes ſonnes wife.
                     21
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Daughters ſonnes wife.
                     22
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Can. Eng. Leu.
                     
                     Wiues ſonnes daughter.
                     23
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues daughters daughter.
                     24
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  7. Section.
                  2. Deg. The vnequall collaterall line deſcending, and ſecond degree.
                  
                  
                     
                        Ca. En.
                     
                     Brothers daughter.
                     25
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Siſters daughter.
                     26
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Brother ſonnes wife.
                     27
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Siſters ſonnes wife.
                     28
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues brothers daughter.
                     29
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues ſiſters daughter.
                     30
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
               
               
                  8. Section.
                  2. Deg. The equall collaterall line, and ſecond degree.
                  
                  
                     
                        Canon.
                     
                     Fathers brothers daughter.
                     31
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mothers brothers daughter.
                     32
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Fathers ſiſters daughter.
                     33
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mothers ſiſters daughter.
                     34
                     
                        Con.
                     
                  
                  
                     Fathers brothers ſonnes wife.
                     35
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mothers brothers ſonnes wife.
                     36
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Fathers ſiſters ſonnes wife.
                     37
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mothers ſiſters ſonnes wife.
                     38
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues fathers brothers daughter.
                     39
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues mothers brothers daught.
                     40
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues fathers ſiſters daughter.
                     41
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
                  
                     Wiues mothers ſiſters daughter.
                     42
                     
                        Aff.
                     
                  
               
            
            Hitherto extendeth the heart of the tree, or figure of conſanguinitie, deſcribed in the ſixt chapter before, and formed at the end of the 7. chapter following,

where the reader may behold, as in a glaſſe, howe neere they be couched togither; namely, the kinred of the ſame fleſh.
            Heere therefore we will pauſe a little, and make as it were a diuiſiō in this table betweene them and the reſt that enſue; namely, the branches that be further off. Conſider therefore of the concordance and difference of theſe catalogues hitherto firſt, and then peruſe the other.
            Theſe catalogues doe concurre togither in 16 perſons, wherein they differ not in name, number, nor degreee: there the Leuiticall ceaſſeth, in name and number; and the Engliſh and canonicall go on, accompanied ſtill with the Leuiticall degree, to the number of 14 perſons more: there ceaſſeth the Engliſh, and the poſitiue canon goes on alone, neuertheleſſe accompanied with the 2 degree, to the number of 12 perſons more; and there that degree reſteth, and leaueth the canon catalogue alone, & yet the catalogue reſteth not, but hath betakē it to outward degrees, namely the 3 and 4, wherewith it goeth on to the number of perſons mentioned in this table hereafter.
            Theſe the ſtatute doth entend in An. 32. H. 8. cap. 38. to be meere humane, and inuented for their lucre that deuiſed them: namely, the BB. of the ſea of Rome, commonly called the Popes; who were enabled (as the ſtatute intēdeth) to diſpence with ſuch by their power, becauſe they were outward, and ſo the ſtatute termeth them outward degrees; and ſpecifieth moreouer coſens germans, and ſo to fourth and fourth degree. Now, Quere of the minde of the ſtatute

touching coſens germans, viz. What germans they ſhould be? for the Pope could neuer diſpence with germans in the 1 and 2 degrees: if therfore the conſtruction be of the ſtatute, of ſuch diſpenſations that were reſerued; for ſo the ſtatute mentioneth them, viz. The diſpenſation whereof they alwaies reſerued to themſelues, &c. we looke amiſſe at what he did, for what did hee not almoſt (in the end) diſpence withall? but our marke muſt be at what he might doe lawfully, i. by his lawes: for other reſeruation had he none, but thereby preheminence ouer them, but neuer ouer the lawes of God nor of nature. And that which is more, ſo farre they were from diſpenſing in the 1 and 2 degrees, that in the 3 and 4 degrees they haue refuſed the ſame generally: and to that (vpon Queſtion propoſed to Gregorie, by Faelix Meſsan of Scicilia) was appealed to, the whole dominon of Rome. It is euident by this, what the prohibition and reſeruation haue been of the Popes law.
            Touching the daughter of Zolophehad, of whom mention hath been made in the 8 chap. of this treatiſe, to this effect, that they married to their fathers brothers ſonnes: this was becauſe the inheritance of the children of Iſrael, of whom the daughters of Zelophehad were, ſhould not remoue from tribe to tribe: for ſo they were commanded, that euerie one of the children of Iſrael, ſhould ioyne himſelfe to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers. And that euerie daughter that poſſeſſed anie inheritance of the tribes of the children of Iſrael, ſhould be wife vnto one of the familie of the tribe of hir father, that the children

of Iſrael might enioy euery man the inheritance of their fathers: and therefore the Lord commanded concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, ſaying; They ſhall be wiues to whom they thinke beſt, onely to the familie of the tribe of their father ſhal they marry, and ſo they did. Numb. 36. 11.
            
            But this was a law of iudgement, as other Iudicials were, that belonged (then) to particular iuſtice, Numb. 27. 11. and haue had their beginnings, and endings. To the reſt of the canon catalogue.
            
               
                  9. Section.
                  3. Deg. The right aſcending line, and third degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon
                     Con.
                     43
                     Great grandmother.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     44
                     Great grandfathers wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     45
                     VViues great grandmother.
                  
               
               
                  10. Section.
                  3. Deg. The right deſcending line and third degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon.
                     Con.
                     46
                     Sonnes neece.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     47
                     Daughters neece.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     48
                     Sonnes nephewes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     49
                     Daughters nephewes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     50
                     VViues nephewes daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     51
                     VViues neeces daughter.
                  
               
               
                  11. Section.
                  3. Deg. The vnequall collaterall line aſcending, and third degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon
                     Con.
                     52
                     Grandfathers ſiſter.
                  
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     53
                     Grandmothers ſiſter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     54
                     Grandfathers brothers wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     55
                     Grandmothers brothers wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     56
                     VViues grandfathers ſiſter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     57
                     VViues grandmothers ſiſter.
                  
               
               
                  12. Section.
                  3. Deg. The ſame line, and third degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon
                     Con.
                     58
                     Grandfathers brothers daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     59
                     Grandmothers brothers daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     60
                     Grandfathers ſiſters daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     61
                     Grandmothers ſiſters daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     62
                     Grandfathers brothers ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     63
                     Grandmothers brothers ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     64
                     Grandfathers ſiſters ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     65
                     Grandmothers ſiſters ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     66
                     Wiues grandfathers brothers daughter
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     67
                     Wiues grandmothers brothers daugh.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     68
                     Wiues grandfathers ſiſters daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     69
                     Wiues grandmothers ſiſters daughter.
                  
               
               
                  13. Section.
                  3. Deg. The equall collaterall line, and third degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon
                     Con.
                     70
                     Grandfathers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     71
                     Grandmothers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     72
                     Grandfathers ſiſters neece.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     73
                     Grandmothers ſiſters neece.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     74
                     Grandfathers brothers nephews wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     75
                     Grandmothers brothers nephews wife
                  
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     76
                     Grandfathers ſiſters nephewes wife.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     77
                     Grandmothers ſiſters nephewes wife.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     78
                     Wiues grandfathers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     79
                     Wiues grandmothers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     80
                     Wiues grandfathers ſiſters neece.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     81
                     VViues grandmothers ſiſters neece.
                  
               
               
                  14. Section.
                  3. Deg. The vnequall collaterall line, deſcending, and third degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon.
                     Con.
                     82
                     Fathers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     83
                     Fathers ſiſters neece.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     84
                     Mothers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     85
                     Mothers ſiſters neece.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     86
                     Fathers brothers nephews wife.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     87
                     Fathers ſiſters nephewes wife.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     88
                     Mothers brothers nephews wife.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     89
                     Mothers ſiſters nephews wife.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     90
                     VViues fathers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     91
                     VViues fathers ſiſters neece.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     92
                     VViues mothers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     93
                     VViues mothers ſiſters neece.
                  
               
               
                  15. Section.
                  3. Deg. The ſame line and third degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon.
                     Con.
                     94
                     Brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     95
                     Siſters neece.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     96
                     Brothers nephewes wife.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     97
                     Siſters nephews wife.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     98
                     VViues brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Affi.
                     99
                     VViues ſiſters neece.
                  
               
               
                  
                  16. Section.
                  4. Deg. The right aſcending line, and fourth degree..
                  
                  
                     Canon
                     Con.
                     100
                     Great grandfathers mother.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     101
                     Great grandfathers fathers wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     102
                     Wiues great grandfathers mother.
                  
               
               
                  17. Section.
                  4. Deg. The right deſcending line, and fourth degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon
                     Con.
                     103
                     Sonnes nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     104
                     Sonnes neeces daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     105
                     Daughters nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     106
                     Daughters neeces daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     107
                     Sonnes nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     108
                     Sonnes neeces ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     109
                     Daughters nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     110
                     Daughters neeces ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     111
                     Wiues ſonnes nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     112
                     Wiues ſonnes neeces daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     113
                     Wiues daughters nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     114
                     Wiues daughters neeces daughter.
                  
               
               
                  13. Section.
                  4. Deg. The vnequall collateral line deſcending, and fourth degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon
                     Con.
                     115
                     Great grandfathers ſiſter.
                  
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     116
                     Great grandmothers ſiſter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     117
                     Great grandfathers brothers wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     118
                     Great grandmothers brothers wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     119
                     Wiues great grandfathers ſiſter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     120
                     Wiues great grandmothers ſiſter.
                  
               
               
                  19. Section.
                  4. Deg. The ſame line, and fourth degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon.
                     Con.
                     121
                     Great grandfathers brothers daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     122
                     Great grandfathers ſiſters daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     123
                     Great grādmothers brothers daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     124
                     Great grandmothers ſiſters daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     125
                     Great grandfathers brothers ſons wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     126
                     Great grandfathers ſiſters ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     127
                     Great grandmothers brothers ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     128
                     Great grandmothers ſiſters ſons wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     129
                     Wiues great grandfathers brothers daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     130
                     Wiues great grandfa. ſiſters daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     131
                     Wiues great grandmothers brothers daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     132
                     Wiues great grandmothers ſiſters daughter.
                  
               
               
                  20. Section.
                  4. Deg. The ſame line continued ſtill, and fourth degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon.
                     Con.
                     133
                     Great grandfathers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     134
                     Great grandfathers ſiſters neece.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     135
                     Great grandmothers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     136
                     Great grandmothers ſiſters neece.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     137
                     Great grandfathers brothers nephews wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     138
                     Great grandfathers ſiſters nephews wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     139
                     Great grandmothers brothers nephews wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     140
                     Great grandmothers ſiſters nephews wife
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     141
                     VViues great grandfathers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     142
                     Wiues great grādfathers ſiſters neece.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     143
                     Wiues great grandmothers brothers neece.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     144
                     VViues great grandmothers ſiſters neece.
                  
               
               
                  21. Section.
                  4. Deg. The Equall collaterall line, and fourth degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon.
                     Con.
                     145
                     Great grādfathers brothers nephews daughter
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     146
                     Great grandfathers brothers neeces daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     147
                     Great grandmothers brothers nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     148
                     Great grandmothers brothers neeces daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     149
                     Great grādfathers brothers nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     150
                     Great grandfathers brothers neeces ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     151
                     Great grādmothers brothers nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     152
                     Great grandmothers ſiſters nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     153
                     VViues great grandfathers brothers nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     154
                     VViues great grandfathers brothers neeces daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     155.
                     VViues great grādmothers brothers nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     156
                     VViues great grādmothers brothers neeces daughter.
                  
               
               
                  22. Section.
                  4. Deg. The vnequall collaterall line deſcending, and ſourth degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon
                     Con.
                     157
                     Grandfathers brothers nephewes daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     158
                     Grandfathers ſiſters nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     159
                     Grandmothers brothers nephewes daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     160
                     Grādmothers ſiſters nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     161
                     Grandfathers brothers nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     162
                     Grandfathers ſiſters nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     163
                     Grādmothers brothers nephews ſons wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     164
                     Grandmothers ſiſters nephews ſons wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     165
                     Wiues grādfathers brothers nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     166
                     Wiues grandfathers ſiſters nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     167
                     VViues grandmothers brothers nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     168
                     VViues grādmothers ſiſters nephews daughter.
                  
               
               
                  23. Section.
                  4. Deg. The ſame line continued ſtill, and fourth degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon
                     Con.
                     169
                     Fathers brothers nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     170
                     Fathers ſiſters nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     171
                     Mothers brothers nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     172
                     Mothers ſiſters nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     173
                     Fathers brothers nephews ſons wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     174
                     Fathers ſiſters nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     175
                     Mothers brothers nephews ſons wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     176
                     Mothers ſiſters nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     177
                     Wiues fathers brothers nephewes daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     178
                     Wiues fathers ſiſters nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     179
                     VViues mothers brothers nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     180
                     VViues mothers ſiſters nephewes daughter.
                  
               
               
                  
                  21. Section.
                  4. Deg. The ſame line continued ſtill, and fourth degree.
                  
                  
                     Canon.
                     Con.
                     181
                     Brothers nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Con.
                     182
                     Siſters nephews daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     183
                     Brothers nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     184
                     Siſters nephews ſonnes wife.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     185
                     VViues brothers nephewes daughter.
                  
                  
                     Aff.
                     186
                     VViues ſiſters nephewes daughter.
                  
               
            
            Note that their neeces daughters, and neeces ſons wiues, not mentioned, as well as their nephewes daughters, nephews ſonnes wiues, mentioned in this Section; be alſo parcell of this Catalogue. And likewiſe in the 21. 22. 23 Sections before, where they bee not mentioned in their particular tearmes, yet neuertheleſſe be of the ſame Catalogue, line, and degree, with their Section: ſuch be in the 21. Section, great grandfathers, and mothers ſiſters nephewes, and their ſiſters neeces daughters: and in the 22. 23. Section, grandfathers and mothers, and fathers and mothers brothers neeces, and their ſiſters neeces daughters. This vnderſtood, the Canon Catalogue ceaſeth.
         
         
            
            Of the neceſſarie parts of this treatiſe, to the vnderſtanding of the reaſon of the Computation in the Catalogues of this Table.
            
               IF thou commeſt (Chriſtian Reader) to this Table, not hauing read the treatiſe before, nor read nor excerciſed in the Canon & ciuill lawes both, it will ſeeme ſomwhat ſtrange vnto thee, why the ſecond degree in the 2 Section of this table, ſhould not encreaſe in the eight Section following: and likewiſe why the third degree in the 11. Section, ſhould not encreaſe in the 12. & 13. Sections of the ſame: and that the 4. degree in the 18. Section, ſhould continue the fourth, ſo manie Sections after.
            Theſe computations be (verily) naturall: and yet (without induſtrie) more than common reaſon can reach vnto, ſuch be the ſecrets of bloud.
            Now, if thou wilt be idle, thou maiſt wonder ſtil, otherwiſe, this treatiſe is but ſmall it ſelfe in the whole, but much leſſe that part of the ſame (by many degrees) that is the totall ſum to reſolue thee.
            To the vnderſtanding therefore, or thy vnderſtanding of this Computation readily in the Catalogues of this table, firſt confer (with the ſame) parte of the 2. Chapter, viz. from theſe wordes, A new found Queſtion, fol. 12. to theſe words that follow, viz. Haue therefore in one degree &c. fol. 13. there thou haſt the Lateran ſynod. Secondly, the 6. chap. in all there is deſcribed the collection, ſtate, and condition of euerie

perſon, his line and degree by the laws, by the Canons. Thirdly I commend thee to the figure and declaration of Conſanguinitie or blood, at the end of the 7. chap. this appertaineth to the 6 chapter, & that to this, either giuing light vnto other, but both a manifeſtation to the diligent reader.
            Laſt, I referre thee to this conſultation, viz. In contracts of matrimonie, what is lawfull, what honeſt, and what expedient. Some ſmall helps, if theſe ſhall not miniſter vnto thee, with ſome little labor of thine owne, they ſhall ſomewhat prepare thee (at the leaſt) to conſult with the Learned.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   