
      
         
            
            
            
               AN
ABSTRACT OF
FAYTH:
            Grounded on Moses, and applyed
to the Common Creede;
plainely and briefly.
            By Henoch Clapham, in the beginning
of his third yeares bands.
            
               Heb. 11. 6.
He that commeth vnto God, must beleeue
that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seeke him.
            
               Mark. 9. 23.
All thinges are possible to him that beleeueth.
            Bernard. Lib. 5. de Considerat.
Fides ambiguum non habet: aut si habet, Fidem non
est, sed opinio. Fayth admits no doubt: for if
it do, then it is not Fayth, but opinion.
            Printed 1606.
         
         
            
            TO THE THRICE-Excellent,
HENRIE,
Prince of Wales, &c.
            
               PArdon sweet Prince, pardon my bold present;
               The Hope we haue your Excellencie shall
               Proue to our Church, a matchlesse Instrument,
               For Gospels good, and Superstitions fall:
               That, and some Grace, vouchsafed to my bands,
               Emboldens mee, to giue this to your hands.
            
            
               Some scandalized haue my Christian Fayth,
               That so hood-winked Maiestrates may bee:
               Though skils not much, what Papal-mynor saith
               Yet duety mine, to cause hood-wink't to see:
               This may reproue such fore-heads as be flinted,
               my faith b'ing such, as Scotland somtimes printed.
            
            
               Yea,Priuiledged by our King. An. 1595. & 96. England's state haue licensed the same,
               The selfesame faith sparsed throuhgout my bookes
               Which here I properly An Abstract name,
               And vnto Moses for the tryall lookes:
               The methode hath my prisond-sense for mensure,
               But read sweet Prince, & then giue out your sensure.
            
            
               Your Graces
poore Orator,
Henoch Clapham.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ABSTRACT
OF FAYTH. &c.
            TO the end, that no soule in Court
or Country be peruerted touching
the trueth of my Fayth, by
the vnconscionable reportes of
some incorrigibleSeorsi
                     •
                   ducentes. Seducers, I offer
heere to Prince and People, a summe of
my Fayth; with euident proofe from
Moses, for the groundes thereof. And
thus (with Auncient Beleeuers) I begin.
            
               SECTION. 1.
               ¶I beleeue in God the Father
Almighty, maker of heauen
and earth.
               BEleife is manifold, according to the
thing beleiued, be it true or false: for
false beleife, it is compared to a man
dreaming of Gold, but being awaked,
he findeth a lye in his right hand. As

for true beleife, it ouer-reacheth Fancie
and Opinion, and is a perswasion setled
vpon Trueth; as when one beleiueth
rightly on God, and the thinges of and
from God: And so, Beleife or Fayth generally
considered, is a true assent to
that which is, be it a thing of Promise or
Narration. For much haue they erred,
that teach, how all Fayth respecteth a
promise.Heb. 11. 3 
                  Through Fayth we vnderstand
that the world was ordained by the
word of God, as Moses declareth in the
first of Genesis; which is a thing of Narration,
not of Promise, seeing the world
had his existence before man, & therefore
could not be promised to man.
               Touching Fayth apprehending a
Promise, it is twofold, according to the
nature of the Promise, and that is Eternall
or Temporary; as it apprehendeth
thinges of eternall abyding nature, or
things that be but momen taine.2. Cor. 4. 18. This
latter being of thinges visible, such as
Moses describeth in the sixe dayes
creation: The other, of things inuisible
and spirituall, such as in the sacramentall
Tree of life, was taught to Adam
in Gen. 2.
               
                  When I say, I beleeue in God, (for
euery soule must beleeue for it selfe) it
is, as if in moe words I should say, I rest
and build vpon God in all my thoughtes,
words, and deedes. The Latine therefore
is not, Credo in Deo, but in Deum, I beleeue
vpon God. Which God, Moses
deliuereth vnto vs in his first speach,
when he sayth, God created the heauens
and the earth in the beginning. The Onenesse
of his Essence he teacheth in the
word Bara Hee created; that is, Hee
the one God: and in the Noune Aelohim,
of plurall Nomber, signifiyng
Mighties, he insinuateth the Trinitie
of Persons; as if the words should run
thus: Hee, the Mighties, did create. Which
Trinitie was not obscurely represented
in the three Angels repayring to Abraham,
the father of true Beleeuers: and
in the clearest Scriptures they be tearmed
Math. 28. 1. Iohn. 5. 
                  Father, Sonne, and Holy-ghost: or,
Father, Word, and Spirit. Which Moses
deliuereth euidently inough (if scales
hung not vpon our eyes) when he teacheth,
that one God to create heauens
and earth, by his Word, and the Spirits
motion vpon the face of the creature.

With curious Scholastique poynts,
touching the sacred Trinitie in vnitie,
Moses dealeth not to open view, neither
doth this auncient Creed of the Christian
Church. The first Churches were
satisfied with that measure of Fayths-confession,
which our times will not
admit: So wrathfull & vncharitable be
our times, learned of the man of Sinne.
The first most notorious Schisme in
the Church, did grow from the curious
search, which curious spirits did make
after the bottomlesse depth of this vnitie
in Trinitie; thereby adding to the
Creed: But, the secret things (sayth Moses
in Deut. 29. 29.) belong to the Lord;
and to the Lord I leaue the secrets of
the Godhead; as the auncient Church
of God hath done before me.
               Touching this one God, it is to be
beleeued, first, that he is a Father: Secondly,
an Almighty Father. His Fatherhood
is twofold: First, as he hath
Created man; secondly, as he hath Purchased
man after his backsliding from
the excellencie of his Creation: Both
these, Moses doth remember in Deut.
32. 6. when as he sayth, Is he not thy Father

that hath purchased thee? He hath
made thee,2. Chro. 3. 17. and proportioned thee. These
two Fatherhoods are to be Pillers to
euery Temple of the Holy-ghost, as

                     Jachin, signifieth Stablished: and Boaz, in strength. 
                  Jachin and Boaz were Pillers to the
materiall Temple.
               The Almightinesse of God, is taught
of Moses in the very terme Aelohim, as
before: and vnto Abraham, he is called
El-shadaj, Almightie-sufficient; because
no soule ought to doubt (as not
of his goodwill, seeing he is a Father; so
neither) of his Might and s
                     •
                  fficiencie,
for bringing to passe, whatsoeuer he
willeth in heauen or in earth; specially
for mankinds good. Whence it necessarily
followeth, that no part of my
Fayth is to be fastned vpon Angell or
Man, or any other Creature, be he as
bigge as Behemoth,
                  Iob. 40. or as scaly as Leuiathan:
seeing the greatest might and
strength of the creature, is not so much
as a Mite to a Mountaine; as also but
borowed of the Creator, to be drawen
backe (as breath is out of the nosethrils)
euen at his pleasure.
               
                  Hebr. 11. 28, 29. 
                  Moses by Fayth in this willing
Almighty-sufficiencie, did ordaine the

                  Pas-ouer and effusion of blood, least he
that destroyed the first borne in Aegipt,
should touch them of the Churche,
Exod, 12. And his people by this Fayth,
passed through the Red sea, as by dry-land;
which when the Aegiptians assaied
to doe, they were drowned. Exod. 14.
Nor doe I beleeue, that our late passage
through the Red sea of humaine blood,
(mixed in conceipt) with Fire and
Gunpowder, did befall vs by other
meanes, then by such Fayth truly fastned
vpon God the Father his willing
Alsufficiencie. In the lacke whereof,
our Romish Aegiptians (deuisors of fast
and loose for aduantage) did perish;
About 200. yeares they haue bin shut vp from deceiuing people as afore: & 800. years more insuing this present, they must more and more be bridled. My ground is S. Iohns Reuelation. and more and more must perish, although
by their owne hand and owne
inuentions.
               In the beliefe of this, I heretofore opposed
in more then an ordinarie manner,
howsoeuer I haue been diuersly
smitten for it, (the Lord lay it not to
their charge) and the same I am still,
howsoeuer I expect for that the more
hard entreatie, where Amalekes may,
preuayle. But he that began that Faith,
augment it in mee, and I eare long, shal

see the saluation of our God. God hath
layde the Axe now to the roote of that
Tree; I hope our high right honorable
senate of Parliament, will take the present
occasion of cutting it downe.
               Touching the Creation of Heauen
and Earth, Moses hath spoken plainely
in the first and second of Genesis. But
there he hath briefly touched the Visible
Creature, Spheares, and Starres aboue;
and the Earth, with her Seas and continents
below: But afterwardes he reuealeth
the Inuisible creature,) inuisible
in the owne proper nature, because
Spirits) namely, the Angels, appoynted
of God for ministring spirits vnto the
good of the heires of saluation, as also
for the execution of corrections and
punishments vpon the transgressors:
So that, for the good of the obedient,
the visible and inuisible creature is appoynted:
The Angels to pitch their
Tabernacles of defence round about
them; and asIob 5. 23 &c. 
                  Eliphaz noteth from the
times of Genesis, the stones & beastes of
the field &c. to be at league with them.
               Lord encrease my Fayth vnto obedience.
            
            
               
               Section. 2.
               ¶And in Iesus Christ, his onely
Sonne our Lord: which was
conceaued by the holy Ghost,
borne of the virgin Mary: suffered
vnder Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, dead & buried.
He descended into Hell. The
third day he rose againe from
the dead; he ascended into heauen,
and sitteth on the right
hand of God: from whence he
shall come to iudge the quicke
and the dead.
               AS the first part of Beliefe touched
God the Father; so, the second
toucheth his Sonne, the Word; by whō
he made all things. Which Sonne is
tearmed Jesus; that is, Sauiour: and
Christ or Messiah; which signifieth Annoynted;
because he was of God the Father,
annoynted to be the Sauiour of
Adam and his chosen-seed, which in
Adam had sinned (through the meanes
of Satan, an Apostate Angell) and so

could not be saued, but by him that
could abace himselfe as low, as Adam
and the seed of his loynes, had sinned
hie: seeing Contraries must cure Contraries.
Mankind had sinned highly,
in that being but earth, he laboured
proudly to be a God. The cure then
must be wrought by God on high,
humbling himselfe (in the behoofe of
man) so low as the earth. The Sonne
of God did this: first, by assuming or
taking vpon him the very nature of
man, body and soule. Secondly, by vndergoing
the smart of our sinnes, and
dying in our nature for vs. Thirdly, in
rysing againe from vnder the decreed
death. Fourthly, in ascending vp to the
Father, carying our sinnes captiue: And
fifthly, by shewing himselfe the Iudge.
As the latter Scriptures (being but commentaries
vpon Moses) doe plainely
shew all this; so Moses taught this as
truly, though not so openly.
               1 That the Sonne of God should
assume our nature for such purpose,
Moses doth intimate in Gen. 3. 15. when
he sayth, That the womans seed should
breake the Serpents head. And of him the

ApostleGalat. 4▪ 4. 
                  Paul expoundeth it: As it is
said, The womans seed (not mans, because
mans hand should not cut this Stone from
the Monntaine) it should triumph ouer
the Serpent of Hell,Dan. 2. which then had
acted the Serpentine beast of the fielde:
So, the Womans seed, being onely passiue,
could not doe that otherwise, then
it should receiue life from some actiue
power: which if not Mans, then needs
it must be of God; seeing Angels could
not vndergoe the waight of that burden:
the Fathers infinite iustice being
so to be satisfied in mankindes nature,
which had so offended. Neither is
such conception strange in Moses, when
as Sarah (Arch-mother of beleeuers)
doth by vertue of the Lords promise,
conceaue and bring foorth Isaac, after it
ceased with her to be after the manner
of women.
               2. 3. Neither any nature, but that
which is infinite (namely God) could so
liue and die for satisfaction, and rayse
vp our assumed nature for our iustification.
All which, Moses hath prophetically
deliueredHeb. 11. 19. in the parable of
Isaac, Gen. 22. There Abraham (hy-father,

a figure of our Hy-father in heauen)
hath his onely Sonne Isaac (one with
our nature, a seed according to Promise)
him he hath allotted vnto death.
The Sonne obayes. The first day Isaac
dyeth in Abrahams resolution, (and the
will is accepted for the deed) but after
a sort, he receiued him againe from
death vnto life, and that on the third
day. And his returne home againe, was
as an Ascension from the earth, vnto
glory.
               4 And as Isaac so returned in a parable
from death to life; so, he became
the Sonne of his right hand, when Ismael
stood on the left: and that Foe,
was made his footstoole.
               5 Which Isaac shewed himselfe in
time, a Iudge of spirituall quicke and
dead, when he gaue a perfect iudgement
(according to the decree of Abram,
                  Malachi. 1. 2. 3. Hie-father of heauen) in separating
betweene Esau and Iaakob,
                  Rom. 9. 23. this being
chosen, and the other forsaken, though
both of one bedd and naturall generation.
Through all Moses, the doctrine
of the promised seed shineth, though
encompassed with cloudes of Ceremonies;

the full reuelation whereof awayted
the fulnesse of time,
                  Heb. 11. 40. God prouiding
that better thing for vs, that they without
vs should not be made perfect.
               
               The Article touching the seconde
person in the Godhead, thus cleared,
some will aske me, Where in Moses do
ye find, that Christ should Descend into
Hell (the place of the damned) there to
triumph in his soule? I answere, I finde it
not in Moses, neither in Doctrine nor
Shadow, for any thing I could euer obserue.
That dying, he should descend to
Sheol (as the Creed in Hebrew speaketh;
or to Hades, as the Greeke speaketh;
or to Inferos, as the Latine speaketh)
I find in Moses, seeing he (as all
the slaine Sacrifices, his shadowes intended)
was to go the way of all flesh.
In which sense, Jaakob sayth thus in
Gen. 37. 35.Cabalistically one m
                        •
                     ght say, that the letters in Aeredh, (that is, Aleph, Resh, and Daleth) in Hebrew numeration 205▪ they might import the time of his seede being in Egipt, being much thereabouts so many yeares. From the word Reau descend vee▪ in Gen. 42. 2. Ben-
                           •
                        orion accōplisheth 210. yeares. 
                  Aerédh el-Beni abel Sheó
                        •
                     ah,
I wil go downe to my Sonne moorning
to Sheol; that is, the place of all flesh:
arguing the full estate of the dead, called
also, Being gathered to the Fathers.

What he should doe in the place of the
damned triumphing in his soule, more
then in his body (seeing our triumph
is in both) I know not: Nor haue the
4. Euangelists, laying downe a plaine
and open Narration of Iesus, once spoken
it. For the speach of Jonahs and
Christes being 3. dayes in the Whales
belly and earth, that argues his bodyes
captiuitie, like as that of Jonas: it being
an estate of Humiliation, rather then of
Triumph. To mee, that argument seemeth
sound;
               
                  Whither Christ repaired,
                  he went to bring comfort:
                  But to the Hell of the damned
                  he could bring no comfort:
                  Therefore to the Hell of the damned
                  he repaired not.
               
               If any approoue not my Iudgement,
more then I do his, I desire him notwithstanding,
to be at peace with mee,
as I with him: Non omnia vidimus omnes:
Euery dissent must not breed a
rent. Christ bare our infirmities; and
Charitie will make vs willing to beare
one anothers infirmitie, fulfilling so the
law of Christ. But such is the miserie

of our dayes, as euery dissent in iudgement
(though but about circumstances)
begetteth a Schisme, to the pursuing
of one another to the losse of life.
Heauenly Father, for thy Sonnes sake,
plant more loue amongst vs.
            
            
               Section 3.
               ¶I beleeue in the Holy-ghost.
               WIth the auncient Church, Credo in
spiritum sanctum, I beleeue vpon
the Holy-ghost. And because affiance
is to be setled vpon him, as vpon the
Father, vpon the Sonne, therefore the
Holy-ghost, God; euen One with the
Father and the Sonne, howsoeuer proceeding
from the Father & the Sonne;
as the Sonne had his begetting of the
Father; but both of an vnutterable
manner: for what can we resemble to
the highest?
               The Easterne and Greeke Church,
standeth seuered in this poynt from vs
of the West: but therefore to be anathematized
(of which Anathema hereafter)
it seemeth vnto mee, to proceed
from zeale beyond measure: seeing in

the Primatiue Church, some were ignoraunt,
Act. 19. 1. 2. 
                  If so there were an Holy-ghost:
and yet were helde Disciples, and Beleiuers.
               As in the externall worke to vs
ward, the Father is sayd to Create, rather
then to Redeeme or Sanctifie:
and the Sonne rather to Redeeme, then
to Create or Sanctifie: so the Holy-ghost
to Sanctifie, rather then to Create
or Redeeme. And for that it is the
worke of the Father and Sonne by the
Holy-ghost, to hallow the Creature,
namely (mankind elected) therefore
Moses introduceth Habel seuered from
Kain in the holy worke of Oblation.
Habel was begotten by the same Adam,
and brought foorth by the same Heuah;
but did the worke of Fayth, which Kain
did not. And why? because he was
not onely acted by this Holy spirit (for
so the wicked oft be) but for that he had
receiued the same Spirit, as an earnest
penny of Adoption (as all ofMath. 20. compared with Chap, 21. 33. the kingdome
of Grace in this life do, at what
howre soeuer they obay their calling,)
which Spirit, as he is holy, so, he sanctified
his thought, worde, and worke,

whereby he is sayd to please God. And
no maruaile, seeing the Father cannot
but like the fruites of his owne Spirit:
euen as vpon his Suruay of the sixe
dayes worke,1. Iohn. 2. 20. 27. he saw and approued all
to be good, and very good.
               The operation of this Spirit for mollifiyng
the hard heart of man, is resembled
by the Leuiticall Oyntment. His
vertue of sweetning the soule, and of
making our Prayers redolent and sauorie
in the nosethrils of our heauenly
Father, is typed out in the Legall Perfume;
the counterfayting and false application
wherof is adiudged to death.
So dangerous a thing is it, for any hypocritically
to counterfaite holines, where
the powre is lacking: or to misapply
the things of the Spirit, to the prophanation
thereof, Exod 31. &c.
               
               
                  Moses tearmeth him Ruach,
                  Iohn. 3. 8. Winde;
not onely for filling all things, but also
for his free brea
                     •
                  hing Graces when and
where he will; for the beginning and
perfecting of our Regeneratiō or newbirth.
The Father of Heauen, for his
Sonnes sake, vou
                     •
                  hsafe to powre on our

                     〈◊〉
                  , plenteously of his Spirit, for the

glory of his owne name. Amen.
               
                  1 So farre touching
Fayth in God the

                        Father.
                        Sonne.
                        & Holy-ghost.
                     
                  
                  2 Now followeth what is to be beleiued
touching his Church.
                        1 First, in
respect of
her selfe

                              once in the whole; Catholiqu
                                       •
                                    
                                 
                              
                              then in the parts; Communion.
                              
                           
                        
                        2 Secondly, touching her benefites.
                              1 First, in respect of this life; and that's Remission
of sinnes.
                              
                              2 Secondly,
after this life,

                                    1 the Resurrection of the flesh,
                                    2 Eternall life.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Section 4.
               
                  ¶The holy catholi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      church.
               
               IT is not sayd, I beleeue in Ecclesiam
Sanctam, in or vpon the Church (for
that were to make her the Rocke of
our saluation, and equall with God) no
more then it can be sayd afterwards,
I beleeue in the remission of sinnes▪ &c.
Nor can Credo Ecclesiam catholicam, be
truly turned, I beleeue the Catholique
Church, (for then euery Grammarian
knoweth, it should be Ecclesiae catholicae:)
But as in the three last clauses, the verbe

                  
                     Esse, to be. 
                  Esse, is vnderstood (as, Credo Remissionem
peccatorum Esse: I beleeue Remission
of sinnes to bee, Resurrection of
the flesh to bee, Eternall life to bee)
so, the wordes are plainely to be resolued
thus; I beleeue that there is an
Holy Catholique Church, a Comunion
of Sainctes, Forgiuenesse of sinnes, &c.
All which cleareth, that the penners of
this Creede, were farre from teaching
man to builde his Conscience vpon
men; no, not vpon the holy Catholique
Church.
               It will be obiected, that of Israel it is
sayd in Exod 14. 31. Vajaami
                        •
                     û baib
                        •
                     
                     uah
v
                        •
                     emosheh gnabhaô, and they beleeued
in Jehouah, and in Moses his seruant.
I answere; First, Learned men
(both on Christs & Antichrists side) do
turne it, Crediderunt Domino & Moseh,
They beleeued the Lord and Moses;
not pressing the letter Beth which often
importeth, in. Secondly, it may
well be said, that they beleeued in Moses,
respecting the Word of the Lord,
which Moses brought immediately
from the Lords mouth to their eares;
and yet be farre enough from setling

Fayth vpon Moses, who afterwards was
found in vnbeleife about the Rocke in
Exod. 17. Euen as S. Peter soone after his
holy confession, was found in like state
touching Christ, theMath. 7. 24. 25. 1. Cor. 10. 4. Rocke of our
Saluation.
               It wilbe againe obiected, that the
Church being Conuened in the name
of Christ, is to be beleeued so well as
Moses. I answere, tis true: for Moses
was not beleeued otherwise then hee
brought the Lords warrant; so neither
is the Church. And because the Congregation
or Church can, and sometimes
will erre through ignoraunce,
therefore the Lord by Moses in Leuit.
4. 13. &c. doth appoynt a peculiar Oblation
for the whole Congregation of
Israel so sinning. Let God then be true,
and euery man a lyer.
               The Church of Israel was Nationall,
and in Exod. 19. called of the Lord an
Holy Nation: he hauing called and culled
them from out all people vnto himselfe;
and so were a figure of the Church
which Christ at his first comming into
the world, would gaine to himselfe, out
of allReuel. 7. 9. Nations, Tongues, and Kindreds,

for woorshipping before his
Throne. And herein was Japhet returned
to Shems Tabernacle, as Noah
foretold. And the Prodigall Gentile repaired
so to his Elder brothers inheritaunce
(namely, that of the Jew) as our
Sauiour intimates in a Parable. The
Jew (respecting the generall) standeth
without, murmuring at the Gentiles acception.
Heauenly Father, perswade
him to come in, that so thy Two people,
may become One, for furthering
thy glory.
               This Catholique Church then, is
the whole body of people, wheresoeuer

                     Catholi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      a greeke word: in English, Vniuersall: and therefore not to be tyed to Rome, or any one place, citie, or nation. 
                  Catholiquely. (that is, vniuersally
spread vpon the whole face of the earth)
gathered from ludahs tribe vnto Shiloh
himselfe, as Jaak
                        •
                     b foretold in Genes. 49.
10. when he sayd, A Tribe shall not leaue
ludah, nor Lawgiuer from betweene his
feete, till Shiloh come; then the people shalbe
gathered vnto Him: that is, to Christ.
And whereas some vrge from the Epithet
Holy, that by holy Catholique
Church, is meant onely that part of the
Church which is inuisible, knowen
onely vnto God, each member wherof

is Holy indeed, I take it to be an errour.
First, for that the auncient Writers,
(who best vnderstoode their owne
terme, Catholique) do vnderstande it of
the visible Beleeuers wheresoeuer; as
may be seene, specially in their forme
of prouoking Heretiques. Secondly,
the tearme Holy giuen vnto it, doth no
more proue, that therefore euery soule
in the Catholique Church is indeede
Holy, then the same tearme proueth all
therefore in Israels people to be Holy
indeed, when as they be called, an holy
Nation: For who in the Scriptures shal
not perceiue, that Israel (howsoeuer
Called to be Sainctes) prooued still in fact
and Fayth (for the most part) very prophane
and Idolatrous? And that is in
deed a Sonne of perdition mounted in
the Temple: a body of Tares ouergrowing
the Wheat-field: Which not obserued
of many, it hath been cause of
much errour in disputation, about the
visibilitie of the Church. Euen as it followeth
not, because Jeroboam is a liuing
man, therefore euery member in him is
liuing, or hath life in it: for his hand,
and some other parts, may be dead

and senslesse.
               Then will some further obiect, It followeth,
that as the Nationall Church
of Israel, and the Prouinciall Church
of the Jewes, had one visible Hie-priest
ouer the whole; so, the Catholique
Christian Church is to haue one visible
Pastor ouer it. I answere, it followeth
not: First, for that One may better rule
ouer a Prouince or Nation, then ouer
the whole world. Secondly, for that
God commaunded that people to repaire
three times a yeare to that One
place, where that Hie-priest was to
continue with the Arke of God: but
no such commaundement to vs. Nay,
God hath taken away that One place,
because in euery place he will be worshipped.
Our Melchi-esedek in repect
of his Diuinitie, is euery where; therefore
to be sacrificed too euery where:
and his Mandood is in the Heauens;
therefore Sur sum corda, thither lift we
vp our heartes.
               As Christ is the onely head of this
Church, and this Church is the whole
Corporation of Beleeuers, of all Nations,
Kindreds, and Tongues, standing

before his Throne: so, the life of this
Church is his Spirit; and the Spirit she
receiuethGalat 3. 2. 5. 8. by the preaching of Fayth.
Moses teacheth this euidently enough,
in not only introducing the Lord himselfe
preaching the doctrine of Fayth
to Adam and Heuah in Paradise, and
to other Patriarchs after; but also, in
his giuing to auncient Mother Zion, the
whole Tribe of Leuj, for discharging
Ministeriall duties for information of
Fayth: besides that in desperate times,
he stirred vp Prophets of what Tribe
soeuer (without all Priestly forme of
Ordination) for informing Priest and
people. All which (taking away Cerimoniall
circumstaunces) the Lorde
doth to this catholique Church, for
trayning her through the worldes Wildernesse,
vnto the alotted Land of Promise,
heauenly Canaan.
               
               In the meane time, as the Church of
Israel had her Captiuities, vnder the
which was an exercise of her patience;
and for gayning of libertie, might vse
no bodyly resistance: euen so, the
Church of Christians hath her Captiuities,
which exact at her hands much

more patience. But as Jsrael deliuered
by the Lords ministerie out of Aegipt,
had an Amalek to warr withal, through
all generations, to the putting of his remembrance
from vnder heauen. Exod.
16. 8. &c. And being freed from Babylon,
had enemies beyond the Riuer; for
resistaunce of whom, they held a Sword
in the one hand, while they did the
worke of the Lord with the other: So,
the Christian Church vpon her deliueraunces,
hath her enemies with whom
she must skirmish, and against whom
she must hold the swordes poynt, while
her people may buyld vp themselues
an holy Temple,Nehe. 4. 17. with 1. Cor. 6. 19. to the mightie God
of Jaakob.
               
            
            
               Section. 5.
               ¶Communion of Sainctes.
               THe Church before, being considered
in the Catholique, or generall,
or whole, in these wordes (Communion
of
                        Sainctes by calling, 1. Cor. 1. 2. though some amongst them were grosly Hereticall, many Schismaticall and not a few Prophaine; euen as in the Church of the Jewes, some persecuted the Prophets, and Christ himselfe, thinking they did God good seruice. Math. 21. 33. Sainctes) or Holy-ones, it is to be

considered in the parts, that is, in her
seuerall Societies and Corporations:
euen as, from the Corporation of any
whole Citie, we descend to the consideration
of particular Corporations or
Companies, included within the Cities
vniuersall.
               
               The Communion or Fellowship of
Saincts by calling, is to be considered as
established, or vnestablished. Vnestablished,
as when some Beleeuers are gathered
togeather in Citie or Familie;
but destitute of such spiritual functions,
as tend to absolute order. And so, two
or three gathered together in Christs
name, haue him in the middest of them.
               An Estabished Church, is a competent
company of Beleeuers,I say not, Gathered: for then no one should be a member that were not at the same season present. gathering
together in Christs name, hauing and
enioying such Ecclesiastique functions,
as be necessarily required for more orderly
and sufficient administration of
Word and Sacraments and Discipline:
Vnto which end, the Apostle Paul is
registred to haue gone too and fro, establishing
the Churches.
               The Ecclesiastique functions appertayning
to such orderly established

Churches, are of two sorts, Bishops and
Deacons; as for Deaconistes, they are
rather to be serued, then to serue. Bishop,
is a terme corruptly deriued from the
Greeke word Episcopus,
                  2. Tim 3. which signifieth
an Ouer-seer, namely, of soules. In
him is required Aptnes to teach, which
includeth Knowledge and Vtteraunce: as
also, the spirit of Gouernment for his
sufficient ruling of that Corporation.
Else-where he is called a Pastor, in English
a Shepheard or Feeder; for that he
is called to feed and guide that Flocke
of Christes pasture. In other places,
these Bishops or Pastors, are tearmed
Elders, in respect of the many yeares
they were ordinarily possessed with, before
they attained such orderly place of
ouersight. To haue one or moe of these
in one particular Church, is not of
Substaunce but of Circumstaunce: and
therefore to be caryed, as edifying Circumstances
require: But with this Prouiso:
that where moe then one be, there
one for order and comlynesse sake, be
called before the rest, to ouersee; vppon
whom the burden of Doctrine
and Gouernement may rest; as it did

in the Churches ofReuel. 2. & 3. 
                  Asia, written
too by S. John, where one vnder the
terms Angel (or Embassadour) is charged
principally, with the Churches
occasions.
               As for the terme Doctor (in English
Teacher) if it be considered apart from
the Pastor, it can imploy no other then
him that is speciall attendant vnto the
Schoole of1. Cor. 14. Prophecie: that is the
Schoole of Christian learning, wherein
people are trayned vp for supplying
the Churches necessitie.
               The terme Deacon is deriued from
the Greekes, and is in English Minister
or Seruitour: First, for the seruice
he was to doe to the Church: Secondly,
towardes the Ouer-seer, or Ouerseers.
To the first, in cases of helping
the poore. To the second, in assisting
by his spirituall guiftes, as necessitie
shall call for it. For the performance
of all which duties, it is required that
they be full of the Holy-ghost,Act. 63. & 1. Tim. 3. and of
Wisedome, hauing the mysterie of
Fayth in a pure Conscience; such as
can rule their owne Househouldes
well. &c.
               
                  The conclusion then of all this, is;
that for the wel & orderly gouernment
& preseruation of euery particular established
Communion of Saincts, there be
some of best qualificatiō set apart so to
attend on the sayd duties; whilest the
common people on the other hand, do
attend the duties of their common
callings. This being all, and easie to
be learned and obserued (if people
were not bent to contend about Words
and Termes, rather then Thinges) what
is there in it, which Moses taught not
Israel long since? In the place of Pastors,
Israel had Priestes, all their lippes
bound to preserue Knowledge, and
equally attending the Alter: howsoeuer
one Priest principall, as the Angell
of the congregation. In stead of our
Deacons, they had Leuites vnder the
Priestes, and for the businesses of the
congregation. The Bookes of Exod.
Leuit. Numb. and Deuteronomie, doe
largely declare this. So Ceremonie and
Circumstance is changed; but the substaunce
and equitie abide still.
               The Word which they are to teach,1 VVord.
                  
is the pure Word of God, which was so

perfect in Moses, as it was a curse to
him, that should detract from it, or add
vnto it; as reason euinceth, when man
shall alter Gods Word. Deut 12. 32. All
inuentions of men herein, be but as the
strange Fire of Nadab and Abihu: or as
the Leauen of the Pharises, which poysoned
the hearers.
               The Sacraments in common to be
administred,2 Sacraments.
                   are Baptisme, and the Lords
Supper. Baptisme in Moses, was represented
by Ceremoniall washinges
& Purifications, intending the Lambes
blood whereby we are clensed. The
Supper was represented in the Paschall
Supper, and other Ceremoniall eatings;
intending the body and blood of Christ
Jesus, (the Lambe that taketh away the
sinnes of the worlde,) whereby the
Church is nourished by Faith, in vnity.
So farre is it from being to be ministred,
(as Antichrist doth) for binding people
in and to Rebellion, and blood-shed.
               The Discipline to be administred,3 Discipline. Markes of an orderly established Church. is,
either brotherly Admonishments and Rebukes,
according to the nature of the
sinne, (be it priuate or publique) or a
Separating of the Sinner for his not repenting.

All these, Moses teacheth,
when first he sayth in Leuit. 19. 17. Thou
shalt plainely rebuke thy neighbour, and suffer
not sinne vpon him: with other places
the like. And secondly, when vnder
ceremoniall Vncleannesses (representing
Sinne) some were seperated more, and
some lesse. But in cases of Blasphemie,
generall Apostacie, and hy-handed Rebellions,
the Priest was to leaue him vnto
the Magistrates sword: like as, for the
Sinne against the Holy-ghost (of the
same Nature) the soule is to be left to
the Iudge of Heauen with an2. Cor 16. 22. 
                  Anathema
maran-atha, seeing they openly declare
themselues to haue Apostated
from louing Christ Iesus. A sinne,
which the Hebrewes are taught to consist,
Heb. 6. 1, 2, 3. 4. compare
                        •
                      with Chap 10. 25. &c. first, in a Free-departure from the
groundes of true Religion, once held
with comfort: Then secondly, in a
voluntarie Schisme from Fellowship or
Spirituall communion with such beleeuers.
The first is a voluntarie reiection
of Fayth: The second, a willing reiectiō
of Charitie. In which Desertions, they
must be held for not Louers of Christ
Iesus; and therefore fully Anathematized

or accursed to vsward, and left to
the Lordes comming, intended in the
wordeIn Chaldi
                        •
                      forme, Marae is, The Lord: and Atha, hee cōmeth: N. is interposed for sound sake. 
                  Maran-atha (in English, The
Lord commeth) namely, with Fire to
render vengeance. Such is the Anathema,
too ignorantly shot out of the
bosome of many Counsels; as if they
delighted to cloath themselues ipso facto,
with Execrations and curings.
               The duetie of the whole Communion
of Sainctes, is first, to1. Cor. 16. 13. 14. Heb. 3. 12. 13 watch ouer
one another in Loue: Secondly, to administer
of the store which God hath
giuen them, to the reliefe of the needy;
specially, on the1. Cor. 16. 1. 2. first day of the
weeke (namely, the Lords day) that so
their actions of worship towards God,
may be mixed with Charitie towardes
their neighbour. All the Law and the
Prophets do teach that.
               The whole Communion so vnited,
is a litle Citie compact in it selfe, seated
on a Rocke, beauteous and inuincible.
Distraction in Fayth and Manners, is
called1. Cor. 11. 18. 19. 
                  Schisma, Schisme; in plaine
English, a Rending a sunder. The making
choyse of some opinion in Doctrine,
whereto a soule vnreasonably tyeth

it selfe, to the violating of Faythes
foundation, that is called Haeresie. With
this, our Churches be canker-fretted,
to the harming of Fayth: and with the
former, they be generally torne a sunder,
to the violation of Fayth and Charitie.
The Lord purge our Churches
of these euils, though as with violence
of
                     Hellebore, is a violent purger: but rightly applyed, is wonderfully effectuall. 
                  Hellebore.
               
            
            
               Section 6.
               ¶Remission of Sinnes.
               NOw followeth the Beleife, that
euery true Christian hath: First,
touching Remission of sinnes, a benefite in
this life afforded to euery penitent beleiuer:
Secondly, two benefites after
this life; the Resurrection of the flesh,
and Eternall life.
               Remission of Sinnes, bringeth necessarily
with it; First, that euery Christian
is a Sinner: Secondly, the meanes
whereby such forgiuenes of sinnes be
had: Thirdly, the effect which such
Remission hath in the heart of euery
true beleiuer.
               
                  1 That we are Sinners (that is) Not
doers of the Law:
                  1. Iohn. 3. 4. (for, Amartia is Anomia,
Sinne is a not-doing of the Law,
whether it be by Omyssion or Transgression)
it falleth out two wayes: one, by
Originall sinne, deriued (Ex traduce)
from our first Parents, Adam and Heuah:
for out of such a bitter Fountaine,
we can draw no sweete water. Besides,
we are Sinners Actually, that is, by our
owne immediate act; wee hauing subscribed
to the law of sinne in our members,
both by thought, word, & worke:
One of these Actions (much more both)
are sufficient for our arraignement and
condemnation.
               2 The Meanes whereby we are
freed of both these Criminations, are
onely the sufferinges of the Just for the
vniust; and that is, the sufferings of
Christ Jesus for vs: seeing hee alone is
the Lambe of God that taketh away
the sinnes of the world, we by his blood
(and by no other) haue our garmentes
and conuersation made white. Our
sinnes in the Law being resembled copiouslie,
by sundry pollutions; and his
cleansing of vs by his blood, being resembled

by theHeb. 9. 21. &c. blood of Animals
sprinkling the Tabernacle and Alter,
there beeing without blood no Remission.
Which cannot otherwise be vnderstood
by the penners of this Creed;
seeing no Angell or Man is in this Beleife
introduced for a Sauiour in whole
or in part: but the Sonne of God solely,
who became Jesus the Sauiour, and
the Christ or Annoynted-one to this
purpose.
               The Manqueller in the Law (Num.
32. 22.) that was set free vpon the death
of the Hie-priest, did plainely figure
out the deliueraunce of a penitent sinner,
by the death of our Hie-priest,
Iesus.
               3 The Effecte
                        •
                     
                   which such Remission
worketh in our hearts, is, Loue vnfeigned;
whereby we are ready to forgiue
to our brethren the sinnes whereby
they haue transgressed against vs,
euen as God hath freely forgiuen vs.
Our sinnes towardes God being compared
to Talents; and our brethrens
towards vs, being assimilated to Pence:
Which Forgiuenesse at Gods hand, as
it is dayly, and oft in a day; so, we are

thereby inuited to do the like towards
our neighbour. To God we are to
pray for their Remission, though them
selues doe it not: and we are in Gods
name to pronounce it vnto them, so
oft as they shall turne backe and say,
It repenteth mee.
               
               Herevpon it is, that Moses introduceth
Josephs brethren, saying, Forgiue
now the trespasse of thy brethren, and their
sinne: Whereto Joseph replyed; Feare
not, for am I not vnder God? as if he
should say, Feare not my laying of your
sinne vnto your charge; for as I am
subiect vnto God, so, I as freely forgiue
you, as he hath forgiuen to mee my
trespasses. Genes. 50. 17. &c. Nor did the
Law of Sin-offrings vrge lesse. Blessed
is he whose wickednesse is forgiuen,Psal. 32. 1. 2. and
whose sinne is couered. Blessed is the man
to whom the Lord imputeth not iniquitie.
Lord for thy Sonnes sake, forgiue vs
our sinnes.
            
            
               
               Section. 7.
               ¶Resurrection of the Flesh.
               THe Church being considered (as afore)
with the mayne benefite she
reapeth at Gods hand in this life, which
is, Remission of sinnes; now follow
two benefites after this life. The first
is, Resurrection of the body: and the second
is, Life eternall ensuing.
               The Resurrection of the body, is
that, which the Sadducies denied, as Familistes
amongst vs. And how doth
our Sauiour prooue it? From these
wordes of Moses in Exod. 3. 6. where
the Lord sayth, I am the God of thy Father,
the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, & the God of Jaakob. From whence
he thus concludeth,Math. 22. 32 
                  God is not the God
of the dead, but of the liuing: as if he had
sayd in moe words, neither Abraham,
nor Isaac, nor Jaakob, was onely soule,
but also body: and therefore the Lord
saying, hee is their God, it must necessarily
follow, that he was the God both
of body and soule. Which neither

could be, except the body liued to him
in the assuraunce of Resurrection, for
being vnited to the soule in endlesse
glory. This stopped the mouthes of
them Sadducies; and I pray God also
the consideration thereof, may stoppe
the mouthes of our Semi-atheistes, denyers
of the bodyes resurrection, flowted
of naturall Philosophers in Athens, but
prescisely taught of the Apostle; and
that with a difference of Glory in the
resurrection, as there is a difference of
glory betweene the Sunne, Moone, and
Starres. As for theCompare Math. 20. 1. with Chap. 21. 33. Parable of the
Workemen called into the Vineyard
at the sixt, ninth, and eleauenth hower,
and each receiuing a penny, that medleth
nothing in proprietie with the kingdome
of Glory, but with the kingdome
of Grace in this life; where the last,
(namely, the Gentile) so well as Israel the
first, receiueth the earnest-penny of
saluation, which is the spirit of Adoption,
the spirit of our Mediatour Jesus,
a sufficient recompence to the first and
last: by the vertue of whichRom. 8. 11. spirit, our
bodyes are raysed vp vnto Glory.
               As for the Rising of the misbeleiuer,

it is but a rising to fall: for as God will
be none of their God; so, to the Diuell
and his Angels they be referred: and
this is the finall Curse pronounced against
the Lawes transgressers, throughout
all Moses.
               
            
            
               Section. 8.
               ¶Life Euerlasting.
               THe first benefite to the Church after
this life, was noted to be the Resurrection
of the flesh. The second
and last is, Eternall life both of body
and soule.
               Some (like craftie smooth-faced
Sadducies) haue denied, that Moses any
where teacheth such Eternall life. But
I pray such Doctors to tell mee, why
the Lords speach to Moses, which before
prooued the bodyes R
                        •
                     surrection,
doth not also as necessarily prooue
Eternall life? If Jehouah be the God of
Abraham, and therefore whole Abraham
must needes liue; which cannot
be, if the body should not rise: then
his beeing the God of Abraham, prooueth
Euerlasting life to appertaine vnto

whole Abraham; seeing Jehouah liueth
euerlastingly, the God of Abraham.
And I would further know of the couetous
Sadducie, why is not Eternall
life fitly, necessarily, and plainely taught
of Moses in Genes. 5. when as it is sayd,
that God translated Henoch from this
world to himselfe? And when Moses
in Exod 32. 32. doth in his Zeale for
Israel, say thus to the Lord, I pray thee,
rase mee out of thy Booke, which thou hast
written? What Booke speaketh he off,
sauing of the Booke of life, that contayneth
the names only of such as (through
the Lord of life, Iesus) are sealed vp vnto
Eternall life?
               
               If he reply, these places and many
moe doe teach necessarily Eternall life,
but his meaning was, that the phrase of
Eternall life, was not vsed of Moses.
               
               Thereto I answere: so, the Sadducie
may denie all the artificiall tearmes of
Diuinity, which the Prophets, Apostles,
& all haue introduced in the wisedome
of Gods spirit. And so he may carpe at
all Religion, & at euery mans writing;
contending about Tearmes, till he haue
forgotten the thing and matter it selfe.
               
                  This Eternall life is, a full fruition
of God all glorious,1. Iohn. 3. 2. seeing him as he
is, and enioying that sight for euermore.
When Satan sayd, Yee shalbe as Aelohim,
(Gen. 3.) he spoke as did Caiphas, a truth
against his purpose & vnderstanding.
For God, that called Light out of
Darknesse, hath out of Death fetched
Life: yea, such a Life, as whereby euery
of the Saued, shalbe as God, though not
God, by God his beeing so all in all.
               Vnto this Eternall life, is opposite
eternall Death. This prouided for the
Diuell and his Angels, and all misbeleiuers:
as the former prouided for true
Beleiuers, vnited to their Head Christ.
The Diuell and his, are thrust out of
the Creed; because thrust out from the
presence of Gods glory. Let them all,
that would partake in that Glory, labour
their assurance thereof, by a true
working Fayth. I beleeue, Lord helpe my
vnbeleife. Amen.
               
               Such hath been, and such is my Fayth,
               Whatse're the close Seducer sayth:
               The sundry Bookes I erst haue writ,
               To all the world will witnesse it.
               Erubescas nonnè Satana?
            
            
               
               Epilogue to the Christian
Reader.
               OVr Sauiour hauing to doe with the
Sadducies, who admitted no other
Scripture for Canonicall, sauing the
writinges of Moses; hee by Moses
answereth them, as being sufficient for
proouing any Article of Fayth, which
had in after times been taught by the
Prophets, Himselfe, or his Apostles;
seeing Himselfe came but to fulfill the
Law (which caused Isaiah to bid his
Hearers, Goe to the Law) as the Apostles
were interpretours of Law and
Prophets. Nor for other purpose was
it, that our Sauiour sayd thus to the
Jewes, Had yee beleeued Moses, yee would
haue beleeued mee;John. 5. 46. 47. for he wrote of mee.
But if yee beleeue not his writinges, How
shall yee beleeue my words? The matters
of Saluation were perfect in Moses,
howsoeuer there was more light in the
expositions of the Prophets, and most
light in the labours of the Apostles.
Wherevpon I conclude, that nothing

is to be held for an Article of Religion,
as essentiall vnto Saluation, which cannot
be made good out of Moses. Which
one lesson, if it had been well learned,
it had preuented the manifold Schismes
which a number run into; partly, about
Quiddities touching the Godhead; partly,
about Externall forme of Church
discipline; and partly, about Ceremonies
of order and comlynes: by such
meanes violating the Fayth, breaking
the bondes of peace and loue; wrathfully
eger about circumstaunces (euery
Sect in their humour) till substaunce
of Fayth, and the groundes of Charitie
be neglected; tything (with the Pharises)
Mynts, and Anise, at the best,
neglecting meane times (Barútera tou
nomou) the waightier thinges of the
Law, as Iudgement, Mercie, and Fidelitie:
while thus one doth bite another;
one is consumed of another: Manasses
eating vp Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses;
                  Galat. 5. 5. Isa. 9. 20. 21. and both against Judah. The
Lord redresse it, and giue vs grace to
do all thinges in loue. Amen.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            PRay for mee Friends, pray for my constancie,
            That in true Faith, Clapham may liue & die.
            So shall his life and death be for thy good,
            While some sticke vp vnto the knees in Mudde,
            Feeding on earth, digging with Mo
                  •
               es to hell:
            God do encrease our Fayth and Loue. Farewell.
            Pergite.
         
         
            ¶To the fainting Friend.
            Thou weary art of doing good,
            Though I the same to losse of Blood.
            Reward is ioyn'd with Constancy,
            When Iudgment whips Apostacy.
            Memor esto vnde excideris & Resipisce.
         
         
            ¶To the Enemie.
            Do wring and wrest, do rayle and rend,
            Yet I will blesse vnto the end.
            Domine, ne statuas Ei hoc peccatum.
            FINIS.
         
         
            The Printer.
            The Auther being a farre off, some faults may
haue passed mee: I pray you impute them
to meere ignoraunce.
         
      
   