
      
         
            
            
            
               THE Parricide Papiſt, OR, Cut-throate Catholicke.
            A tragicall diſcourſe of a murther lately committed at Padſtow in the Countie of Cornewall by a profeſſed Papiſt, killing his owne Father, and afterwardes himſelfe, in zeale of his Popiſh Religion. The 11 of March laſt paſt. 1606.
            
               Written by G Cloſſe, Preacher of the Word of God at Blacke Torrington in Deuon.
            
               VIRESCIT ❀ VVLNERE ❀ VERITAS
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            ¶ Printed at London for Chriſtopher Hunt, dwelling in Louells Inne in Paternoſter-row. 1606.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE Parricide Papiſt, OR, Cut-throate Catholicke.
            
            
               
                  PEruſing the plentifull and profitable labours of many learned & zealous Writers of this time, and the Chriſtian forwardnes of all ſorts bending their batteries againſt the Bulwarks of Superſtition & Popery, ſome with theyr pennes, others with their pikes, and all with theyr prudent policies purſuing the reculing Miſcreants: I thought it not impertinent to my place, profeſſion, and occaſion, to cut a few vacant houres out of my priuate buſineſſes,

ſes, and to latch a blow (amongſt others,) at the ſcull of the ſeauen-headed Dragon, & whoreApoc. 17. 3 of Babylon, rather to teſtifie my conſenting will to true Religion, then my contenting ſkil as able, to adde any ornament vnto that which the Lord hath ſo gloriouſly adorned with wiſedome, and power to ſupport it ſelfe againſt all malignitie of the world, and the gates of hell not able to preuaile againſt it.
            
            Euery cleere eye, and iudicious care, hath ſufficiently diſcerned the cauſe of Rome to be deſerted, and deſtitute of all defence by argument: enough (if not too much) hath beene anſwered to all theyr allegations in defence of theyr falſe Sinagogue, and accuſations in offence and derogation of our true reformed Chriſtian Churches: and of theſe blinde Wormes; and deafe Adders, may be verified the ſaying of Salomon, That though you bray aProu, 27, 22 23, 9, foole in a Morter, yet hee will be neuer the vviſer. I ſhall therefore commend vnto your Chriſtian conſiderations, the Tragicall act and euent, which lately hapned in the Countie of Cornwall, (not farre from the place of my habitation:) and ſeeing our Popiſh pamphletors cuculate nothing more than ſurmiſed calumniations againſt the perſons of our godly and moſt painfull Miniſters, not beeing

otherwiſe able to diſcredite their doctrines, I wil expoſe to their Owle-ſight eyes examples of theyr owne Sectaries to be looked vpon, and ſeriouſly conſidered. Wherein to ſhunne the iuſt taxation of ſlaunder, (which is moſt proper to their Popiſh practiſes,) I will propoſe matter in fact euident, by publique Records, in qualitie execrable, in time newe, and freſhly bleeding in our eyes.
            
               Luther and Beza, beeing ſurcharged with manifold fictions, and odious imputations, out-liued the enuy of theyr enemies, and in theyr life time confuted theyr forged imputations: but ye examples of theſe mens more then barbarous blood-thirſtineſſe, ſhall outliue all ages liuing, and remaine inchronicled as Prodigies, and ſtand enroled in publique acts, as memorialls to all poſterities, ſo long as our lawes, or any ciuill gouernment ſhall be praciſed in the Land: and let them heare me to tell thē plainly, that which our bleſſed Sauiour told their fore-fathers the Phariſees roundly, that they are of their FatherIohn; 8, 44 the deuill, who was a murtherer from the beginning: they are the progeny of Caine, ſacrificing Abell, becauſe he ſacrificeth to GODGene, 4, 5▪
                a better ſmelling oblation then theyrs.
            
               If they will needes iudge the Tree by the frutes, & the cauſe by the effects: then what pietie can bee imagined in that Profeſſion, which is ſo bloody, as theyrs is notified in all the world to be? Yea, theyr whore of Babilon, in all her deliciouſnes, is eſpecially banquettedApoc, 17. 6, 
               with the blood of the Saints.
            
            If I ſhould ſpeake of vſuall murthers, which common cut-throates commit in theyr purſe-takings, or that furious ſwaggerers ſhed in their hote bloods, and wrathfull reuenges, it were no more in cōpariſon of that which cōmeth in this argument, then a bloodie noſe to a gaſping wound. For though all killing is cruell, and an enemy to nature, yet the vnnaturall & deteſted Parricides (whereof this argument intreateth) aſtoniſheth all humaine reaſon to conſider it, appalleth all the ſences to apprehend it, and exceedeth all credulity to beleeue ſuch a thing to bee doone, till they behold it actually performed.
            The wiſe Law-giuer aunſwered diſcreetly,Solon. excuſing himſelfe that hee made no Lawe for him that murthered his Father, becauſe hee neuer imagined ſuch an odious acte againſt nature would euer be imagined, much leſſe attempted of any humaine creature.
            
               But ſee the blindneſſe of hereſie and falſe religion, which being a poyſon of the ſoule, brought from the denne of darknes, and a drugge of the deuill, how it not onely oppoſeth the creature againſt the Creator, man againſt GOD, and man againſt man, but tranſformeth theyr whole natures, ingendering in them vnnaturall thoughts and deſires, and producing effects odious to GOD and nature. In theſe our latter dayes, men beeing1, Tim, 4, 1 2, Tim, 3, 2, 3, departed from the faith, are become (as the Apoſtle ſaith) vnnaturall: and God giuing them ouer into a reprobate ſence, which would not receiueRom, 1, 26 the loue of the truth, they haue changed the naturall vſe of thinges, to that which is againſt nature; as not onely theyr execrable Sodomitries, but theyr thriſe deteſted Parricides, openly teſtifie, and cry out againſt them.
            Doe I, or dare I enſtile them Parricide Papiſts, or Cut-throate Catholicks, and be deſtitute of examples pathetically to mooue, and effectually to prooue it? No, no, amongſt many old, I will introduce one new exemplarie inſtance therof, lately acted in the midſt of their ſmoaking broyles, irrefragably warranted by vnreprooueable witneſſes. One Inigo Ieanes of Padſtow in the County of Cornwall, being lately ſome-what reclaimed from his

Popiſh profeſſion, & frequenting the Church (though as it appeareth with no great deuotion) was in the harueſt of their late politick platforme, aſſailed with ye perſwaſiue tongue of one William Manfil, (a profeſſed Romaniſt) to returne to his old byas againe. Who vpon better information of his friendes, replied, that it was in vaine now any longer to conſect in that Religion, ſeeing after the death of the late Queene, the inauguration of a moſt religious King, forced the tide & ſtreame againſt the Romiſh Church, ſo that both hap and hope, were drowned and periſhed together. Yet the Temptor, like ſathan his maſter, deſirous to caſt downe the ſtrong in faith from the pinacles of the Temple, perſwadethMath, 4, incouragement, and confidence of better ſucceſſe, aſſuring him, that platformes were thē in hand, not onely for redemption, but renowne of the Catholicks, & that forces were in full preparation both at home and abroad to aduaunce the Catholicke cauſe, as he termed it. Onely it behoued them to apply their maſſings, and ceremoniall obſeruances, to obtaine it by merit at Gods hands.
            Perhaps they imagined (as the ProphetPſal, 50, 21 ſpeaketh) that GOD was like vnto themſelues, and would participate with them in any wickednes,

if they could make him ſmell to theyr bloody vnbleeding ſacrifice. But the poore credulous caytiffe, being led on by theſe faire pretences, and hopefull preparations, relapſed Catholicke againe: and as buſie as other Waſpes of that ſwarme, conſorted with the crew of other corner-creepers, in obſcure Caues to doe ſeruice to the Prince of darkneſſe. And although Iames the Father of thē ſaid Inigo Ieanes often diſſwaded him from thoſe dangerous courſes, which the ſeuerity of the Lawes would ſharply correct, yet he deſperately running on, and reſolued to perſiſt, not only refuſed to obey the admonitions of his father, but became an earneſt perſwader that hee would permit them a place of ſecrecie in his houſe, for the exerciſe of their idolatrous maſſings.
            The Father, (whether fearing God or the Law more, I omit to cenſure) ſtill conſtantly contradicted his ſonnes vnreaſonable and vnſeaſonable requeſt, alleaging, that at this time, Lawes were making in ye Parliament, to puniſh Popery more ſeuerely then euer heretofore: and that vpon iuſt occaſion of the late diſcouerie of ſo damnable a ſtratageme, as was neuer plotted againſt any Chriſtian or Heathen ſtate: and therfore in ſome round

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
termes (as it ſeemed) checked & reiected his peeuiſh ſonnes Popiſh petition.
            But he, in the franticke ſpirit of a Papiſt, haſtily tooke vp a club or beetle (where-with they vſed to cleaue wood) and rudely, (O let me ſtudie a more apt word for ſuch ſauage inhumanitie) barbarouſly aſſailed his owne naturall Father, and ſtrooke him violentlie on the head to the ground. And doubting that hee had not throughly diſpatched him, tooke vp a barre of yron, & ſtrooke him with maine force and brake his backe, ſo that hee preſently died of thoſe wounds.
            Then this Inigo Ieanes, leauing his Father groueling on the ground, and wallowing in his owne blood, immediatly fled to a Chappell (called Saint Sauiours) neere Padſtowe, and haſtily vnclothing himſelfe, with a bad and blunt knife (adding all his force thereto) gaſtly in two or three places gaſhed his own belly athwart, that his bowels were to be ſeene.
            The Mother of the ſaide Inigo ſhortly after comming into her Garden, and finding her huſband thus cruelly murthered, and vtterly diſmaid there-with, came into the houſe

enquiring for her ſonne Inigo Ieanes, and finding him fledde away, ſhe cauſed another of her ſonnes, and ſome other meſſenger to ſeek him: who comming vnto the foreſaid Chappell of Saint Sauiours, found him there leaning to one of his hands, & moſt greeuouſlie wounded.
            Vpon ſome ſpeeches and conference, the ſaid Inigo confeſſed the murthering of his father, and wounding himſelfe: and was very deſirous to ſpeake with Maiſter Nicholas Prideaux (then and nowe high Sherieffe of Cornwall,) dwelling neere the ſaid Towne of Padſtow, to the intent he might reueale ſome ſpeciall matters vnto him, where-with it ſeemed his conſcience was ſurcharged. And being brought vnto his preſence, hee inſtantlie made knowne vnto him, how he had been ſeduced by the foreſaid Manfill vnto his erronious Religion: and that the ſame morning, himſelfe, with ſeauen men, & eyght women more, had been at Maſſe, at one Richard Hores houſe of S. Eruin.
            
            Heerevpon the ſaid Maiſter Prideaux, ſent for three other Iuſtices of the Peace next adioyning, namely Maiſter Arundell of Treriſe, Maiſter Michell, and Maiſter Coſworth Eſquires,

to whom vpon further examination he confeſſed all that is before declared: and that he had beene there-vnto drawne & mooued by the inſtigation of the deuill, and ſeeming very ſorrowfull for the fact, after ſome two or three daies languiſhing, departed this life. And ſo wee will leaue him to the tribunall ſeate of the moſt righteous, and All-ſeeing Iudge to be cenſured.
            Before I proceed further in examining the innumerable impieties in this one fact compriſed, I may not omit to note vnto ye world, what a blinde & ſenceleſſe guide they had for theyr Prieſt, that from ſuch a director, no hope of better fruites could bee conceiued. This paltry Popeling, was well knowne a little before to be a badde and rude Schoolemaiſter, and a fellow of ſuch noted ſtupidity, that young Gentlemen, ſeruingmen, and others, for an exerciſe and recreation, would practiſe to haue him ſtand ſtill, whiles they with all theyr force, quoyted ſbillings or teſternes at his blockiſh browe, which for a ſmall peece of mony he would as quietly endure, as if a Stoicall ſtupidity had poſſeſſed his braines and body, euen till his face and fore-head was often-times moſt grieuouſlie gaſhed, moouing many beholders to pittie

him, which did not pitty himſelfe.
            This Dorus, was now lately become like one of Ieroboams Prieſts, taken as one out of the1, Reg. 13, 13 2, Chro, 11 15 Iudges, 17, 10, 11, baſeſt of the people, & conſecrated with the Popes vnguent, a prieſt of the deuill, or Maſſe-monging Catholick. This calfe of Dan, beeing now become a Bell-wether to the ſcabbed flocke, it is doubted whether the ſheepe infected him more with the hope of hire, to become a Micahs prieſt, or hee with his Ramme-like forehead, had hardned the faces of his flock vnto this extreame impudencie and impiety: but ſure the prouerbe was well ſhared amongſt them, ſuch a prieſt, ſuch people. Theyr mother was Atheiſme, theyr nurſe Ignorance, Darknes theyr dwelling, and Confuſion theyr inheritance.
            Let me returne to our ſeraphicall Doctors of Rome, which accuſe all the world but thē
               ſelues of impurity: and let them anſwere me in earneſt, ſhall wee know the tree by the fruites?
               Math, 7, 16, iudge of the ſoundnes of the profeſſion by the workes of the profeſſors? Will you try vs, not by rules of Diuinitie, but examples of Diuines? Looke vpon this patterne, peruſe this picture of your Parricide Papiſt, whoſe offence is taxed, not as hee is a man falling through infirmitie, but as he is a Papiſt, erring

wilfully, no paſſion but his profeſſion, no hope of gaine, but blind deuotion, no reaſon but his vnreaſonable Religion, plunged him into theſe execrable enormities. It is your religion that hath dubbed you man-quellers, king quellers, ſelfe-quellers. Are you not Parricides? alas, your maiſters are not like Peter, that forſookeMath, 26, 34 Iohn, 21, 15, his Maiſter, & repenting did counteruaile his triple deniall, with a three-fold confeſſion of him: but as your Legend noteth of Iudas, that had murthered his father, and cō
               mitted inceſt with his mother, and became Chriſtes diſciple for a cullour to ſhadowe his horrible impieties, and betraying his maiſter laſtly hanged himſelfe: ſuch ſucceſſion rightly correſpondeth with your Popedome, by bloodſheds they are hatched, grow great, and ſtrengthen themſelues.
            
               Phocas murthered his Maiſter the EmperorAu
                     •
                  . Victor. 
               Mauritius, and was it not the firſt & ſureſt ſtep to the Romiſh Popedome? But it may be you can allow this lay Parricide to murther Princes, for eſtabliſhment of a Popedome: Your holy Fathers, Popes & Biſhops, haue by ſundry poyſonings, ſome loſt their liues and places, & others gained them: how approue you this ſpirituall parricide? Chriſtian Kinges and Princes, are deſigned to deſtruction by

your holy Popes ordinances: is it no Parricide? The Prince of Orenge, & the French-King deceaſſed, murthered by Papiſts, and he that now raigneth, aſſailed to be ſlaughtered by your vnhallowed hands: will not all men abhor theſe portentuous parricides? King Iohn of England, long agoe poyſoned by Monks, & our late renowned Maiden Queene more often attempted with trecheries, then your Popes crowne hath haires of an honeſt Prelate, dooth it not proclaime to the world your damnable parricides? Let me make an end with you all, which would make an end with vs all, your late ſtratageme, to blow vp with gun-powder our potent King, Queene, Prince, Prelate, Nobilitie, & the whole ſtate of Parliament, was it not an vnheard of practiſe of Parricide?
            I heare ſome of your Politikes vnder their viſards to confeſſe, that it was an horribleAnſwere to the Diſcouery: praeface to the King. proiect, which no Religion can excuſe, no reaſon defend, no authoritie maintaine: that God & heauen are againſt it, men and earth deteſt it, (the ſillie (you ſhould haue ſaid, ſlilie) delinquents) themſelues did lament it. Goe to then, if to murther Parents, (which are in the higheſt degree of naturall loue) if to murther Princes, which are in moſt eminent dignitie of polyticall parentage,

if to murther a whole Commonwealth, your natiue Country (quae vna omnesCicero. omnium charitates complexa eſt) compriſeth the liues, and loues of vs all, be not an inexplicable parricide, then I muſt, and will confeſſe, I haue ouer-leaped my limits, & miſtitled your profeſſors of the Popiſh religion, in terming them Parricides. But a father of children, muſt needes be touched with a horrer in his hart, to conceiue how many fathers and mothers you would haue made childleſſe, & children fatherleſſe by your helliſh proiects: A Prince that is honoured as a father in his kingdome, and embraceth his ſubiects with an affectionate loue, abhorreth the remembrance of ſo vile an enterpriſe, to ſee a ſtate ſo floriſhing, in a moment torne, and vtterly diſſigured: All louers of God and Religion, yea euery man that taſteth any ſweetnes of ciuill ſocietie, ſtandeth amazed, and amated at the conſideration of ſuch barbarous immanitie, ouer-turning Temples, palaces, citties, and families, without any remorſe, or reſpect of Religion, or order: and yet all theſe effects, cannot be denied to be the fruites of your Romiſh religion. I will conclude, and hold it maintained with a world of witneſſes, that though the terme be tart, yet it is true, Papiſts are Parricides.
            
            
               But why (ſay they) is this rude phraſe of Cut-throate Catholicks (ſo harſhly ſounding in vulgar eares) applyed to our pope-holy profeſſors? Let Northumberland, aboue twentie yeres agoe murthering himſelfe in ye Tower, Arden ſtrangling himſelfe in Newgate, and this our Corniſh Catholicke, (ſo lately killing his father and himſelfe) ſtand forth as freſhbleeding examples to verifie it. Did not Percy and Catesby, which choſe rather to die wilfully and deſperately by the ſouldiers hand, then ſubmit themſelues, and liue to confeſſe their faults, ſatiſfie the King and Commonwealth, and permit themſelues a breathing time to repent thē of their hideous attempts, beare witnes againſt them, & conuince them to be deſperate Selfe-murtherers?
            I dare not charge all, nor any of their cō
               plices which died in priſon, to be guilty of Selfe-poyſoning, but the manifeſt deſperate attempt of Nicholas Oven, moſt bloodily mangling, and maſſacring him-ſelfe in the Tower, and with his owne handes tearing out his fat and bowels, the ſecond day of March laſt paſt, (this our Corniſh Cut-throate ſeconding him within nine dayes after) cannot be denied, nor exempted frō the imputation of barbarous immanity in our Popiſh

profeſſors.
            What is the whole practiſe of the Romiſh Church, wading through blood of Princes and kingdoms to eſtabliſh a Popedome, continually complotting and practiſing maſſacres in the whole Chriſtian world, but a publique proclamation to beware of Cut-throate Catholicks. Though they go in ſheepes skinnes,Math, 7, 15 1, Reg, 14, 2, 6. wee know them to be Wolues: howſoeuer diſguiſed, the true prophet diſcerneth the diſſembling of Ieroboams wife, and will prophecie the renting of theyr kingdome. Whatſoeuer theyr othes and proteſtations be, wee know theyr Aequiuocations & Diſpenſations; not peace but warre, not loyaltie but rebellion, not the Kings honor, but the Popes aduauncement is theyr errand. And let the fauourers, and furtherers of your treaſous vnderſtand, that thoſe which hate theyr naturall Prince, will not long adhere to Strangers. Such as can conſent to the confuſion of theyr natiue Country, will not be truſted for friends to any Cōmon-wealth. Such as murther their Parents, wil not ſpare Aliants. Thoſe that kill themſelues, which is the fountaine of all loues, (for ſibi nequam cui bonus erit) can neuer find any whō they will deeme worthy of preſeruation, if they ſhall croſſe theyr curſed courſes.
            
               Theyr pontificall Biſhop, (that beaſt whichApo, 17, 1, 2, ſitteth vpō many waters,) and hath brewed and broached theſe bloody broyles in the Chriſtian ſtate, and glorieth in his title, to be called Eccleſiae Catholicae Pontifex, a Bridge-maker, to tranſport his paſſengers the Catholicke creatures into his Sea of Rome, ouer the Riuers and ſtreames of blood, mixing his intoxicating potions of hereſies, idolatries, and traditious, where-with the Kings of the earth, (quaffing & carouſing the cuppes of his fornication) are made drunken, as the Euangelicall prophet ſpeaketh. Els let him be Pontifaex, et terrae fax, the dregges of the Sea, and firebrand of the Earth, with his filth polluting the waters, and with his fierie faggots of perſecution, ſcorching and conſuming the inhabitants of the world. No doubt it ſhalbe done vnto him, as hee hath done vnto others, and his meaſure ſhall be in ſeauen-folde manner, meaſured vnto him againe, when the beaſt ſhal be caſt into the Lake that burneth with fire & brimſtone for euer-more.
            
            But for a monition to the ſimple ſeduced ones, (for ye Seducers ſeeme deſperatly hardned in their pertinacie) wee pray you to looke on the preſent ſtate of things, with open and equall eyes, and conſider the courſes & carriages

of the cauſe on both ſides: and let them in plainenes confeſſe, whether they haue not diſcerned the hand of God againſt them and their attempts, turning theyr deepeſt deuiſes like Achitophels policies, into fooliſhneſſe, and2, Sam, 17, 14, 23, 18, 9, 1, Reg, 1, 7, 2, 25. Numb, 16, 1, 2, 31, bringing the wheele ouer their Counſellors and conſpirators, ſo that they both periſh together, like Achitophell and Abſalon, Ioab and Adoniah, Corah and his complices.
            Their hardened Pharao, ſtriuing to keepe Gods people in bondage, & ſeruitude to his ordinances, and will not let them peaceably depart to ſerue their liuing God, according to his commaundement, ſhall no doubt in the end, receiue the condigne wages of his merit, and hardnes of hart: and our Moſes and Aarons,
               Exod, 21, 51 (our elected Princes, prieſts & prophets) ſhall proſper in the deliuerances, informations, and gouernment of Gods people.
            The mighty God, who by little and little caſt out the Cananites, & planted Iſrael in theyr Land, hath his workings conſtant and conſonant, alwaies like himſelfe, ful of patience & iuſtice, with a ſlow and ſtrong arme bringing2, Sam, 7, 10. Exod, 1, 7, 8, mighty thinges to paſſe. The kingdom of Antichriſt is in ſhort time by degrees cut ſhort, and abated, and the Iſraell of GOD, hath as

mightily proſpered, out of a few families enlarging his borders into many kingdomes, and what remaineth, but that he which letteth2, Theſ. 2, 6, 7. be taken out of the way, and that the man of ſinne beeing reuealed, may be alſo remoued & rootedMath, 15, 13 out, as a plant which is not of our heauenly fathers planting.
            
            We cōfeſſe the Church of Rome receiued, and for many yeeres retained the ſinceritie of the Goſpell and true religion: and ſo there was a good Pharao in Egypt, which by holy Ioſephs
               Gene, 45. 10 direction ordered his kingdome, & gaue vnto the people of God a fruitful poſſeſſion in the Land of Goſhen, where they proſpered, andGene, 47, 6 multiplied exceedingly; but there aroſe in proceſſeExod, 1, 8, of time another Pharao, which knewe not Ioſeph, and became a tyrant vnto the people of God, and cruelly oppreſſed them. So Rome is become Babylon, her Candleſticke is remoued,Apoc, 18, 2, 3, 4, Cap, 2, 4, 5. ſhee is fallen from her firſt faith, and the faithfull Cittie is become an Harlot, and her Antiquitie without Veritie, is but oldnes of Errors, and wee muſt depart frō her, which is departed from GOD.
            If ſhee will returne vnto her ſpouſe, & forſake her Louers with whom ſhee committed all her fornications and abhominations, we

will reioyce with her for ſuch an holy reconciliation: elſe we will cry vnto the people of God to come out of her, & not to pertake with her ſinnes, and idolatries, leaſt they pertake of her grieuous plagues and puniſhments, when the cup of the Lords wrath ſhall be powred vpon her.
            God of his vnſpeakable goodneſſe, make that your ſinnes be not an hinderance vnto his rich mercies, but that he will ſpeedily, for the Elects ſake, cut ſhort the power of Antichriſt, and amplifie the borders of his kingdome, that our eyes may ſee it, and our poſteritie may reioyce in his great ſaluation, and prayſe him for all our corporall, and ſpirituall deliuerances. So be it. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   