
      
         
            
            
            A brief and most pleasaūt Epitomye of the whole art of Phisiognomie, gathered out of Aristotle, Rasis, Formica, Loxius, Phylemō, Palemō, Consiliator, Morbeth the Cardinal and others many moe, by that learned chyrurgian Cocles: and englished by Thomas Hyll Londoner.
            ¶ Imprinted at London by John Waylande.
            
               Cum priuilegio per septennium.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the right worshipful Master George keable Esquier, Thomas Hyll wysheth prosperytye.
            
               THe kindnes whyche, I haue founde at youre frendly handes, ioynte wyth your knowledge and loue of good letters, hath moued me to dedicate these my laboures, vnto youre mastershyp: whiche I haue attempted to put in prynt, rather to shew what I wyshe to bee doen, than what I can doe. The argumente is not onely plesante but also necessarye, and that for all kyndes of men to be skylled in. And that ryghte wel knew the auncyente Phylosophers, whiche would receyue no Skolers nor bye any scruaūtes, whose shape answered not their knowledge in thys science. But what nede I declare thys vnto you, who know it already muche better than my selfe: wherfore no lenger to trouble you wyth my rude letters, I hartely beseche you to take in good part my good wyll, and wyth your authoritie to protecte my doynges. Thus I pray god to kepe you.
            
               yours most bounden Thomas Hill.
            
         
         
            
            The Preface To the Reader.
            
               IF it be true (gentle Reader) that the chefe point in knowledge is to knowe God, the second to know oure selfe, the thyrde (whiche is also the firste part of prudence) to know al other men, thā must it nedes follow that such menes as leade vs to the nerest perceyuing of any of these three, must nedes be both good, profitable and necessary. What folly is than in those heades whiche condemne or dispise natural Philosophy, whiche as Saincte. Paul affirmeth, leodeth vs to the firste, and as Kyng Salomon sayeth, dryueth vs to the seconde. And as the whole consente of all that haue been learned beareth wytnes, doth throughly instructe vs in the thyrde. For the excellencye of the creatures as heauen (whose course & effectes Arithmeticke and Astronomy declare) and earth, (whose compasse, scituacion, and alteracion Geometry and Phisicke publysheth) cause men to graunte not onely the excellency but also the almyghtynes of their maker and ruler. The vse and effectes of natural reason whose trueth and pleasantnes logicke and rethoricke dooe playnly set furth, teache vs how we differ from

other creatures, for what end we were created, and how we maye behaue vs to come to that ende: for about thys laste poynte morall Philosophy is onely occupied, teachyng what is iuste, what honeste, what cumly, and what profitable. And as the excellencye of the creature maketh vs knowe the creator, whose name be blessed for euer, and as the vse of Reason in vs doth cause vs to knowe our seiues: so doeth the effectes and wurkyng of nature, comprehended by reason, teache vs to know and iudge of al other thynges, As firste of the elementes and of their powers in in them selues seuerally vnnixed, secondlye of theyr myxture in thynges, thirdlye of the effectes caused through their mixtures, which be playnly set furth in Phisiognomie, that is to saye knowledge of bodyes. Thys Phisiologie is learned two wayes: by meditacion or by apparence. Meditacyon is a conceyuyng in the mynde of suche thynges as cannot be perceyueo by any sence, as the substaunce of soules, spirites, and vertues. Apparaunce is the iudgemente whiche the senses haue of suche thynges as are obiected agaynst them: as the felyng, of substaunces: the hearynge of mouynges, the tast and smelling of qualities and mixtures, the syghte, of forrmes and Colours. Whych sences although they be all excellente in theyr kindes for vs to iudge and discerne thinges by, yet the chefest truest and most ready is the syght, which is chiefly occupyed about Phisiognomie, as we may cal it in englysh, body skyl, or the knowledge of the temperaunce of bodyes by theyr shape & fourmes, Which although it be of al creatures, both stones, plantes, verbes, fish foule, beastes and men, whose inward prop r
                  •
               yes and difference are knowen by the outwarde shapes: yet be cause that of all the rest man is most excellente, therfore it specially belongeth to hym. And of hys nature the Philosophers haue chefely sought, & that because man is not onely the chefest good to manne, but also

the chefest euil both to man & al other thīges. Which causeth Tully in hys boke de natura deorum, to call Reason (which is the excellētest creature that god euer made) the wurst of al other creatures: because that onely by man (the only possessour therof) al kīdes of iniquities and sinnes agaynst nature are diuised, and cōmitted. But to leaue Tully in hys errour til an other tyme because he distinguisheth not lust and reason, but attributeth the effectes of thone to the other, we wyll come to the matter concernyng Phisiognomy chefely in man, whiche teacheth the thyrde parte of wysdom, and first of prudence, that is: how to discerne the disposicions of al men by their fourme and shape, wherby we maye knowe whom to make oure frendes and familiers, whom to preserue frō beyng our foes, & whom to auoyde as daungerous to haue to doe with all. Al these poyntes are marked by nature in the proporcion and liniamentes of mans body, with diuers other more secrete, whiche are well knowen to as many as knowe the arte, and specially in the face and handes, whiche as it should seme, god hath made opē and vncouerable because al men mighte at all tymes see and perceyue them. And to thende no man shoulde thynke thys incredible (as the grosse heades dooe of all thynges whiche they cannot comprehende) I wyll counsell them by thynges more euident, to credit such as be more obscure, yet not obscure of them selues but hidden from vs for lacke of searche. Can not we knowe by a mans countenaunce whan he is merye, whan sad, whan angry, whan fearfull, whan ashamed, and whan shameles? and that by newe and so dayne alteracions of the visage? Doe we not by the coloures and makyng iudge and not fayle of stomacke and properties of horses, dogges, Cockes, & other creatures? Doe not the Phisicions likewyse iudge the temperamentes, crasis, and diseases of the body by the colour

and alteracion of the qualities and quantyties of partes? And how are all these thynges knowen but by consideryng what elemente is strongest and what weakest in the composicion. For the elementes wurke the same or muche lyke effectes in composicions of bodyes where they rule, as they haue in themselues simply, and so cause the proporcyons both of membres and liniamentes, and bryng furth the lyke condicions and propertyes. Which what they bee, and how they differ, the best learned me from tyme to time haue searched, noted and put in wrytyng. Wherin as they are to be commended, wyth al other which haue followed their good example, so of al other nacyons I am forced most to disprayse myne owne country men, whiche haue leaft no monumente of their skil therin. For there are fewe other nacions but haue in theyr own tounge diuerse treatises therof set furth in print, wheras we (so farre as I haue seen), haue neuer a worde therof. And although I knowe that no begynnynges can lacke disprayse, yet to set other on wurke therin, I haue wyth blynde bayarde aduentured to turne into Inglish, that whiche I haue founde in other tounges, wrytten by the best learned in that arte as Hermes, Aristotle, Rasis, Formica, Locius, Philemon, Palemon, Conciliator and other, wishing that al mē at vacant tymes myghte occupye theyr wittes therin. And one thyng I warne (as I my selfe am warned) not to Judge by any one part alone, but by all (or at the least) by many together: so shall we be sure not to bee deceiued. I meane we shall not bee deceyued to know the trueth of the naturall disposicion, and yet we maye fayle of the mans condicions, whiche Socrates hymselfe well declared. For whan he with hys disciples about hym, asked of a Phisiognomer what condicions he perceyued to be in hym, Ah Socrates (quoth the Phisiognomer) thou art a great 
                  •
               eachour, a craftye felow, subtyle, and geuen to all wyckednes.

Thys answereso vexed Socrates Scolets, who know the contrary to be most true, that they rayled at the Phisiognomer, and woulde wyth strypes haue recompensed hys paynes, had not Socrates stayed them. For it is all true that he sayeth (quoth Socrates) for such I am by nature, but I haue (as al other mē may haue if they wyl) a reasō and grace that ruleth about nature. By this it is euident that reasō and grace ma
                  •
                brydle nature or turne the prouocacions therof vnto goodnes. For the cholericke or irefull man maye eyther by grace represse hys lust, or els vse it well in correctyng of vices. The malicious man maye by gra
                  •
                asswage hys lust, or els turne it agaynst the wycked and so furth of al other natural inclinacions. And therfore although a man may perfitly by Phisiognomy declare the natural inclinacions of any man, y
                  •
                may he not perfectly iudge hym except he know wh
                  •
               
               ther he haue grace or no. And the lacke of thys consi
                  •
               
               raunce hath brought thys science to be thought fals
                  •
                because grace brydeleth or vseth wel the naturall 
                  ••
               
               clinacions of man. Thys well remembred, the boo
                  •
                maye be safely read, and thou (good Reader) therby mayst infallibly iudge the state and condicions of any manne. For the better knowledge wherof, I entende shortly to sette furth palmestrye, In the meane ryme I beseche thee to take in good parte thys my rude endeuours.
         
      
      
         
            A briefe Epitome of the whole art of Phisiognomie, touchyng generally al the membres of man.
         Of the signes of healthful and sicke bodyes, by the part of the foure compleccions. First the signes of the bodye of a hote compleccion.
         
            The firste Chapter.
            
               
            
            
               BOdies naturally hote, do spedily & wel encrease, as appereth in yoūg children, and waxe fatte, muche drye, their vaynes apparaunte in their places, their breath strong, their voyce loude, mightie, and great, mightie in coeatyng, and muche desiring or lusting therto, They fede, digest and beare their meate well, hauing aboundauncy or plenty of heare on the head, and in such places as it should naturally

growe, which partly be thicke bristled of hear of the breast, whiche commeth by muche heate of the heart as perfectly appeareth in the lion and cocke.
         
         
            The signes of the body of a colde compleccyon. The. ii. Chapter.
            BOdyes naturally cold, do slowlye encrease, and waxe fat, their vaynes appeare greate and manifest, their breath smal to be hard, (or as it were in darke maner) their voyce subtile in the hearyng or shrill, feble in coeatyng, and seldom desiring therto, eatyng litell, digesting, & bearyng theyr meate euell, whyte of skynne, or rosie of coloure, their heare deape and long after suffisaunce whether it be blacke or whyte, and they be subtil, fearyng, and trem blyng of a light cause, and weake to laboure.
         
         
            The signes of the body of a moyst compleccyon. The. iii. Chapter.
            
               BOdyes naturally moyst, be softe, and lyghte in the fleshe, theyr Joyntes hid and of small fortytude, whereby they maye endure but a whyle to laboure, they feare and tremble in maner at euery matter sleaping euilly, oftē moued to coeate or to the lust of the body, naked and thinne of heare, their eies often watery or distilling, y• heare of their head, and in the other places, long and thinne hauyng a good or forwarde witte to learne.
         
         
            The signes of the bodye of a drye compleccyon. The. iiii. Chapter.
            
               
               
            
            
               BOdies naturally dry, be thought rough in the fealing, lene in flesh, stronge and durable in laboure, willingly, and conueniently they eate, the iointes of theyr membres be manifest and apparaunt, the heare of their head, & in the other natural places, great, roughe, and courled.
         
         
            The sygnes of a temperate and healthful body. The. v. Chapter.
            
               TEmperate and healful bodies, eate and drincke wel, after their conuenience of nature, digest and dispose, things to thē be sauerye, they hunger in conueniente houres, they ioy with them that be mery, they slepe their ful slepes, they think them self lyght of body, and go lightly on the ground they sweate sone, seldome or neuer snese, they waxe

meanelye fat, coloured in the face, hot in the fealyng, in them the fiue sences haue conueuiente force, after congruency of age, bodye, and houre.
            
               
            
         
         
            The sygnes of a distemperate, and vnhealthful body. The. vi. Chapter,
            
               DIstemperate and vnhealthful bodyes, in all thinges be vnlike to bodies temperate and healthefull, wherefore they eat euilly or very litle, they passe not to drinke, they dygest and dispole or beare their meat euilly, thynges to thē be not sauery, they hungre not in congruente houres, they geue not them selues fully to be chearful and mery, in 
                  •
               eioising at them that laugh and be meary, but be alway as it were sad, and continue sadde, they sleape their slepes euilly, they iudge and thinke them selues heau
                  •
               , and go heauily on the grounde, they seldome sweate, or sweate nothinge at all, they gape or often snese, streachynge their armes oute and abrode, pale

in the face, or ouer hyghe or muche coloured, their. v. sences be weake, they maye not longe susteyne or endure labour, they soone forget matters, spiring much their nostrylles alway ful of fi
                  •
               th, theyr body therow out as it were fat, their fleshe blowen ly
                  •
               e the nose, and their handes, fyngers, and eies sweatie and distil lyng.
         
         
            The signes of a good nature and memorye. The. vii. Chapter.
            
               
            
            
               HE is of a singuler memory & vnderstandyng, and wel fathoned in nature, which hath moyst and softe fleash, meane betwene roughnes and lenitie, meane of stature, hauing a ruddie counten aunce suffused with whitnes, hauyng also agē til and frendlie loke, whose heare of the head is plain thorowout: hauing eies meanly bigge, and declynyng to a roundenes, the head meanly great with an equalitie, the necke well fashioned, and the shoulders declining

downwardes, or shoulders ready to declyne, not fleashlier aboute hys shankes and knees, hauyng a meane voyce betwene great and shrill, hauyng the palmes long with lōg fingers declining to subtunes, meane in laughing or of laughter, whose countenaūce loketh ioyous and meary.
         
         
            The significacyons of hote and dry bodyes after Rasis. The. viii. Chapter.
            
               
            
            
               THese bodyes be thicke, bushye of heare on the head, and elles where, leane also, and in the felyng hote, & the skynne thycke and roughe, and strong sinewes, hauing the vaines bones & iointes, much apparaūt, a lowe voyce, their pulces verye swifte, and moauing or beating the lyke, they bee also hote in the fealyng, very bolde, and obstinate, these hetherto be Rasis wordes.
         
         
            
            The significations of cold and moyst
                  •
                bodies after Rasis. The. ix. Chapter.
            
               
            
            THese bodies be thought saft in y• feling, and naked of heare, & hauing gentle or saft heare on the head, theyr vaines narrow, & Jointes hyd, hauing corpulent bodyes, much fatte, sleping weakly or vnquietly, slowe of mouing and slower in their pace goyng.
         
         
            Of the heare of the head. The. x. Chapter.
            
               THe heare of the head, playne and long and whitshe lyke or flaxen in coloure, if they be thinne and softe, declare that man yuery to be naturallye fearfull in heart, weake in strength, peasable in sosietyes, euery where congruente, reformable,

benigne, and gentle.
            The heare grosse, bristled and shorte, declare that man to be naturally strong, withoute care, bolde, vnquiet, a maker of lyes or enuious, (and of sum named vayn) an often deceauer, desyryng fayer thynges to the eie, and more simple then wyse, although for tune maye fauoure or fawn on hym.
            The heare muche kurled, declareth that man to be dull of witte, or of muche simplicitie, or elles both a lyke.
            
            The heare aboundaunte on the temples of the face, and on the forehead, by whiche the forehead may well be iudged heary: declare that man to be symple, vayn, seacherous, soone credityng other, in maners & talke rusticall, and grosse of witte.
            The heare much bristlyng, and standyng vp in a bushe writhingly, declare that man to bee much simple, bolde, proude, of a dull capacitie, sone angrye, a liar, leacherouse, maliciouse, & in euill presumptuouse.
            The heare feakyng vp on the corner of the forehead,

and al the rest standyng vp, or but parte of them and that the forehead therby appeareth balde, declare that man to be simple, and partly maliciouse, with a wittines or circumspecciō of ordre, or maners therin.
            The heare much aboundaunte on the head, that is, thicke, bushing ouer all the head, declare that man to be leacherous, and of good digestion, vayne or a liar, lightly fierce and rigorouse, slowe in doyng thinges, euill of memorye, desiryng or coueting fayer thinges and infortunate.
            The heare of the head redde in coloure, declare that man to be enuiouse, muche irefull, full of inward deceite, full of rancore or poyson, whiche we terme com monly venimouse, a deceauer, proude, and an euil talker by one behinde his backe, & flatteryng to his face.
            The heare of the head very browne to the coloure of the chesnutte, declare that man to be congruente to all thynges, louing or desiryng honour, dooyng iustice, hauing a haut mynd, and vayne pryde or gloryin hymselfe.
            The heare of the head very blacke declare that mā to be congruente to all thynges more to the good thē to the euil, in ockupacion and labour studious, secret faythfull, and not well fortunate.
            The heare of the head to flaxen or cleishe coloure, declare that man to be of a good condicion, and congruente to all thynges, fearefull, chaste or shamēast, weake, and of a good witte, of a tender capacitie, hauing a hard and cruell fortune.
            The heare of the head meane in quantitie, and co loure, declare that man to be congruente, and more tē dyng to the good, then to the euill, louing a peaceable lyfe, louing clenlynes, and good maners.
            The heare of the head, in Juueniute or younge age, h
                  •
               ry, and balde, declare that man to be often moued,

and desiryng to coeat, vayn or a lyer, bolde, vnstable, and talketyue.
         
         
            Of the head. The. xi. Chapter.
            THe head bigge, and sufficiente rounde throughe oute: declareth that man to be secrecte, witty, and circumspect in his doinges, ingenious, discrete, of a great imaginacion, or a great imaginour, laborious, stable or stedfast, and faythfull in promis or otherwise, for the more parte.
            That head that hath a great throte with the necke whiche declyneth to the earth warde: declareth that man to be ware or witty, a nigarde, peaceable, secrete: folowyng very muche his owne sensualitie and minde, and stable in doyng matters.
            That head whiche is long, hauing the face long and bigge, and deformable: declareth that mā to be a foole maliciouse, or very simple, vayne or a lyer, sone beleuing the thyng heard or tolde hym, a caryer or teller of newes, and also enuious or hatefull.
            That head which is very voluble, or lightly turning here and there: declareth that man to be a foole, simple, vayne, a lier, deceitfull, presumtuouse, vnstable, dull of capacitie or vnderstandyng, of an euill witte, of a tender capacitie, sumwhat prodigall or wastfull, and a bearer or teller of newes.
            That head whiche is great hauing a large face: declareth that man to be suspiciouse, stoute and hardye, couetyng beutifull thinges, wary, symple, grosse of fedyng, secrete, bolde, and not sufficient shamefast.
            That head whiche is greate and not congruentlye shapen, hauing a shorte throte and great necke: declareth

that man to be sufficiente witty, to hymselfe wary, secrete, Ingenius, of a stable Imaginacion, faythfull, tellyng troth, and in many thynges or matters tractable.
            That head whiche is small, hauyng a thinne and long throte: declareth that man to be very Weake, folyshe, long angry, fearefull, a little feader, apt to learn or to be taughte, and not wel fortunated, and for the smalnes of the head, apt to fall into lickenesses.
            
            That head which is very great, and the necke with the sinowes and bones small: declareth an euill condicion or qualitie of the brayne, and that man to be a dullarde and foole, compared to the asse.
            That head whiche is great propercyoned to the body, and especially with the necke, so that the necke be strong and meanely great, with strong and greate sinowes: declareth a laudable conuersacyon and honestie in that persons, apt to study good artes & to be an vpright dealer with all men for the more parte.
            That head which is lyke to a pineapple, that is great

beneath, and sharpe rounde vp to the crowne: declareth that mā to be alwey without shame, a gready catcher, and vniuersally Irefull and bolde.
            That head whiche moueth faste as though it quauereth: declareth that man to be vnstable, bolde and Irefull thorowe the cause of the heate of the braine.
            That head whiche is very rounde as a boule or cō
               passe rounde: declareth that man to promesse many thinges and perfourme none, a babler, double tōged, importunate, couetous, enuiouse, and cōsidereth not of that paste nor commyng, but that presente, and that very slēderly: And ther be also of them whiche robbe and murder by the high way, which if they cum to be rulers, they be tirauntes, cruel, importunate and vndiscret, whose companyes be to be auoyded and eschewed, as fro thy enemyes as Conciltator sayth.
            The head very long and fashioned bygge and smal to an organe pype: declareth vnshamefastnes.
            The head soft and playn, or flatte: declareth arrogantnes and dissolucion in that person.
            The head appearyng dentid in hollowe (in a certain maner) in the fore parte therof: declareth that man to be deceatfull and Iracundious.
            The head greate wyth a largenes of the forehead and countenaunce lyke to a gyaunte: declareth that manne to be slowe, gentle, strong, dull and vnapte to learnyng, compared to the oxe.
            The head long and flatte as a beatyll: declareth that manne to bee circumspecte, and a foresear in hys dooynges: And for the more parte many of the swichers and fleaminges haue the lyke head.
         
         
            Of the forehead The .xii. Chapter.
            
               
               
            
            THe forehead very hygh and round declareth that man to be liberall to his frindes and acquaintanuce, meary, of a good vnderstāding, tractable to other, and in manye graces vertuouse.
            The forhead playne or smothe in skinne and bone & wythout wrynkles, declareth that man to vary for a lyghte cause, vayne or a lyar, deceatful, more simple then wyse.
            The forhead ouer smal and narrowe through ou
                  •
                declareth that man to be simple, sone styrred to Ire, lyghtly furious or cruel, a desyrer of bewtiful thinges to be a courtyer or a seruinge man, foolyshe, vnapte to learnyng, a poluter, an ouer great feader and a glotō.
            The forehead sufficient round, in the angles of the temples that the bones appeare as it were, and naked of heare, declareth yt man to be of a good wyt and parfyt vnderstandyng, of muche boldnes, a lyare in euyll stout and hardy, a delyrer of bewtiful mundanes, and of honoure.
            
               The foreheade verye greate, declareth that man to be slowe and a heauy goer on the earth, a dullard and folyshe, compared to the Oxe.
            The forehead sharp pointing out in the angels or corners of the temples, that the boones appeare as they were standing wythoute, declareth that man to be vayn or a lyar, vnstable, weake in al his doynges, simple, of a tender capacitie, and a glutton often tymes.
            The forehead in the temples as it wer blown with the grosnes of the fleshe, that is that it hath the cheke bones fylled with flesh, declareth that manne to be dyuerse or of a sondry mynd, Phlegmaticke, proud, Ira cūdiouse, of a grosse and dul wit, and hath also a great head and euil fashioned, leacherous or vnshamefast, en uyeth longe, couetouse and a backbyter.
            The foreheade ful of wryncles declareth that man to be iresul: And the forehead playne without wryncles after a sad maner, declareth that man to be sadde and sorowful alwaye in a maner.
            
            The forehead wrinkled, and a falling of the wrincles

fro the middle as it were so that it apeareth double as it were in the face of the nose, whether it hath or maketh a valley or no valley, declareth that manne to be symple, stout and hardye, of a great wytte, and to haue a sharpe and cruel fortune.
            
            The foreheade great througheoute and somwhat round throughout, bare of heare or somwhat balde, or sufficientlye, declareth that man to be bolde, of a good wit and vnderstanding, wary, malicious, stout and heady, long continewyng angry, faynedly faythful, & therefore he wil lyghtlye lye.
            The forehead very long and high rounde, so that the face to the chynne appeareth figured sharpe oute, declareth that man to bee symple, feable, congruently faythfull, and to haue hard fortune.
            The temples of the forehead bearyng out rounde and heary: declareth that man to haue a worthy witte, desiryng honour, arrogante and alway stoute and hardy in hys doynges.
            The forehead very greate, rounde and heary: declareth that man to be bolde, hardye and a lyer.
         
         
            Of the ouerbrowes, of the cies. The .xiii. Chapter.
            
               
               
            
            
               THe ouer browes as Aristotle saith much heary, declare that manne to be peruerse in talke talkatyue, vngracyous or wicked, and rude manered.
            The heare of the ouer browes extendinge to the temples, declare that manne to be enuious, proude and lecherous, vnshamefast and haulte of stomacke or mynde.
            The ouer browes thynne of heare in congruent quantitie of length and shortnes, declare that man to haue a readye wytte, and facile in vnderstandyng.
            The ouerbrowes growyng thicke and long to the rote of the nose: declare that man to be of a melancolyke

nature or otherwyse of an euyll nature, and sum suche lyke, to be theues, but alway deceiuers, murtherers, and maintayners of harlottes, flearing, catchers, dissemblers and malicious, and these when the ouerbrowes by the herines ioyne: and vniuersallye be thinckers of all mischefes: and not vnlyke be they too these whych haue but one eie, which be heaped in vyces, contumelious deceitful and wicked.
            The heare of the ouer browes growing from the rote of the nose vpwarde, & fro the Temples downeward, declare hym to be leacherous and of a dull wyt.
            The heare of the nether part of the ouerbrowes to the nose growinge douneward, and the vpper part growyng vpward, so that thereby they appere broade, declare him to be vnshamefast, enuyouse, a dullarde a fole, and vnsaciable, compared to the hogge.
            The heare of the ouerbrowes descending by incur uacion by the part of the noose, declare that manne to haue a sharpe and an ingenious wyt in vnhappye and wycked busynesses.
            The heare of the ouerbrowes growyng euen streight lyned alonge, declare that man to be euyl, weake and of a feminate minde or stomacke, compared to the woman.
            The heare of the ouerbrowes growynge so bendynglye that they almoste ioyne wyth the nose, declare that manne to be subtyll and ingenious, and also studyous.
            The heare of the ouerbrowes thyn and greate in bredth, declare that man to be facile in vnderstanding and of a redy wytte.
            The ouerbrowes much herye and long, declare that man to be one which willinglye seketh and desireth to be muche prayed and intreated in any matter.
         
         
            
            Of the eie lyddes. The. xiiii. Chapter.
            
            THe eie lyddes muche wrinkled and which by often mouing eleuate on high: declare that man to be proude, stoute and hardy, vayne gloryous, bolde, a threatner, a desirer of bew tifull thynges, and congruente to good and euill.
            The eie lyddes declyning downwarde, when he speaketh to one or beholdeth one (as it were wrinklig lye) declare that man to be very maliciouse or a deceauer, a lyar, a betrayer, a niggarde, slowe of pace or otherwyse, secrete, and of fewe wordes.
            The eie lyddes thynne of heare: declare that man to be simple, vayne, weake, lightly or for a smal cause cruel, and in frendship or company sufficiently congruente.
            The nether eie lydde bonching out as it were blowen

and red in coloure: declareth that manne to be a notable drunckarde, especially if the lyddes appeare drye.
            The eie lyddes that naturally folde downewardes as they wer wrinkled, and redde or not redde: declare that man to be vnshamefast, slowe in pace or otherwyse suspiciouse, a niggarde, enuiouse, and a lyght or a sleyght deceauer in many thynges.
            The eye lyddes very shorte or narrowe and in coloure white or browne: declare that man to be as he were congruent to all thynges, weake, fearful, easely and soone crediting other, more simple then wise, and conuertible to good and euil.
         
         
            Of the spaces betwene the eie browes. The. xv. Chapter.
            THe spaces betwene the eie browes neare ioyning together: declare that man to be a nyggarde, enuiouse, secret, very muche desireful of beawtiful thynges, hauyng a vayne fortune, and more cruel or fierce, then delectable.
            The spaces betwene the eie browes, very long, declare that man to be sumwhat dull of capacitie, of a subtyll vnderstandyng, of muche boldenesse, verye faythfull, and of a perfyt, and vpryghte frendshyp.
         
         
            Of the eyes. The. xvi. Chapter.
            
               
               
            
            
               THe eies greate, that is grosse, and muche apparaunte: declare that man to be commonly slowe, and sumtyme bolde, enuyouse, partly shamefaste, and partlye not secrete, congruente, a niggarde, 
                  •
               ain lightlye lying, long a
                  •
               
               grye, of an euill memorye or remembraunce of a grosse wytte an
                  •
                of a small vnderstandyng, and lesse sapyente then h
                  •
               
               reakenc
                  •
               h hymselfe to be.
            The eyes depe in the head, as they were hydde that is▪ hollowe in and the syghte farre in, declar that man to be suspiciouse, maliciouse, long angry o
                  •
                muche Ireful, of a peruerse maner, perfyt of memorye, bo
                  •
               de, cruell, lyghtlye lying, a threatner, a vycyouse

leacherer, proude, en
                  ••
               ouse, and a deceauer.
            The eies situated (as in lengthe): declare that manne to be a wyly begyler of menne, enuiouse, and a deceauer of deceauers, hauyng hys delyghte therein.
            The eies standyng very farre oute: declare that manne to be simple, or a foole, somwhat shamefaste, sumwhat large in expenses, wyllyngly to be bounde, to serue, or to be a prentise, of a grosse vnderstandyng and wytte, talketyue, and lyghtlye leadde to good or euyll.
            The eyes that beholde sharpelye, and wyth the eye lyddes studyous
                  •
               ye declyning, declare that manne to bee maliciouse, and an often deceauer, verye false, often lying, enuiouse, a thefe, a nyggarde, secrete, wicked, and fayntly faythfull.
            The eyes verye small: declare that manne to bee a foole, weake in strength, applying in maners to the ape: that is, to be fearful, and a deceauer.
            The eyes congruentlye small, and rounde: declare that manne to be shamefaste, weake, symple▪ soone beleauyng an other mans sayinges, of a grosse wytte, and dull vnderstandyng, and often hauyng a sharpe or cruel fortune, lyberall to other, and decently shamefaste.
            The eyes lytle, and wrinkled: declare that manne to haue an vnhappye forewarde wytte, to dooe vnhappy dedes, compared in hys lyfe to the ape.
            That manne whiche hath a chyides looke wyth hym: declareth to be one, that bethynketh not on hard or diffuse matters, and lyueth long after nature.
            
               
               
            
            The eyes ob
                  •
               yque, or lookyng crokedly: declare that man to be a deceauer, wytty, a niggard, enuiouse, Ireful, a lyar, and in many thynges malicyous, and shal haue also a sharpe feauer, wherof he shall spedely dye vpon.
            The eyes dyuerse or not a lyke, and in beholdynge wauer vp and downe, or to and fro, declare that man to be an often lyar, bayne, simple, leacherouse, a deceauer, soone credityng one, enuious, stoute and hardy a desirer of fayer thynges, and easily broughte to good or euill.
            That man whiche is varyable, graye, and whitishe 
                  •
               yed, is for the more parte borne to bee a Philosopher and a searcher of darke and hydde secretes.
            The eyes that 
                  •
               winkle often, and moue beefore and after: declare that manne to be leacherous, vnstable, often lying, lyghtlye or soone false, a betraier vnfaythfull, presumptuous, harde in beleuyng
                  •
                one.
            
               The eyes that moue swiftlye, and the syghte appearyng sharpe: declare that man to be ful o
                  •
                disce
                  •
               t, wyly, a thefe, and vnfaythfull: whiche Cocles founde trewe in sondry parsons.
            That manne whyche 
                  •
               oketh or beholdeth with the eyes as thoughe he alwaye laugheth: declareth hym to be a flatterer, leacherouse, vnshamefast, and a deceauer.
            The white of the eyes somwhat cit
                  •
               ine in colour, declare that manne to be symple, often lying to one, and reasonable, secrete, very seife wylled, and long angry, or Ireful.
            The eyes that moue fast or slowe, or slowlye beholdyng but yet sharplye, with a reclinacyon of the fleashe of the eye lyddes: declare that man to be very maliciouse in many thynges, vayne, slowe in pace, or otherwyse, a lyar, vnfaythfull, enuiouse, and a brauler.
            That man whiche hath white or blacke, or redde spottes like blode aboute the eyes, is to be forsaken of al good and honest company.
            The eyes whiche be as they were redde, or filthy, by teares, or bloude, declare that man to be Ireful, arrogante or proude, disdaynful, cruel, vnshamefaste, vnfaythful, a lyar, obstinate, vayne, simple, of a tendre capacitie, a deceauer, and maye easely be brought godly, or vertuouse.
            The eyes very great, lokyng vpwarde, lyke to 
                  •
               xe eyen, and that they appeare readdysh: declare that mā to be mischeuouse, folyshe, and a foole, dul of vnderstandyng, of an euyll remembraunce, a drunkarde, and a grosse feder.
            
               
               
            
            THe eyes meane informe, tendynge to the celestiall coloure, or to blackenes: declare that manne to be reasonably, 
                  •
               easeable, gentle, faith full, of a good wytte, of a synguler vnderstandyng, and congruentlye wyllyng to be bounde to serue one▪ or to be a prentyse or a courtyer.
            The eyes whiche be mattery, and one whyle rūne and another whyle cease runnyng: declare that manne to be deceatfull, rashe, a robber by the hygh waye, and lyke to cum to an euyll deathe, onlesse almightye god pleaseth the contrary.
            They whiche haue drye matter, or fylth, shining before the eyes, declare that manne to be a great sleaper, and louer of sleape: And he also which hath filth hanging on the eyes, is a louer of wyne, and a greate drynker: he which hath the whytnes of the eyes tendyng to blackenes: declareth hym to be a greate man lyuyng or beeyng in honoure: And the whytnes, yealowish, to be a cruell manne, and a deceauer.
            The eyes greate, and the ouerbrowes long: declare that manne to be shorte lyued: And the eyes also longe, wyth the ouerbrowes long: declareth that mā
               
that he shall bee learned, but shorte lyued, he whyche shall haue the eyes oblique hauyng that tyme a sharpe feauer on hym, shall soone after dye.
            The vpper eye lydde▪ coueryng as it were the neather: declare that man, to be long lyued after nature: he whiche hath sinal and rounde eyes, declareth hym to renewe agayne wyllyngly to dooe euyl, especyally, if he be pa
                  •
               e faced.
            The eyes of measurable or competente greatnes moyst and cleare shyning, to be stoute and bolde, th
                  •
               n kyng and intendyng or doyng mightye matters, and sumtyme they declare that man to be Iracundyouse, a wyne bybber, a braller or clatterer, geauyn to moste 
                  ••••
               c
                  •
               able glottony.
            The eyes hauyng as it were lyke to a pearle, compasyng the syghte of the eyes: declare that manne to be enuyouse, full of woordes, fearefull and mischeuouse.
         
         
            Of the nose. The. xvii. Chapter.
            
               THe nose longe, and somewhat thinne, declareth that manne to be boulde, curiouse in hys doynges, Irefull, vaine, soone perswaded to good or euyl, weake, and soone geuynge creadite to one.
            The nose longe, and extensed hauynge the typpe declyning downwarde to the mouth: declareth that manne to bee warye, secrete,

contente to serue, and congruentlye faythfull to one, modest in hys dooynges, and a supplanter or deceauer.
            The nose that moueth, wyth the mouyng of the muscles, and cheke bones: declareth that manne to bee Irefull, and hastye, and not farre vnlyke in condicyon is he, whiche hath the nose bendynge vpwarde.
            The nose stretching to the mouth: declareth that manne to be of a hote compleccyon thorowelye, and by the consequente, geueth hym to be honest manered and bolde.
            
            The nose flatte, declareth that manne to be violente or hastye in hys wrathe, vayne or enuyouse, a lyar, leacherouse, weake, vnstable, soone credityng one, and conuertible to good or euyll.
            The nose broade in the middle, and denteth or bendeth to the top thereof, declareth that man to lye, knauysh or malapert, diuerse or variable, lecherous,

               
cruel, ful of wordes, wanton, reprocheful, proude, readie to do wrong, and hauing a hard fortune: wherfore keepe the out of his companye.
            The nose throughout greate, and sufficient long, declareth that man to be a desyrer of bewtifull thynges, in good matters simple, and in euil sapient, congruently wel fortunated, a fayner in those thynges or matters which he desyreth or c
                  ••
               eteth to kepe secret, and knowynge muche lesse, then he reakneth hym self to knowe.
            The nosethrilles greate and large: declare that man to haue greate testicles, leacherous, a betrayer or vtterer of secrettes, false, bolde▪ 
               
                  •
               lyar, enuyouse, couetous, of a grosse capacitie, hauyng a slendre wyt, and fearefull.
            Note, that of the grosse humores, is engendred the grossnes and magnytude of the membres, and by the consequence, the spirittes grosse, as witnesseth Aristotle in hys seconde booke and fourthe Chapter, de partibus animalium.
            
               The nose verye sharpe at the ende or typpe, and meane, betwene longe and shorte, greate and thinne: declareth that mā to be soone angry, much selfe wyllde, lykely brawlyng, disdaynful, wary, weake, maly cyouse, a deceauer, a threatner, and of a good memory or remembraunce, and coleryke of compleccyon.
            The nose verye rounde at the ende wyth small nosethrelles: declareth that man to be haut or proud, a grosse feader, hauyng a ready mynde and wyll to venereouse actes, sone credityng, vayne, large in expences and faythful.
            Note that the nose expresseth the qualitie of the heart: wherfore the nose greate, declareth the caliditie of the heart, whiche causeth such a person to bee Irefuli, and to haue a greate yarde.
            The nose ouerlong, and at the ende more thynne then grosse, and congruently rounde, declareth that man to be bold in talke, modeste in his doinges, lightly iniuriouse, a deceauer, enuiouse, a niggarde, in fayth secrete, a coueter of other mens goodes, and in many maners couertly maliciouse. Note, that thou maye not take or vnderstande singly, these sayinges, because sum other membre euyll shaped maye contradicte thesame, therefore consydre thys, as a worthy note▪ into thys arte.
            The nose retorte and crokyng vpwarde, and long, hauyng the ende congruently grosse: declareth that man to be bolde, proude, a niggarde, enuyouse, couerouse, Ireful, leacherouse, a lyar, a deceauer, vayne gloryouse, vnfaythful, a stryuer, and a brawler.
            
               
               
            
            The nose very highe eleuated in the middle which we name a copped nose: declareth that man to bee an often lyar, vayne, vnstable, leacherouse, sone or lightly credytyng, importunate, hauyng a good wytte, grosse in feadyng, and more simple then wyse, and malycyouse.
            The nose ruddye in qualitie, more than any others, or hath pustles here and there on the nose. declareth that manne to bee couetouse, a bybber, wycked, a drunkarde, leacherouse, muche and often thirstye, a fayner of goodnesse, grosse of feadyng, and wytte, and of a tender capacitie.
            The nose shorte, and the mouth small and the teath shorte and greate: declareth that manne to be colde, and moyste of compleccyon.
            The nose congruentlye grosse, or greate thorowoute,

and at the ende somwhat or a litle flat, declareth that man to be peaseable, gentel, faythful and laborious, secrete and of a good vnderstandynge.
            The nose that croketh, lyke to the byl of the Egle, declareth that man to be cholerick, couragyous, bold a gredy rauener and cruel.
            The nose somwhat heary on the end, and congruently greate throughe oute, and in the ioininge of the foreheade somewhat thynne, declareth that manne to be of a good condicion in all thynges, and lyghtlye brought, or led, to good or euyl.
            The nose thorough oute greate, hauynge large nostrylles, declareth that man to be of a grosse wytt, and more symple then wyse, a lyare, vnapte to learning, deceitful, cautelous, a braller, leacherous, enuiouse and vayne glorious.
         
         
            Of the mouth.

The. xviii. Chapter,
            
            
               THe mouthe great and large, bothe in the closynge and openyng, declareth that manne to be boulde, vnshamefast, lyghtly fyghtynge, or to be a warriour, a lyare, full of wordes, a bearer or teller of newes, a gluttonouse feader, vnclenlye or nastye, of a grosse wytte, a niggarde and very folyshe.
            The mouth smal, both in the closing, and opening, declareth that man to be peasable, modeste, fearfull, faythful, secrete, shamefaste, asparer, sobre, sometime large in expensis, apte to be taught or tolerne, and a litle feader.
            The mouthe standinge farre oute, and rounde, by meane of the thicknes of the lyppes, and the mouthe somwhat wrythinge withall: declareth that manne to be vnclenlye or nastie, a foole, fierce or churlysh, compared to the hogge.
            That mouthe that sauoreth ill, or stinketh in the breathinge, declareth that manne to be corrupt in the lyuer, an often lyare, vayne, lasciuiouse, deceatfull, of a tender capacitie, and grosse vnderstandynge, a seducer, enuiouse, couetouse, or a coueter of other mens goodes, and congruentlye lyberall to one, a bearer

and teller of newes, soone credytyng one, and more symple then wyse.
            The mouth hauyng the quantitie thus wyth the lyppes small, and the closyng small, and the eies with the reast of the face, loking smilingly, such a persone after Conciliator is leacherous, or libidinous, and a lyer.
            The mouthe that sauourethe sweete in the breathing: declareth that man to be congruent or reformable, sapient in geuynge, and warye in reteynynge, secrete, a coueter of bewtifull mundanes, faythfull, sone crediting one, and conuertible to good or euyll.
            The mouth litle, hauynge thyn lyppes, declareth that man to be weake of mynde and stomake, deceatfull, and malycious.
            The comlyest condicioned mouth, is when it is not ouer moyste, for the moystnes or waterishnesse of the mouth and lyppes: declareth fearefulnes and malignitie. As Albertus affirmeth.
         
         
            Of the lyppes. The .xix. Chapter.
            
            
               The lippes of the mouthe verie greate, or ouer muche folding outwarde (which we name blabered) declare that man to be more simple, then wyse, soone creadetinge one, a grosse feader, and congruente to good or euil, a dullarde, talketyue, bolde, leacherous, vnconstante, and vnmanered.
            The lippes faire, and chearefull, and the countenaunce chearefull or smylinge also, declare that man to bee leachearous, or to appeare lybidinouse, leake to the wanton geldinge, but sume suche be deceauers, theues, and full of gieles or caute lous: as Cocles noted it in a countriman of his, whiche was the lyke.
            The lippes with the gummes bearing or bunching vp aboue the tethe, declare that man to be wicked, an vnquiet talker, Iracundious, and inclined to doo iniuries, properly cōpared to y• dogge, as Palemō saith.
            The lippes well coloured, and more subtyle then great, declare that man to bee of a good condicion in all thinges, and lightlie conuertible to good or euill, and rather to vertues, then to vicis: as Mychael the Scot faieth, and there Jubiter is represented.
            The lippes not sufficiente equall thoroughe oute. To that the one is greater thē the other, declareth that man to be more simple, then sapiente, of a grosse wit, and dull vnderstanding, hauing a diuerse or variable fortune, as the autentikes affirme.
            The vpper lyppe thinne, and sumwhat eleuated or turmnge vp (as Ptholome sayeth) declareth that mā to be very talkatiue, an accusare, & very enuious.
            The vpper lippe turning or folding vppe, and the neyther lippe downe, declare to that man, a myserable lyfe, and to be vnseamite manered: and this Cocles noted in certaine, and neady poore parsones.
            
               The Philosopher Ptholome also sayeth, that yf the lyppes be thinne, and that the vpper lyppe foldeth vp, and the nether downe, declare that man to be a deceauer, and a thefe.
            The lyppes greate, lyke the dogge, declare that man to be a deceyuar and an accuser.
            The nether lyppe of the womā, large, hanging and very ruddy: declareth a most earneste wyll to coeate, and somtyme to be a harlote.
            The lyppes congruently thinne, and not much folding outwarde, declare that man to be secret in al his doynges or in all thinges (commonlye) warie, Iracundious, and of a synguler wytte.
         
         
            Of the Teathe. The .xx. Chapter.
            THe teathe small and weake in chewyng, and thynne set, and shorte, declare that man to be weake, of a good wytte, of a tendre capacitie, gentle, faythfull, trusty, secrete, fearefull, of shorte lyfe, and congruente to good, or euyl.
            The ththe not equipolent or all alyke, in quantity, and in the standing of the gummes, certayne be shall narrow, certayne large, certayne thynne, and certaine thyck sette, declare that manne to be warye, of a good wit, bolde, dysdaynfull enuious, and lyghtlye or easely brought to good or euyll.
            The tethe verye longe, and as they were sharpe, and sumwhat thynne sette, and stronge in the chewynge, declare that man to be enuyous: wicked, a gluttone,

bold, and as he were vnshamefaste, a lyare, false or deceatfull, vnfaythfull, and suspicious.
            The teathe cytryne, or browne in coloure, whether they be shorte, or longe: declare that man to be more foollyshe then wyse, a grosse feder, soone crediting, of a trubled or an encombred vnderstandinge, often deceatfull, a lyare, enuious, a coueter of other mennes goodes, and suspicious.
            
            The teathe great, and large, whether they declyne or beare out, or in, whether they be thynne, or thicke set, declare that man to be vayne or enuious, lasciuious, of a grosse feading; soone crediting, symple, deceatfull, a lyare, and of a tender capacitie: and wyttyd to the Oxe.
            The teathe stronge, and thycke set: declare that manne to lyue longe by nature, a desyrer of bewtyfull thynges, of a dull capacytye, and grosse wytte, stoute and hardye, muche selfe wylled, or a follower to muche of hys owne reasone 
                  •
               
               
a bearer or teller of newes, & soone credyting to one.
            The teathe weake set, small, thinne, and slendre, declare that man to be weake, of shorte lyfe, warye or wyttie, of a good capacitie, soone crediting, common lye shamefaste, tractable, gentle, and faithfull.
            The teathe stronge, and thicke set, declare that man to lyue tonge, leachearous, a riotous waster of hys proper goodes, bolde, stronge, dyscrete, and selfe willed.
            The teathe longe like dogges teathe, and strong set and properlie bearinge outwarde, declare that man to be a very gluttonous persone and fierce, angrye, compared to the dogge, or bore: such Cokles knewe to be deuourers of their owne substaunce, great haū
               ters to tauernes, and ale houses, deceuars, horehunters or maynteiners of hores, and somtyme murderers espectiallye yf any other proportion strengtheneth the same.
            The teathe weake set, thynne, and verye small, declare the hole bodie thorough out to be weake as Rasis affirmeth.
            The teathe of a persone sycke, moste drye, wyth oute anie moystenes in them, declare a most sure token or sygne of deathe: because the radical moystnes in hym is consumed: and suche bodyes, bee lyke to a laumpe without oyte.
         
         
            Of the tounge. The. xxi. Chapter.
            
               
               
            
            THe tounge ouer swyft to speake, declareth that man to be more symple, then wyse, of a grosse wytte, and dul vndrestanding, sone creadyting, and lightly conuertible to good, or euyll.
            The tounge that stutteth or stamereth in speakinge, declareth that manne to be verie simple, vayne or a lyare, vnstable, iracundious, soone conuer tible fro angre, willing to sarue, and weake.
            The tounge verye great and roughe, declareth that man to bee warie, malicious, congruentlye wyllynge to sarue, vayne or a lyar, dysdaynfull, secret, a betraier, a bearer or teller of newes, fearefull, wycked, vngratious, hauinge congruentlye sufficiente of manye thinges.
            The toungue subtyl or thyn, declareth that man to bee verie ingenious, lyghtlie or for a lyght cause fearefull, soone creditynge, and conuertyble to good or euyll.
            
               The tounge that lyspeth or stamereth: declareth that persone to feare, to drynke wyne: and sumtyme he susteyneth debilitie of the brayne, and thereof it commeth, that the drounke do stammer, stut, or lyspe, because the vapoures of the wine dronke in, into that parte of the tounge named the sponge, enlarge the same, and chaunge it fro hys natural state and forme.
            Hypocras in hys secrettes sayeth, that the heauines of the tounge in a younge man, after hys lightenes, declareth sodayne deathe: yf God permitte the same.
            The tounge greate and large: declareth that man to haue a rude witte: and that phlegmaticke humores reaste in the brayne, or in the rest of hys body: as Cocles manye tymes noted it.
            Conciliator sayeth that, that persone, that speaketh hys wordes at twyse, or pronounceth them with great difficultie, declareth a melancholicke qualitie.
            The tounge come swyfte by mouynge, and corruptnes, causyng a repeatynge of wordes: declareth that manne to be a foole, violente or hastie in wrathe, and Iracundious: for the mouablenes and caliditie of the spyryttes, festinating or hastininge the pronoū
               ciation▪ without consideracion.
            The tounge in maner immouable, lyke to a stone, declareth that manne to be slowe in hys pase, and in hys worckes or doynges. And the tounge subtile, representeth a subtyle wytte: for the decente matter, that is, of the humore and spyryte, althoughe it declareth a hote, and perauenture a cholerycke complextion.
            Ptholome the phylosopher sayeth, that the tounge

longe and redde, declareth that persone to be wyttye, because it declareth laudable humoures, and in kysses maye muche be conceaued herin: for Cocles consyderinge a certayne creature, felte the tounge put fourthe moste pleasaunte, to a braunche, whereof he knewe that the vertue of the musckles is voluntary.
            Ptholome also sayeth, that the tounge whyte of colour: declareth pouerty, and misery to that persone.
            The tounge in the naturall coloure infected, declareth an infection, and euyll dysposition especially of the breast and bellye, as Conciliator affyrmeth.
            The tounge longe, greate, and rounde, and that it may licke the nose therwith, declareth that parsone to followe the nature of the Oxe: as Cocles noted the same, by a neyghboure of hys.
         
         
            Of the sygnyfycacion of the voyce. The. xxii. Chapter.
            
               HEre Aristotle dothe Physiognomate by the voice, affirming a doble knowledge, after the doble diposition of the voyce: for sayeth he, the voyce maye be heauye and dyscensed, or hyghe, that is greate, to a basse orgayne pype: and suche a voyce (saieth he) declareth that manne to bee stronge: or yf it maye bee small and lowe

that is not greate, but softe, whiche declareth suche a parsone to be ferfull: And the causes of these sygnifycationes be taken by the complextion or qualitie of the harte, and lunges, in the hotnes and coldnes of them: For these membres when they be hote, cause or make large and sounding pippes, and much breth by the largenes of those fynewes: Wherefore muche breathe, in suche large and great sounding pypes, make a great and grosse or base voyce, like to a large, and greate, or base or gane pype blowen, whiche soundeth verie bigge, and baselie, & econtratio. When these membres bee colde, they make those synewes or vayne pypes, small, and narrowe, and litle breathe, by the whiche is caused a highe and shryll voyce: as the lyke appereth in small organe pypes, whiche blowē, make a shryll sounde: and the lyke knowledge of thys is in men, and litle women, the mē for theyr hotnes, and women for theyr coldnes, and this wel appereth by Auerois, where he wryteth (de signis temperantie pulmonis) sayinge that the fortitude of the voyce dothe ensewe lyke the largenes of the vaines, and the largenes declareth the hotnes of the complexcion or qualitie of the lunges, and the causeis, that the fortytude of the voyce declareth necessarilye hotenes, but the colde complexion, declareth straytnes of the wayes, that is, of the vaynes, and debilitie of the voyce: The Phylosopher, in an other distinctyon sayth also, that they which speake greate, bee Iniurious, compared to the asse: And they which sore call, be foolish: in a basse maner, and ende smalle, bee iracundyōus, and to be pleased, compared to the Oxe, and to the cō
               lines of the voyce. And they that speake small, safte, fayntlye or weryedlie, speake fearfullye, and compared

to women, and to the decentnes of the voyce: they whiche call in a bigge or basse voyce not parplexed, be compared to bandagges, and to the comlines therof. They that call saftlie, without anie tension or reaching out, be gentle, compared to the shepe: They which call small and fearcilie, be Iracundious, compared to the go
                  •
               tes. These hetherto, bee after the minde & iudgement of Aristotle, and the same lyke affirmeth Albertus, and Conciliat
                  •
               r, & Hieronimus de: Manfredis, a bononiane, but yet Cocles writeth of the same in a more ample maner, and with other wordes as after shal appeare, bringing in a cōtrary reason to these afore First Cocles sayeth, that he which hath a great, hyghe, and sounding voyce, declareth to be bolde, eloquente, and a warrioure. The voyce meane in subtilnes, and grosnes, declareth such a parsone, to be sapiente, for seinge, true, and iuste: for the contrary cause, he which speaketh or talketh faste, especiallye hauyng a small or shryll voyce declareth suche a parsone to be obstinate or malaparte, a foole, importunate, and a lyare. The voyce also greate, to be iracundious, and of an euyll nature. The voyce swete (or fawningly as I maye nameit) is enuyous, & suspicious The pleasantnes or bewtyfulnes of the voice, declareth folishnes, cochebraynes, and stoutnes. The swiftnes of talke, declareth a hote complextione, and the same affermeth, Albertus, Loxius, Palemon, Phylemon, and Conciliator, vnder those wordes. Ageyne the voyce greate, to bee iracundious, peruerce and of an euyll nature, and the reason is, for the vntemperate caliditie. He that speaketh hastely, hauīg a shril voice, declareth to be frowarde, obstinate, or malaparte, a foole, importunate, a lyar, irefull, and alway euil condicioned.

The voice alper, lyke the crane, to bee enuious, teteyning rancoure, and secrete hatred in the harte, and aboundinge in melancholike humores: He that speaketh hys wordes cuttedlye, not with a longe breathe: declareth a vilenes or infection of nature, through the coldnes of the harte, and perauenture wyth moystnes applicated. And he also whych hathe a heauy voyce, is seruaunt to his proper belly: the reason is, because the voyce heauye, procedeth of the debylitie of the vertue, which can not breathe oute plentifulnes of aire to moue the muscles of the breaste, by which proceadith slouggyshnes, so that the wit cannot be applyed in study, nor laboure with the body, or vse bodilie laboure. They that speake bigge inflexible, by the commotion of the breste: be manlye, vnapte to bee taught or to lerne, and hardy, compared to the lyons. They which haue a slowe and basse voice, be peasable, and ioyous or merie: and certaine of these parsones, be iuste and affable manered. And they which speake and sounde theyr wordes thorough the nosethrelles, be babblers, lyars, malycious, and enuious, and of them there be whyche ioye in euyll, and suche follow the nature of the Ducke, as Cocles by experience founde trewe.
            These fewe examples gentle reader, of the sygnyficacions of the voice, for thys tyme suffice here: which I shall desyre thee to accept in good parte, bearyng with my grossenes in the traunslation of them, suche as they bee: And in so dooynge, I haue my hartes desyre.
         
         
            Of the breath.

The. xiii. Chapter.
            MUche breathe and wynde, argueth aboundancye of spyrite, and the contrarye is after two maners: as the tone by smalnes or lacke of the lunges, and the other by the straytnes of the breast: and therfore a beaste muche breathyng, is of muche fortytude, and myghte, by reasone of the caliditie resoluyng the moysture, and especiallye the dewe moysture: ordinate breathe, betwene great and small, beyng a meane, declareth quietnes of the harte and to bee a man well to be pleased: and to breathe loude withoute cause, and to make huge and longe syghes, wytnesseth a moste melancholike qualytie to be, and when the breath is cut betwene, beynge ordinate, and at the laste with the straytnes or parplexity of the mynde commeth oute troubled with syghyng: declareth that parsone to bee encombred and detented with thought and vexacion of the mynde: and to some, to be immixte with euill, especiallie, yf the head quauer or shake muche withall. And loke, when with bewaylinge or syghing he bryngeth or casteth the eyes crokedly or wrythingly, he then soroweth for that cometh into mynde, searching or deuisīg with himself the maner howe that he maye best handle and doo the same. He that breatheth with a certayne noyse in the delayinge or stoppinge of the nosethrelles, declareth crueltie, brutish furiousnes, and violence or hastines: which delaying also is referred to the passiō, in whiche the troubled spirite and thycke resteth: as though it were accidental caused by running or laboryng: & then they be violent or hasty and iracundious.

when the breth shalbe short, and thycke, and by a much cutting of, stopped betwene, is Judged fearefull and weake. And he whych with the syghing & countenance, is berest wyth a certayne godlines, and inspyratione, such a parsone is named, to be taken and wrapped, in furious loue. Aristotle in his secre
                  •
               ces to Alexander sayeth, that when thou shalt see a parlone muche and often beholde the, and when thou regardest hym, feareth, and of this blusheth or is a shamed, and especyally yf agaynste hys wyll he sygheth, and the teares appere standynge in hys eyes, thys parsone (sayeth he) loueth, and feareth thee. And if it bee contrarye, he shalbe enuyous, & contem
                  •
               ne the. The breath loude cut betwene, with the syghing lyke, declareth sorrow, and sadnes for thynges loste. Certayne of the worthye Physitians affirme, that the breathe passynge oute colde, by the mouthe and nosethrelles: declarethe deathe at hande, or shortelye after. The Phylosopher Ptholomie also sayeth, that he whiche wepeth for nothynge, or for lyghte cause, shalbe alwaye poore, and neadye.
         
         
            Of laughter. The. xxiiii. chapter.
            
               
               
            
            A Foole much, and often laugheth, and they also, which haue the mylte greate: & econuerso. The bellowes of the mouth that lightly laugheth, declareth that man to be simple, vayne, vnstable soone crediting, of a grosse wytte, and fedinge, wyllynge to sarue, but not secret.
            The bellowse, or hollowe of the cheke that seldom laugheth, and soone hath done, declareth that man to be stable, a niggarde, or sparer, warye or wittye, of a parfyt vnderstandinge, secret, faythful & gloryous.
            The hollowe of the cheke, hardly moued to laugh declareth that man to bee sapiente, much or very selfe wylled, warie, ingenious, patiente, a niggarde, studious of his arte, iracundious, and a surmyser.
            The hallowe of the cheke, or bellowse that lightlye laugheth, and in laughing often cougheth or ga
               
                  •
               eth or wryeth the heade, declareth that manne to be varyable or diuerse, enuious, soon creditinge▪ and cō
               uertible to good or euill.
            
               The hollow of the cheke, or bellowse that wryeth in the laughing, with derision of an other: declareth that man to be arrogante, false or deceatfull, harde to be moued, Iracundious, a lyare, and sumwhat geuen to be an vtterer of secrettes, or a betrayer.
            He which sufficiently laugheth; is benign, beloued with all men, endamaged or greued lyghtlye, and passeth very lytle of, or for any: and he is of an apparant comlynes, compared to sanguine parsones, or to Jouiall.
            If they sufficiently laughe, it declareth iocundi
               
                  ••
               c, and a good complextion in that manne, and they muche ioye in coeating, especially when the lyes loke chearefull and merely. But yet to much laughter (as Aristotle to Alexander wry
                  •
               teth) remoueth reueren
               
                  •
               y, and causeth olde age: suerly with them, is no assured felow shyp to be had, because there is no stability, nor secretenes in them, worthie the▪ trustinge to, although they 
                  •
               e saruisable, after certayne.
            He which laugheth loude or with a certayne noise is inucrieu
                  •
               d
                  •
               ous, and Conciliator sayeth, that he which in laughing cougheth▪ or susteyneth difficultnes of breath, is iudged inuericundious, and a tirant: and this Cocles found most true in a certaine prince
            Whose bellouse of the mouth often smyleth or co uertly laugheth: declareth an euil mind, and peruerse cogitacion, and a lyare, and suche vniuersally, be malicious, and dyssemblers: and there is no trust in thē, or to be geuen to them: especiallye when it is conioyned wyth the accydentes of the mynde: and yf theyr eye liddes folde to a cloude, they be sleares of menne, theues and robbers by the hyghe waye, or pirates, as

Cocles manye▪ tymes. noted it. To smyle or laughe couertlye to hymselfe, in speaking or talkinge, declareth foolyshnes in such a persone, as Cocles noted the same, in a certayne countriman of hys: and suche sayeth he abounde in the melancholicke qualitie.
         
         
            Of the chynne. The. xxv. chapter.
            
            THe chynne large and greate with much 
                  〈◊〉
               , declareth that man to be peaseable; of a mean capacitie and grosse witte▪ faythful, secret, and lyghtly conuertible to good or euyll.
            
               The chynne sharpe, and congruentlye full wyth fleshe, declareth that man to be of a good vnderstandynge, of a hyghe harte or arrogaunt, and suffycyent laudable of fedyng.
            The chynne as it were double, by a certayne vale or hollowe dentinge in, declareth that man to be peasable, of a grosse wytte, vayne, soone creaditing, congruently saruisable to one, and a very surmyser, and secrete of hys doynges.
            The chyn sharpe, and subtyll or thynne in fleshe: declareth that man to be bolde, a warryer or fyghter, Ireful, disdainful, fearful at tymes, weake, and somwhat content to sarue.
            The chynne recuruate, wyth a vale or hollowe, in the ioyninge or knyttyng of the Jawes, and in fleshe leane, as it were sharpe, declareth that man to be most wycked or vngracious, symple, bolde proude or hautie, a threatner, enuyous, warie in expenses, deceatefull, soone angrye. Iracundious, a betrayer or traytoure, a thefe, and a surmyser.
            Note that Physiognomie and 
                  •
               awmestrye doe more declare by experience▪ then reasone, but yet (saieth Cocles) somwhat may be iudged in the pryncypaller membres whiche gyue or expresse the magnytude and smalnes of matter fro the begynnynge of generacion.
            The chinne longe declareth aboundauncie of matter: and by reason of the caliditie, it is ouer muche lengthened out: yea they be Iracundyous, aspere, & cruell, as Dalemon, and Constantyne affyrme.
            The chynne small, and shorte, declareth that man to be full of naughtynes, and vices, and one whose

company is vtterlye to be eschewed, being a man most enuious and vncurtyous: and this manne Palemon applieth to the venemous serpent. The chin rounde, declareth that parsone to be effeminate▪ conditioned lyke the woman: as Pythagoras wryteth. And yf there be aboundauncie of flesh vndre the chynne, reachynge to the throte: declareth that man to bee moste luxurious, especiallye yf ether hole be founde in the the chekes. The chynne verye longe descendynge: declareth that manne to bee full of wyles and deceates. And if in the myddle deuision of the chynne it be not much de
                  •
               e 
                  ••
               at, 
                  •
               t is a tokē of venereousnes, and that with mē suche shal winne grace and fauour: as Cocles manye tymes noted the same in theym whiche haunted hatlottes. The chynne curuate, that the 
                  •
               y
                  •••
               s be as it were in a va
                  •
               ye, declareth rudenes of wyt▪ and to be moste wycked manered or condicioned; vnfaythfull: and of thes there be, whiche b
                  •
                the
                  •
               es, (as certayne saye) vnles olde age cause thys, for the losse of teathe. Aristotle also sayeth, that they become lesse balde th
                  ••
                other▪ which haue the chynne deuided as it were in two partes.
         
         
            Of the nature of the bearde. The. xxvi. chapter.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
            
               THe bearde in the masculyne, groweth after fourten yeares, by little and litle, fro Daye to daye, and then after spryng the thyghes fast: and note, that suche heare soryngeth of the superfluitie of meate, proceding thorow the fumosities: which superascende vnto the partes of the chekes or Jawes as a fume passing oute of the holes or chi
                  •
               kes of an ouen, or fornace, vntyl the wayes or passages be stopped, that they may no more ascende, and so lyke issewe oute the heares in man, whiche make the bearde: The coloure of the bearde somtyme, expresseth the qualities, and quantities of the humours, but yet Cocles neuer saw a bearde in coloure lyke to Juorye, because the phlegmaticke humour is not mightye to generate heares in coloure lyke, for the lacke of caliditie, eleuatyng the matter congruente to the generacion of heares.
            
               Some maye argue, and say, that we see somtyme womē haue beardes or bearded, & yet they be of a phlegmaticke complexcion: Thys hapneth sayth Cocles because the humors be so subtill, that by nature they be hote, that of them also spryng heares somtyme on the cheakes or Jawes, and properly about the mouth where the more heate aboundeth: and thys woman is named bearded, vnderstande that suche a woman is very luxuriouse, thorow her hote and moist cōplexcion, and that she is of a strong nature, and virill or manly condicioned: but the woman sufficiently naked and bare of heare, especially about the mouth▪ (after phisiognomie) is named to be of a goód complexcyon, that is fearfull, chaste, shamefast, weake, gentil, and obedient for the more parte: but the bearded women be contrary, as aboue appeareth: here riseth a doute, why womē haue no beardes as wel as men. To thys Dont maye be aunswered, when it is demaunded, why 
                  〈◊〉
                haue beardes and not wemen, that thys cause may be by the especiall workyng and by the materiall and finall cause, because it is as an ornamente to the man. Note that in euery kynd, the male is bewtifuller th
                  •
               n the female, and the bearde is also as a defensione to the Jawes, the which the woman nedeth not so much as the man, because the fences and fealyng is stronger or mightier in mē, wherby they maye the better endure to goe bare headed, and barefoted in the sharpe winter withoute harme to them, whiche very fewe wemen can doe: & vnderstand also▪ y• al wemen in a maner haue no beardes: & why because al the humours in which mās bearde is engrēdred, in womē runneth to the mēsture

the whiche is in them, by a certayne passage, and runnynge, after the age, or increase and decrease of the Mone: as sumtyme once and twyse in the moneth: whose issue out is named to be the fluxe, or superfluous fume, but thys runneth, when the woman is not wyth chylde, and in them that be past. xii. yeares older and this 
                  •
               enstrue somtyme in women is altered and chaunged to mylke in the breastes or pappes. By the aforesayde appeareth, that the thycknes of the beard, and muche hear: nes vniuersallye, is iudged of the substaunciall heate, and moysture, and of the naturall vygorte or strengthe. Here it maye be say
                  •
               d, that mē chyldren be hote, and moyste, and yet be not bearded: and the reasō is because the fumositie & superfluitie, which is the matter of the heares of the head and elles wheare, runneth to the nurishinge and increasinge of them as all these very well appere by Constantine. Wherfore how much the more heate, and so much the more aboundauncie of heare on the head: therfore beware of them which haue to much heare on the head, especially when he is of an aduste complextion. Beware of them espetially, whiche haue a redde bearde, because they represent the aboundauncie of adustion and caliditie, and such be luxurious, deceauers, and stars, and in whome the principall heape of vices teste. Whose bearde is comlye, and well fashioned▪ declareth that manne to be of a good nature, and of a reasonable condition▪ and congruente to all thynges, and manered after h
                  •
               s bringing vp: but in the contrary maner it is of them, whiche haue the bearde yll fashioned, as appereth in gealded parsones, whiche after they haue loste bothe theyr testycles, be very much chaunged fro the nature of menne▪ into the nature o
                  •
               
               
women, as Arystotle sayth. Undrestande, that Cocles sawe manye whych wearing longe beardes, came to 
                  •
                melancholicke madnes, or folyshnes. And Cocles sawe also, manye parsones with him, that after the ful growth of theyr longe beardes, wer throwē headlonge into myseries, and kepte vnder: and also pry
                  •
               
               ces hauing the lyke beardes, dryuen out of theyr bomynyons: and of the bearde whiche cometh soone horie, he pronounceth the lyke▪ because theyr nature draweth nere to the feminine.
         
         
            Of the face▪ The. xxvii. chapter.
            
            
               
               THe face whiche often sweateth of a light mouing: declareth that man to be of a hore nature, vayne or enuiouse, luxuriouse, of a grosse wyt and gluttonous.
            The face very fleshye, declareth that man to be ferefull, congruentlye merye, large in expenses, discrete, luxuriouse, of an euill memory, sone credityng thynges harde, sufficiently faythfull to one, of an importunate wyll in desyryng vayne and impossible thinges in (vnwished happe) enuiouse or frowarde, and sufficiently conuertible to good or euill, and very presumptuouse or haute of mynde.
            The face leane declareth that man to be warye or wittie, circumspect in hys doinges, fatigable, of a good vnderstandyng as the mercuriales haue: more cruell or enuiouse, then godly, of a tender capacitie, and dysdaynfull.
            The face very small, and rounde, declareth figuratiuely that man to be simple, fearfull, weake, of a grosse fedynge, and of an euill memory.
            That face whiche is belpekled, or otherwyse to a dronkarde: declareth that man to be a drinker of good wyne after the choyse of the nose, as the prouerbe is, luxuriouse, vayne or a lyar, strong, and one that wyll lightly or very sone be drunke.
            That face whiche is lyke to an Irefull countenaunce: declareth that man that he wyl lyghtlye and sone be angrye, and retayne anger long in mynde.
            The face long, and leane, declareth that man to be very bold, in tongue, & deade, simple, a braller, proud, en
                  •
               uriouse, deceatfull, grosse or harde manered, godly and congruently luxuriouse.
            
               The face commune betwene long and rounde, leane and grosse: declareth that man to be cogruente to all thynges, but soner to good then euill.
            The face very grosse, and large, declareth that man to be more simple then wyse, of a grosse wyt, and dull vnderstandyng, dull in doyng matters, often vayn gloriouse, sone crediting, conuertible to al thynges, luxuriouse, vayne, obliuiouse or forgeatfull, in euil false or craftie, an yll reporter or slanderer byhynde ones backe, and a supplanter or surmiser.
            The face very flatte, or playne, without verye high puffyng or bearyng vp: declareth that man to be of a good condicion, hauyng a sufficiente loue to all thynges, seruiseable to one, or contente to serue one, sone credityng, not verye warye, sufficient faythfull; & more simple then wittie, and commonly quiete, and well bearyng the losse of waightie thynges, by misfortune.
            That face whiche denteth somwhat in, and is more leane then grosse, declareth that man to be iniuriouse, enuiouse, deceatfull, a liar, bolde, a chyde
                  •
                or braaller, cruel, laboriouse, of a grosse wit, vayne, very simple, and of a dull vnderstandyng, and somtyme a murtherer, especiallye if he be adust wanne or yelowesh in colour as Cocles knewe the lyke.
            The face meane to the disposicion of the others afore but more fatte, then leane: declareth that man to bee true in talke, willyng to be bounde to serue, commonly ingeniouse, wary and pertitie of memorye.
            
               The face very croked, long, and leane: declareth that man to be of a grosse wytte, (as it were to all good thynges) simple, of a dull vnderstandyng, not faythfull, enuiouse, and of a lighte occasyon malicious.
            
            The face larger fro the forehead downewarde to the ioyning, or knitting of the cheke bones or Jawes, and higher then after or behynde, declareth that man to be simple in doing matters, in talke enuiouse, partly fearefull, partely bolde, somtime sparinge, a ly are, vayne, deceatfull, stoute of mynde, a braller, weake, a grosse seder, and of an euill wytte.
            The face well disposed or fashioned in fleshe, coloure, and in his partes, as in the eyes, and eye lyddes, in which is a pleasauntnes and comlines: declareth that man generallye, to bee well dysposed to doo bothe vices, and vertues.
            
               The face pale in coloure, declareth that manne to bee parfytlye healthefull, verye malicious, a betrayer or vtterer of secretes, a lyare, proude, vayne, luxuryous, sumwhat sparynge, enuious, presumptuous, a gros feder, not sufficient faythfull, nor trusty.
            The face well cou
                  •
               oured: declareth that manne to be of a laudable dysposicion, in hys or after hys complextion merye, soone creditynge, congruentlye saruisable to other, of a good vnderstandyng, and lightlye conuertyble to all thynges.
            The face hollowe, that is, fro the begynnynge of the forehead vnto the end of the chynne, that the nose and mouthe bee, as it were in a vallye, argueth that mā to be euil manered, especially yf the face be aduste, or wanne in coloure: Cocles saw such, to bee murtherers, robbers by the hygh waye or pirates and theues: and thys was hys iudgement often in such parsones.
            The face small, and yelowyshe in coloure, argueth that man to be vngracious, vicious, a deceauer, and often geuen to be dronke, as Cocles manye tymes noted it.
            The face as it were fyrie redde incouloure, especiallye wyth manye redde spottes, lyke to lyttle pustles, declareth that manne to haue a verye craftye and wylie wyt.
         
         
            Of the sygnyfycacyon of the eares. The. xxviii. Chapter.
            
               
               
            
            TThe eares expresse the temperaunce, and the proporcion of the principall membres and speciallye the brayne, whiche experience certifieth vs, because the brain somtime sendeth out an intoxicate matter very fulsum behind the eares, where is engendred an impostome, after the diuersities of the humours.
            The eares great, and thicke, declare that man to be simple or a fole, slouthfull, a grosse feader, of an euyll memory, and of a dull capacitie, and long lyued.
            The eares very small, and thynne: declare that mā to be of a good witte, vnderstandyng, and wysdom, secret, peaceable, warye, fearful, honest, clenly, somwhat sparyng, shamefast, vayn gloriouse, bolde or hardy, of a good memory, and sufficiently content to serue.
            
               The eares somwhat ouer long, that is, aboue the commune fourme, or large by an ouerthwarte maner, declare that man to be bold, vnshamefast, vayn, slouthfull, folyshe, contente to serue, and maye indure but a whyle to laboure, and a great feader.
            And in a maner, al they which haue great or bigge eares (as Cocles hath noted it) haue a short necke, a well facioned heade, and they be sanguyne, and for the more parte tendyng to choler, or to grosse sanguyne somwhat aduste: and these persons be impacyent, and sone or for a lyghte cause angrye, & for that Aristotle nemeth them nidiottes, but that they be of a good cō
               dicion, after their fury past, and also of good memory and long lyued, because in them is a good proporcion betwene hote & moyste: and he that is a meane is temperate in hys doynges. The eares greate and rysyng high or long, declare folyshnes and a babbler.
            They whyche haue ouer small eares, be condicioned to the ape, and great eares, after the asse, whose properties both of the axe, & asse, be well knowen: Ptholomie the Philosopher saieth, that the, eares greate bowyng downward, argue riches, and when the eares be very smal, it signifieth paucitie of matter, and the weake vertue of the brayne, and it argueth also a choleryke matter, of the whyche be caused subtyl spirites, and therfore suche be wittye in vngracyouse workes, and be theues, nidiottes, (and so couetouse) that they desire all thynges, and thorowe their concupiscence, they be luxuriouse, and peraduenture vnderstanded of the immoderate desires, & not by the power or vertue of the matter. The eares bearyng or hangyng very great oute, (as Palemon sayeth) declare foolyshues and garrulitie, and to be also couetouse. The eares

also as they were cutted, and verye shorte: declare (as Loxius sayeth) a dyuerle dysceate. The eares fashyoned, that the connexed lynes semicircularlye, bee i
                  •
                the mydle sumwhat flatte towarde the centre, and of meane bygnes, whiche maye agree decently to the head, do witnes a goodnes of nature in that person. And the eares ouer rounde: declare that person to be vnapt to learne or to be taught. The eares long and narrow: declare enuiousnes. The eares hanging flat to the head: declare dulnes, & slouthfulnes, as Albertus affirmeth: note also, that smal eares declare short lyfe. and to be perfit of hearyng, thorow the vertue of heate. The eares very great and farre bearyng oute as Consiliator sayth, declare foolyshnes, garrulitie, and imprudencie. And Ptholomie the Philosopher sayeth, that he whiche hath thynne and drie eares, shall neuer haue substaunce or be riche, and it deciadeth a very cholericke complexion, of whiche procedeth an exhauste intencion in congruente operacyons, and argueth also most instabilitie.
         
         
            Of the throte. The. xxix. Chapter.
            
               
               THe throte cleare, whether it be leane, or fatte, declareth that manne to be vaine gloryous, enuious, feareful, lasciuious, lyghtlye lying, congruently wary, much Irefull, and longe dysdaynfull.
            The throte leane, and thynne, and in which the vaynes appeare: declareth that man to be of an euyll fortune, weake, slouthful, a grosse feder. soone crediting, and conuertyble to good or euyll.
         
         
            Of the sygnyfycacions of the necke. The. xxx. chapter.
            
               FIrste the necke greate, not by reason of the fleshines, but by reason of the bygnes of the bones & sinowes: be stronge. lykened to the masculyne kynde (after the maners of the minde he vndrestandeth) because the male in his kinde, hath a great necke, and liuelie: The necke meane, betwene longe and short, declareth a hote complexion, & boldnes. The necke long, and slendre, lykened to the femynine kynde: when the necke is greate & lyueliy, as I haue aboue said argueth fortitude of the brayne, & by the consequente, caliditie of the harte, like as there be men, in their kynde.
            
               
               
            
            The necke great by fleshines, and not by reasō of the magnitude of the sinowes, and bones, and as. Rasys addeth to, stiffe and strong, be Iracundiouse: and likened to the apparante congruencie in Irefull bulles chafed, whiche then inspeciall haue suche a disposicion of the necke: and as Rasis addeth to, be also hasty in their doynges. The necke sufficiently bygge, not by reason of the fleashlynes, but by reason of the sinowes and bones, and congruente long also, be hardy, compared to the lion, and thys is especiallye trewe, when the head, and necke be proporcioned so, that it is also of a meane magnitude, as the same Constantine affirmeth. The four me of the head, if it shalbe of meane bygnes. and the necke somwhat greate, declareth the goodnes of the complexcyon and disposiciō, but if the head shalbe small, and necke greate, declareth aboundaunce of matter, and hys superfluousnes, and the lacke also of

the informatyue vertue and suche a heade as it is sayd is fatigated, by muche payne, and vnquietnes of the head.
            The necke very long, and thynne, be fearefull, compared to the harte, but yet that man whiche hath assender and long necke, bearyng it vp strayghte, is not, so muche feareful, as the hart. The necke very shorte be deceitfull and wyly begilers or full of wyles, compared to the wolfe. And thys signe is taken, by the manēr apparante in men, and beastes, for men entending to goe closely in a matter not to be seen, drawe in the neacke, and so appere the shorter: as the lyke may be considered in the catte, whē she stealeth vpō the mouse Some saye also that the necke long, declareth longe feate, and the necke slender, slendre fete, wherefore thē necke hollowe and flatte, declareth debilitie of the sinowes, and sickenesses, after the conioyning, but the neacke much fieashie declareth him to be a lyer, vsyng moste fylthy excesse, and the neacke meane, witnesseth goddnes: And the nape of the necke next the head, whē it shal be heary, wytnesseth that man to be strong, and hardye, because it declareth caliditie. The necke longhauyng a middle parte, declareth malyce in that parson: and they saye also, to be a fole, weake, fearefull, & a loude clatterer, but greate with a certayne proliritie not very fleashlye, argueth that person to be stronge, and stoute. The necke styffe, and strong, to be Iracun diouse, hasty, vnapt to be taught, and the vertue of the mynde, and the humanitie also negatiuely (they saye)▪ to concurre to suche an operacyon. The necke weake or lose, that it semeth to hange, vnable to endamage and to be deceatful it declareth. The necke great and fleashie, with a certayne shortnes, declareth hym to be a 
                  •
               oole, and a greate feader.

and when betwene the conioyninge of the shouldr
                  •
                poyntes, and beginning of the necke, shalbe a certain berynge or bunchynge vp, as of the knottes growing sharpe, Cocles noted those parsones to be proud and haute of stomake, for the more parte. The necke declinynge: vn apte to be taught. And bearyng the necke to much vpryght, declareth hym not alonly vnapt to be taught, but also hygh mynded, and disobedient, receauing no admonicion. The neke bending vpward, to be haute or proude, stubburne or vngentle, and voyde of a
                  •
                honesty. The necke bending to the partes of the breaste, declareth that man to be much encombred wyth the thoughtes and cares of the mynde: but su
                  ••
               ime with nigardshyp, and sumtime with malygnitye: of the necke shall decline to the lefte parte: to be a 
                  •
               hurl and doggysh. The necke styffe, and great whether it be longe, and that it styfiye bendeth: argueth hym to be a gready catcher. The necke croked after the latytude of the bodye, fro the ryghte or leafte syde, argueth hym to be deceatfull, a wary talker, and vnfaythfull: as Arystotle affyrmeth, eschewe vtterlye hys company, whiche is wrye necked downe to the Joyning of the shoulder pointes, for such be vngracious, dissēblers & deceateful, as Cocles noted the same in melancholicke parsōes. The necke meant betwene lōge & short, be indued with algood vertues. The neck longe, declareth that man to be symple, not secretee, fearefull, weake, enuyous, a lyare, deceatfull, indoctrynall, and soone conuer
                  •
               yble to good or cuyll. The necke shorte, declareth that man to be wary, somwhat sparynge, deceatfull, secret, stable discrete, ita cundyous, ingenious, of a greate vnderstandynge, congruently strong, louyng peace or quietnes, and gouernment, and feareful in al thynges.
         
         
            
            Of the coloure of the hole bodye. The. xxxi. Chapter.
            ANd that whiche we haue spoken or declared of the mēbres, is the lyke to be iudged of the hole body. For if thou considre the body in the feling thou shalte promptly knowe the qualitie, or cō
               pleccyon therof. Wherfore the body safte and slender, and the skynne cleare wyth softnes of the fleshe, especially, if somwhat ruddye about the knees, declareth that person to be sanguyne of complexcyon The body white, fleashy, and saft, declareth that person to be Phlegmaticke of complexciō. The body fuskyshe or swart or reddyshe, declareth that person to be cholericke of complexcyon. The body bleke, blackishe, pale or palishe, declareth a melācholyke qualitie, or ad ust choler: Euen so the bodye wrincled, hauing greate or many sinewes, and thycke skynned, declareth that person also, to be of a choleryke complexcyon. The body slender, and the skynne thyn, & white, to be phlegmatike, and weake. Further of the knowledge of dyuers complexcyons. The coloure white, and as it wer inwarde cleare and reddyshe, declareth equally a common qualitie, and suche a coloure oughte to bee (as it were) thorowe oute the hole body, naturally, wel dysposed. Ther be three places in which ye vertue of colour is shewed. First in the face, secondly in the handes, & thyrdly in the breaste. If suche a coloure be fierte red, declareth hym to be Idle, especially if hys eyes moue fast. If suche a rednes be fuskishe or swarte in colour,

declareth a grosse bloude, and to be a deceauer: suche a coloure of Albertus is named (
                  •
               nopos), which is a fierie, darke redde:▪ but suche a coloure maye very well be named a deuelyshe coloure as the lyke was noted in one. If suche a read coloure▪ drawe nere to grennes or as it were to graynes more thē to whitnes, declareth blacke c
                  •
               ole
                  •
               , and hys qualityes: and▪ if to subtill cit
                  •
               innes (as it were to whyttynesse) whiche is wonte commonly to bee in healthfull persons, and thys wythout greate matter, declareth the sheading of nature, wyth the losse of the spirites (and especially thys) if the eies be, or stande deape, and moueable, suche then be taken or rauished with the passyon of loue, whiche vndoutedly (as Locles sayeth) is a greuouse sickenes. The vertue of suche loue is thys, that it ex
                  •
               incteth vertues, and dulleth or darcke
               
                  ••
               th vnderstandyng, causing leacherye, makyng the fearefull bolde,▪ and the sobre in maner frantyke And if whi
                  •
               nes shal abound, and that readnes so litle that it can scarsely be seene, declareth a Phlegmatycke condicion, and suche a coloure was wonte of the autent
                  •
               ckes to be named a clayishe coloure. And if to thys coloure, be redu
                  •
               s 
                  •
               dmixt to, declareth an euil Phlegmaticke, and his condiciōs: and this colour is named a leadyshe colour, comixt wyth swartyshe and grenishe colour, & thys is the outwardest degre of a maliciouse complexcyon, that is, that heate declareth the mortificacion naturall. The fealyng temperate and good cosysteth in the dewe proporsyon of the firste qualities, and more approcheth to caliditie and ienyty, thē to coldnes or aspernes, and more to fleashynes, then to leannes: suche a felyng verely argueth the goodnes

of the complexcyon, y• is, the equal complexcyon wyth the goodnesse of the wyite, and vnderstandyng.
            The vaynes verye large and apparante, declare a cho
                  •
               crycke parson, and hys condicions. The vaynes narrow, and as they were flatte, and somtyme leadish in colour, declare a melancholike nature or complexcion. The vaynes depe in the body, seme to declare a Phlegmaticke nature. The vaynes in due proporcion apparante and notable, declare a sanguyne nature
            
               Of the shoulder poyntes.
               THe shoulder poyntes leane and smal: declare that man to be weake, fearefull, peaseable, and maye not endure to laboure, sone credytyng, and to all thynges conuertible.
               The shoulder poyntes large and great, declare that man to be strong, to much constante or hard to be moued, faythfull, of a grosse wytte, and feadyng, simple, a paynful laborer, sufficiently feadig, and soue quieted.
               The shoulder poyntes crokyng inwarde: declare that man to be wary, slouthfull, secrete, ingeniouse, and a surmiser.
               The shoulder poyntes flatte and brode, declare that man to be simple, a sparer or niggarde, laboryouse, modeste in all hys doynges, especially in tounge and feadyng, quyete, sone credyting, and conuertyble to good or euill.
               The shoulder poyntes vnequall, as the one greater then the other, declare that man to be slouthful, of a dul vnderstandig▪ of a grosse wit & feadyng▪ sipie, of a dul capacitie, faithful, bold, a niggard or one hard to be

moued, and somtymes an vtterer of secretes, false, and not credityng one.
               The shoulder pointes very high standing vp, declare that man to bee in maners of an open lyfe, enuiouse, symple, vayne, a liar, vnstable, bolde, inuerycundiouse, and a braller or quareier.
            
         
         
            Of the Phisiognomye of the armes. The. xxxii. Chapter.
            
               OF the armes nedeth not much to speake seyng there is none so slendre wytted (as I Judge) but that can readily saye, and Judge those men to be mighty and strong, which haue wel brawned armes, or great sinewes and manye: whyche make a body strong. Contrary, the skynne fleshie, and the senowes not so diuerse land many to be sene, declare such to be Phlegmatike, and sanguyne, & proue to cowardnes. The armes monstruous long, declare holdnes, fortitude, & ignobilitie, and wyth thys short lyfe. The armes croked, in respecte of the stature, or greate boned, declare those persons to be vnthankeful, shameles, couetouse, ill reporters or backebiters, enuiouse, haute or proude, and not muche differyng fro thē, which haue heary armes, which also be proud or reprocheful, veneriouse, wielie, craftie, vnstable, and talketyue or ful of wordes. When the armes shalbe so long, that they reche to the knees, argueth subtylnesse, arrogancie, and couetousnes to reygne or gouerne. Aristotle

also sayeth, that these signes declare boldnes▪ goodnes, with largenes in expēsis, & such kyng Alexander was thought to haue. The armes so mōstruous long, that they reache to the thighes, declare that those persons bee vngracyous, Joying in other mennes harmes, and enuyouse: and many authors saye that thys signe declareth fearfulnes, ignoraunce, and a louer of discorde. He whiche feadeth so gredely, that he bryngeth the mouth to the meate, & not wyth the hande decently, for the euill fashioning therof, and for the shortnes, and crokednes of the armes, declare those persons to be malicious, and enuyouse. The cubites of the armes slendre and leane, if they shalbe weake, declare hym to be rude, & vnapt to be taught. The armes greate in the bones, sinewes, & fleashe, declare a strōg and mightie nature. And if the vaynes appeare, declare a hote complexcyon, when the armes be great, by softe fleashe, declare a feminine nature.
            The Phisiognomiers saye, that the armes very hearye, declare that person to be luxuryouse, Aristotle sayeth, that he whiche when he talketh moueth the arme muche, by the mouyng of the hande: declareth that person to be enuiouse▪ eloquente of speache, and a deceauer. And he that refrayneth to moue the hande the lyke, is of a perfit vnderstanding, wel disposed and wittye of councell, or a wytty counsaylet.
         
         
            Of the significacions of the breast and ribbes. The. xxxiii. Chapter.
            
               
               THe lion is not alonely knowē strong but also bold by the breast, as they especially Judge which wryte of the natures of beastes: euen lyke by that conjecture we name that man to be strong and bold whiche hath the brest well bearyng out, and to be luxuriouse, malepert, or wanton in asking, or yl tonged, lasciuiouse of talke, haute or proude, Iracundiouse, and somwhat spatyng.
            The breast bushie of heare, and in the selyng hote, declareth that man to be cholerick with hys qualitie, that is to be bolde, obstynate, and muche Ireful.
            The breast naked and bare of heare, declareth that parson to be colde, and Phlegmaticke of nature, and inqualitie feareful, and slowe. The breaste vnequallye hounchyng ht
                  •
               h oute: on the ton parte, we fynde such parsons to be marcialies, wie
                  •
               y begilers, & prone to al wickednes, to be naturally vayne or liars, and hipocrites. Euen so they whiche be red on the breaste vp to the throte we fynde to be Irefull, contencyouse, presumptuouse, haute or arrogante, inconstante, but yet fearefull. And that breast we Judge most comly, which is meanely fylled wyth fleshe, and meanelye heary, for thys declareth that person to be discret, prudente, and of a good nature. They whiche be well ribbed & strong after lyfe, be compared to the masculyne k
                  •
               d. And they which be weake & smal ribbed, after nature be likened to the feminine kynde: & they which he compassed aboute the ribbes with fleashe bearyng out lyke as they were blowen: declare those persons to be talkatyue, and folyshe talkers, compared to the oxe & frogge. Note also that the ribbes of the feminine kind be narrowe and smal, and the great guttes also for the

lacke of natural heate. And the man, the contrarye, by 
                  ••
               s greate heate.
         
         
            Of the Phisiognomy of the handes. The .xxxiiii. Capter.
            FOr as much as hetherto I haue vsed an ordre in the phisiognomatyng of the membres, and that by the handes may diuerse
                  •
               ye be noted, I wyll therfore speake somwhat therof. And first as Aristotle sayth, the greatnesse and shortnesse of the fingers declareth paucitie of matter, and a Phlegmaticke compleccyon and that nature maye not direcie, of whych the spirites be not lyke to nature, and then they bee folysh: and the lyke affirmeth Rasis, Consiliator, and the Philosopher Ptholomie. Formica worthely saith that the greatnes of the hande, commeth somtyme by much laboure, and therfore they which laboure much haue great handes. And somtyme it commeth by nature and thē by the grennes of the bones and sinewes or muscles, such a person whether it be man or woman, be naturally strong, and sometyme also it proceadeth by the grossenes of the fleshe, and then suche be drunkardes, luxuriouse and naturallye vile. Also he whiche hath greate handes and the fyngers at the toppes sharpe or small such a parson is couetouse, & false: vnderstande also, that the fore fynger, middle fynger, ryng fynger, and eare fynger, haue three Jointes a pece. If therfore, in eache Joynte, shall bee but one lyne, he shall dye sodeynly: but if there shall bee two lynes in eache Joynte equall distante, declare a happye signe, and to be an honest faythfull man. And if in the middle Joynte of eache finger, shalbe but one lyne, and in the other Joyntes two, such a persō shall s
                  •
               ese one of hys eien, and these hitherto Formica. Ptolom
                  •
               e sayeth that the handes greate, and thynke skin 
                  •
               ed, declareth that manne to be disquieted in mynde.

Rasys sayeth, the handes lyght and subtyll or thinne declare muche wysdom, and a good perfyt vnderstandyng, and subtilnes of the humours. The handes slendre and very long, declare tirannye, and foolyshnes. Ptholomie the Philosopher sayeth, that the handes of diuerse colours, declare that man to be luxuriouse or cruell.
            The fyngers also ouer thynne, declare foolyshnes. Formica sayeth that he whiche hath the fyngers at the toppe brode, suche a person is faythfull, & a good companion.
            The table in the hande large, and the fyngers slendre, that is long, suche a person is subtyll in a naturall worke, and geuen to playe on Instrumentes.
            The table in the hande small or narrowe, and the fyngers greate, suche a person is geuen to wryte wel or perfitlye. And suche a person shall dye of an apostume.
            He which hath the handes not ouer greate, nor ouer smal, but wel proporcioned to hys body, suche a person is more congruente in all hys mischancis or accidentes.
            The handes small, suche a person is feminine, in hys doynges, and is also vnsac
                  •
               able, and hateful, and now loueth, and now hateth, and seldome or neuer there is any confydence to be had in hym.
            He whiche hath greate and fatte handes, such hath 
                  •
                dull wytte. And the womā hauing such handes, desyreth much veneriouse acte.
            He whiche hath slendre handes, is nimble and ready in hys doynges, and muche desireth women.
            
               The fyngers hollow, and ill fashioned, and not con
               
                  •
               oyning wel together, is an euil person, talking larger lier then he wyll doe, and full of vntrouth. He whych hath the fyngers segregate, and not lying strayt oute, declareth miserye, and pouertie.
            And the reason of thys is, for the improporcion, whiche presupposeth not there a good and perfyt vnderstandyng, but an euyll, and inordinate.
            The fyngers smal, declare that person to be a foole, 
                  •
                dullarde, and enuyouse.
            Morbeth the cardinall in hys chyromancye sayeth that the fyngers long, and thynne, and well proporcyoned together: declare a good wytte, and especyally in handy craftes.
            And it declareth also an euill gouernance, whereby they be alwaye miserable, and neady, and thys Cocles many tymes noted in neady persones, that lyued by almes.
            The fyngers very shorte, and lytle: declare them to be strong, and fuffyciently wary or wyttye: but thys alonely is not to be affirmed.
            The handes grosse or fatte, and the fyngers ouer shorte: declare that man to be a false demer or periurer, a theefe, and ful of wyles: and the handes croking in, and thynne, declare that person to he a glutenouse feader and talkatyue: Certayne saye that the fyngers flatte and small, and the palme of the hande croked, declare that mā to be enuyouse, a fole, an innocent o
                  •
                wreache, and couetouse: and the reason of thys is, because the grossnes declareth aboundaunce of the matter, and somwhat of naturall heate, not mighty aboue

the degree, by whiche is declared an earthly drie man and rude by reason of ouer muche drynes, and a fole for the lacke of natural heate and moysture proportionable, and by the consequence to be couetouse, for the crokednes thereof: A
                  •
               u
                  •
               or in 
                  •
               ys small woorke of chyromancie sayth y• the womā whyche hath small or 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               e hād
                  ••
                and the fyngers grosse at the toppes, declare a rude wyt
                  ••
               
               ▪ and a notyse to be 
                  •
               u
                  •
               u
                  ••
               ouse.
            And those women whiche haue a shorte pa
                  ••
               e, shalbee greued with the strayghtnes in the 
                  •
               e
                  •
               ue
                  •
               ie of chylde.
            A certayne authoure sayeth, whose name Cocles knewe not, that the handes shorte and knottye or bounchyng oute and thynne, declare that manne to be a Jeaster, and glu
                  ••
               enouse feader.
            And the cause of thys is, that the ende of the sinowes whyche thorough drynes is drawen together, and bendeth inwarde, is therby knottye.
            When the toppe of the eare fynger, shall not reache to the vpper Joynt of the ryng fynger, declareth that person assuredly to be a bastarde, whiche Cocles very often founde trewe. And if the fyngers bende in the toppes: declare enuie, and couetousnes, and suche be wary, and false of promes, compared to the ape.
            But when they bende inwarde, contrary wyse, If the thombe towardes the fyngers, and the fyngers towarde the thombe enclyne, declare ma
                  •
               cousnes, and couetousnes.
            He whiche of a custome or customably, holdeth the hande 
                  ••
               rayghte oute, and the fyngers lyke extensed 
                  •
                length, declareth that man to be talkatyue, fearefull, and vayne.
            He whiche alwaye beareth the hande closse shut, declareth to be vn
                  •
               itifull or vio
                  •
               ente, and Iracundiouse. The fingers small and thynne i
                  •
                a man declare

hym to be an idiote, If shorte and grosse, declare boldnes, and enui
                  •
               : and the fyngers comly made, fayer of forme, and of sufficiente lengthe, declare good and honest maners in that person. He whiche in speakyng moueth and clappeth the handes muche together, and vseth many gestures besydes, declareth to be eloquent enuyouse, and a begiler. Certayne saye (as Hermes) that the tremblyng or quaueryng of the handes, in a healthfull younge man, declareth to be sone and lyghtly angry or moued to 
                  •
               re. And this procedeth by great heat, and commocion of the spirites But if the tremblyng be very strong or faste, it is a token of a vic
                  •
               
               ouse comple
                  •
               cion, and that suche a one wilbe or is angry for a triff
                  •
               yng cause▪ melancholyke, desiryng dyuerse thynges, and couetouse or enuiouse. The hand hollow, with the tubercles fayre, and the proportion of the lynes lyke semly, promyse long lyfe. And 
                  •
               f it be contrary, contrary Judge. The fyngers in what fourme they be, wyth the Joites grosse, declare misery & mi
                  ••
               ortune as Cocles hath very often noted it. Albertus and Conciliator say
                  •
               , that when the fingers be so wel filled with fleashe, and perfyt rounde, that holdyng them vp thou cannot see the elemēt thorow them, declare that man to be couetouse, and enuyouse: And if the fingers rightly bende towardes the backe of the hand especially if they be thynne, declare that man to be vniust, subtyll, and ingeniouse. And he which of a custome when he walketh, holdeth or beareth the thombe thruste within the other fingers: declareth to be couetouse as Cocles noted thesame in a countrey man of his. The fingers also long declare the eares of the lyuer to be long, and the magnytude of the fyngers, declareth the magnitude of the eares of the lyuer. And the smalnes of the fingers, declare the smalnes of the eares of the lyuer.
            If any haue ruddy handes, whether it be manne, or woman, declareth that person to bee sanguine

and luxuriouse, as Formica sayth: 
                  •
               tholomye sayeth that he whiche hath the vpper ioyntes of the fyngers grosse and bendyng or turnyng vp, suche if they shalbe thē ryche, in countinuaunce of tyme after shalbe poore or by some other infortune they shalbe hyndered: further he sayeth, hauyng the handes croked in length, declare hym to dye a violente death: These hithert
                  •
                of the Phisiognomating of the handes for this time suffice here.
         
         
            Of the belly, backe, greate guttes, and haunches, with the legges to the fet. The. xxxv. Chapter.
            
               OUr matter requireth not muche to wryte, what eche mā may Judge by the beliye, backe, and greate guttes, althoughe they be principall mēbres of the body, by whiche myghte muche be noted and Judged: but notwythstandyng what is necessaryly to be spoken of them in breuitie shalbe shewed. Fyrste the bellye heary and roughe to the nauell: declareth that man to be luxuryouse, bolde, hardye or stoute, prudent, of a great vnderstandyng, studyouse, warye, and somtyme hardlye fortunated.
            The bellye leane, and thynne, declare a hote and cholerycke complexcyon, and often tymes also a melancholyke complexcyon.
            As they for the more parte, whiche haue fa
                  •
               te and 
                  •
               orpulente beliyes, and yet very wytty, and thys by

often experience, we fynde trewe. He also which is 
                  •
               a
                  •
                or well brawned aboute the bellye, and that the bellye beare not muche oute, is Judged strong after nature. He commonly whiche by some accydente, as by fastyng, or sickenes, or by some other accydentall cause hath a leane bellye, is Judged vnapte to be taughte tendre, and weake: And so long as he contineweth 
                  〈◊〉
                suche a passion, he declyneth to the feminine nature. Aristotle in hys secretes to Alexander wryteth, that he whiche hath a greate bellye, is vndiscreate, folyshe, and lyght mynded, louing and delytyng in veneriouse actes: but the belly meane, and the brest decently strait or narrowe, declare to be a man of a singuler vnderstandyng, and wittye of counsell or a good counseler▪ Aristotle sayeth that the backe bone, greate and well brawned, and strong declareth that man to be strong and mighte in stomake, compared to the masculyne kynde. And the backe bone narrowe, 
                  •
               a
                  •
               te brawned & weake, to be weake, compared to the feminine kynde: wherfore Rasys sayeth that the largenes of the backe, declareth fortytude, arrogancye, and vehemencye of 
                  •
               re.
            The crokednes of the backe, declareth the maliciousnesse of condicious, and ouerthwartnesse in maners.
            The equalitie of the backe, is a good sygne, Conciliator sayeth, the backe large, strong, wel brawned, & bo▪ned, declare a manlye nature: & contrarye, a femini
                  •
               e nature. And who that is croke backed if it shalbe sa
                  •
               t in fleashe, bearyng vp to a hyll, and that any by that be 
                  •
               arroer, as it were to a waste aboute: thys man excelleth in vertue, hauyng a studyouse desyre in huntyng.
            They saye also that the crokednes of the backe, declareth the ouerthwartnes in maners.

The backe large vnextensed, declareth fortitude, arro gancie, fiercenes or furiouse hastines in angre. The thynnes of the backe declareth yt man to be of a waywarde nature. Further the backe bone large at the nether ende to the buttockes, and safte compassed or brawned wyth fleashe, declareth that person to bee effeminate, compared to the woman. But if the backe bone be long and ende sharpe: declareth that man to be libidinouse, moderate in manners, and fearefull. Certain saye, that the backe heary, leane, and muche bearyng vp, fro an equalitie of the partes: declareth that man to be inuericundiouse, maliciouse beastly of an euil vnderstandyng weake, & not long enduring to labor, and slouthfull.
            The backe greate or broade and fatte: declareth that man to be diuerse, slouthfull, & of much deceate.
            The backe thynne extensed, and leane, declareth that man to be weake, and of lyghte cause fearefull, vayne, a brawler, and of muche credulitie.
            The backe from the shoulder poyntes downe to the wast or geardel steade shorte, and sufficiente large, suche persons as Cocles hath very often noted it, be swifte and preste in coetyng.
            Certayne of the Philosophers admonishe vs, to beware of those persons whiche haue the backe muche bunchyng out, for suche especially be geuen to doe mischiefe and harme, and most in defamyng, backebytyng, and enuy.
            The haunches expresse the lyke, in maner of the former: for if the haunches be fleash, and fatte, and that the legges, downe to the fete be also fleashy: declare boldnes, and strength.
            He whyche hath bony haunches so that the bones beare oute and well sinewed: in such maner that the haunches be great by especialler cause of the bones

and sinewes, thē of ouer much fleashines: declare that man to be strong, & bold. Rasis also sayeth yt when the bones of the haūches shal beare out: declare boldnes.
            And thys Rasis meaneth, when the haunches bee well brawned and bendyng to the siluester parte, whiche is a notyse of fortytude, and suche runne quicke and swiftly, and be also great iourn
                  •
               ers: as Cocles hath noted it. Mthell the Scot sayeth, that the haunches wel brawned, declare that man to be strong, hardy, and no lesse proud: as appeareth in the stone horse, cocke, and falcon. Also he sayth, that hauyng the haūches bony, but yet in such wyse yt the bones be not great & much fleashy, wyth the smaines of the synewes: such be weake referred to the feminine kynde.
            To thys Rasys sayeth, that when the haunches beare oute throughe muche fleashe: declare debi
                  •
               itye of strength, and loosenes of the members.
            The hippe or hucke
                  •
               l bones tendynge outwarde (as Consi
                  •
               ator sayth) declare vri
                  •
               litie and fortitude: excepte effiminate fleashines happen to hynder the same. The siendernes or smalnes of them: declareth that man to be a louer of women and to be feareful, wyth weakenes of the bodye. The shankes well sinowed, strong brawned or muscled and greate, not by reason of the fleashines, but rather by reason of the greatnes of the bones, and sinewes: declare that manne to be strong after iyfe, referred to the masculyne kynde. The shankes thynne or leane, and sufficiently synowed: declare that person to be luxuryouse, lyght, and vnstable in hys mouinges: and thys notyse is taken by byrdes hauyng the lyke shankes. Whiche because they be light after nature, & vnstable, haue lytle of the terrestrial substaunce or grauity, but much of the Aeriall 
                  •
               yghtnes. The shankes leane wythout the sufficiencie of sinewes, declare that mā to be feareful, as cociliator affirmeth. The shākes ouer gret, by reasō of

ouer much fleashines, and as it were indistincte, that is with equalitie or all a lyke, so that aboute the ancles they be fleashye and fatte, as women be, be named weake, and vnshamefaste, as appereth aboue, by the signes incensible. Whan the grosnes or fleshines shalbe aboute the ancles, declare that man to be grosse and folysh of nature, as Rasys sayeth. And Aristotle wryttyng to Alexander sayth, yt the thynnes or leanes of the shākes declareth that man to be Ignoraunte or simple, And the greatnes of them, declareth that mā to be bolde, and strong.
            The shankes all a lyke, as they were swollen downe to the ancles of some dysease, declare a fylthy intemperamente.
            The shankes softe in fleashe, be signes of a feminine nature.
            The shankes leane, and sufficiently synewed, and roughe (after Aristotle) declare an ardencye to venerouse acte: For that their nutrimentall matter, is altered into sperma in thē, and lykened to byrdes.
            The shankes superfluouse, and indistincte or yll fashioned, declare that man to be od
                  •
               ble, and vnshamfaste. Note also that the shankes very hearye, wyth the multitude of heare about the preuie membres, declare an ardente desire to veneryouse acte, for such be compared in nature lyke, wyth brute beastes.
            They that be much heary fro the haunches to the feate, declare to bee muche geuen to coeate.
            The feete greate, by meane they be well sinowed & muscled, and that the muscles and sinewes, appeare in such maner, that the greatnes be, by reason of the bones and sinewes, and not by reason of the aboundaunce of fleashe, such be iudged strong after nature. Rasis sayeth, the feete muche fleashie, and harde, declareth that man to be of an euill vnderstandyng. Aristotle

in hys secretes wryteth that the fete fleashye, declare such a person to be folyshe, and a louer of Iniury. And the fete small, and lyghte, declare that man to be bolde, and strong. Rasys also sayeth, that the fete smal, and bewtifull, declare that man to be a fornicator, and sporter and maker of myrth, alwaye mery. The nayles of the fete croking lyke to haukes talons be iudged gready catchers and vnshamefast, in maner lyuing lyke as the hauke after hys praye. Cocles alway marked suche persons, which had the lyke nayles on the toes and fyngers, to be of a cholerycke complexcyon: And founde it a laudable notyse, in worthy warriours, & in such as vse marciall aries. And such persōs Aristotle meaneth to be naturally vnshamfast or ouer bolde, theues, despoylers, and fyithy talkers. And he nameth the martiall, theaues or warriours, because they, whiche geue their industry holly to war faryng, be robbers, and wily begilers a
                  •
               raynyng substaunce or bouties, whether it be in ryghte or wrong. Of womens fete, is here what to be noted; as they whiche be long foted, be apter to the procreacion of children, and by their rote also (as the Philosophers saye) maye be knowen whiche be apteste to coeate, wyth many others moe, whiche for the displeasure of god in the vtteryng of them, I omitt, desiring thee gentle Reader to beare wyth me ther
                  ••
               .
         
         
            Of the hole stature of man. The. xxxvi. Chapter.
            WE maye here somwhat Judge of mans stature. And first for an example we read in the historyes of one Maximinus Emperoure, whiche was a man of a huge parsonage, and stature, and yet named or rea
                  •
                ned

for a sole. Of whom arose thys prouerbe. (Climacis egiptia, et Caliga Maximini) whiche prouerbe brieflye to saye, is applyed to suche as be of huge stature & parsonage, hauyng eun condicions or properties, & that for their maners, had in contempt of al men. But what nedeth to recite thys, seeing we see euery where (sayth Indagines) that suche whiche be of so huge & straunge stature, be not of the wisest, or very nidiottes, & this most especial, if they be leane long bodyed, and crane neaked, or neaked lōg lyke the crane. Of whych sort, Indagines noted in the court of Fredericke the third, and Charles, Emperours, maruelouse leane, and tall, very frowarde, and stark folyshe: nor they muche differ not fro these, whiche goe much stoupyng or crokedly, wherof the olde prouerbe (If I maye so saye) mighte here bee renewed, which is, I haue seldom seen a long or tal man, wittye, or a litle man, meeke and pacyent. But to be brief, that man whiche is of a meane stature, and comly or reasonable fat of body, and in qualities honestly nurtered, declareth to be ingeniouse, circumspect, and wyth expedicion doeth hys businesses. Further, the stature long and sufficient strayte and more leane then fatte, declareth that man to be bolde, cruell, proude, clamorous, vayne gloryouse, long angry, or furiouse in anger, to muche constant or hard to be moued, presumptuouse, not sone credityng thynges heard, an often lyar & in many thynges maliciouse The stature long and sufficietly fatte, declareth that man to be strong, lightly vnfaythfull, false, of a grosse wytte, a niggarde warye, vnfaythfull, and a surmiser. The stature long leane and thynne, declareth that man to be sapyente, vayne, a lyar, of a grosse feadyng or feader, importunate, to wished thynges sone credityng, weake, slowe in

doing thynges, and very self willed. The stature short and grosse: declareth that man to be vayne, fearefull, suspicious, more folysh then wittye, of a grosse wytte, and congruently saruisable to one, sone crediting, and long continewing angrye.
            The stature shorte and leane, and sufficiently strayte vp, declareth that man to be naturally wary, ingeniouse, a sparer, proude, bolde, secrete, fatigable or a much prouoker, vayne gloryouse, congruently sap
                  •
                ente, of a good vnderstandyng, and very often surmysing, The stature declyning or fallyng forward (not caused thorow age) but by nature: declareth that man to bee wary, secrete, dull, of a grosse feadyng, sharpe or cruel, a niggarde, laboriouse, long bearyng angre in mynde, and not lightly credityng. The stature bendyng bakwarde, declareth that man to be a fole, of smal vnderstādyng, a grosse fea der, vayn, of an euil memory, and lightly cō
               uertibleto good or euil.
         
      
      
         
            
            A conclusion or briefe rehearsall of the whole arte of Phisiognomie.
            
               NOwe let vs reduce all these matters afore spoken, to a conclusyon: Although these afore rehearsed appeare sufficiente. Wherefore to bee briefe, let vs pronounce of all the membres throughout the body, and first of the eyes. They whyche haue moysty, cleare, cherful, and quaueryng eies: declare them to be honest conditioned and merye. And that these maye the readyier appeare, we shal set them forth orderly as it were in a table, what euery membre declareth, whiche we haue placed here vnder.
            FIrst the eies moyst, cleare and smilyng: declare that man to be mery, well manered, and circumspecte in hys lyfe. The eies stedfast of syght, som what redde, and very great; declare that man to be a glutton, and leacherouse. The eies small, somewhat mouing: declare that man to be couetouse. The eies great: declare that man to be crafty and a begyler. The eies stedfast of syghte: to be deceitfull or crafty. The eies mouing to & fro: declare yt man to be sedicious, suspicious, vnfaythfull or trusty, & a boster. Brod eied: declare that man to be dull witted, a sluggarde, fearfull, a coward, honest and trusty, & dronke with wyne. Small eied: declare that person to be vnshamefast or shameles. The eies couertly quaueryng (as it were) to be vniust. The eies not a lyke, and smal: declare that mā to be deceitful, and a flaterer. The sight

of the eies turnyng nere the nose: declare that person to be veneriouse. The eies brode and runnynge, and the syghte mouing to and fro: declare that man to be Ireful. The eies dryer then they afore: declare that man to be chaungeable, wyly, and experte. The eyes twinklyng as it were: declare that man to be shameles. The eies blacke and cleare: to be a iuste and vpryghte meanyng man, witty, and libidmouse, and of knowledge. The eies rounde aboute grene: declare that person to be deceitful, vniust, and a thefe. The eies moisty: declare that man to be high mynded, able to perfourme that he promyseth, vpryghte of counsell. The eyes greate and quaueryng: declare that per son to be madde, lyght or idle witted, and a glutton. The eyes hauyng many windinges or wrincies, hollowe, and drye: declare that man to be a forelec
                  •
               , and a betrayer. The eies standyng high out, greate, clere, pure, and moist: declare that man to be witty, studious and a louer. The eies watery and runnyng, if it come not by sickenes: declare hym to be a foole. The eyes darke of sighte and drye, to bee very faythfull. The eies quaueryng as it were, large, moyst and cleare: to be a man of singuler knowledge, haute of stomacke, furiouse in anger, hardy of courage, and a boster. The eies blacke and resp
                  •
               endent: declare that person to be fearfull, and most wycked. The eies rounde aboute swollen as they were, and crude: declare that person to be a glutton, and hatefull. The eyes very smal, and hollow: declare that man to be couetouse, and a crafty begiler. The eies cherefull of loke, and of a lyke bygnes: declare that person to be prone and apt to laughter, gentle, and godly. The eies moyste: declare that man to be a good counsayler, sad, gentle, and studious for the more parte. The eie liddes partyng: declare that person to be a louer, and loued. That man which winketh with the eyes: declareth to be a deceauer and thefe. That man whiche hath bleared eien: declareth

to be libidinouse. The ouer browes large: declare that person to be efftminate. The cye lyddes playing often, declare that man to be an aduouterer.
            The forehead narrowe, to be a foole. The forehead long, to be studyouse and apte to be taught, or highe, or as it were swollen, and rounde, to be craftye, mutable, and a doer of iniurye.
            The forehead full of wrincles: declareth that man to be burdened with cares.
            The foreheade rounde to be enuyouse, and deceytfull. The forehead large, to be free and lyberall. The ouerbrowes hearye, to be a stammerer. The eie bries streatchyng to the Temples, to be nastye, and beastly condicioned.
            The face playne or euen filled wyth fleashe, to be ful of stryfe. Not full faced, to be Iniuryouse, rude and nasty, leaner faced, to be wittye. The face fleashye, apt to learne, sad of coūtenaunce, to be a fole, mixed with wisdom.
            The cares wyde open, to be a nidiote. The eares very great, to be simple witted. The eares small to bee a fole. The eares as they were foure cornered, to be learned.
            The nose sharpe, to be Irefull. The nose fleashye, & softe, to be euill manered. The nose bowing to the mouth lyke an haukes byll, to be honest, strong, learned, and apte to be taughte. The nose greate, to bee gentle and frendly. The nose small to be a deceau
                  •
               r.
            The nose flat, to be leacherouse, wyllful and pleasaunte.
            The nosethrelles steafe, to be myghtye and strong. The nosethrilles rounde, to be fearce. The nosethrils deuyded a parte as they were, to bee quicke wytted, iustye of courage and mearye. The nosethrilles narrowe and rounde, to be a fole.
            The mouth wyde, to bee full of striefe and a fyghter, fierce, and bolde. The mouth very greate or large,

wyth the vpper lyppe hangyng farre oute, to bee a glutton, wycked, a babier, foole hardye, ouerthwarte, and duli wytted.
            The lyppes small, thynne, and subtyle to bee Eloquente. The lyppes thynne in a litle mouth, to bee effeminate. The lyppes fleashye or thycke, to be a fole
            They whyche haue teath lyke to a dogge, bearing oute the lyppes, bee contumeliouse, or vse to speake rebukefullye, and not to bee trusted.
            The throte boll asper, to bee a trifler, and of litle wytte.
            The throte boll, farre fro the shoulders standyng, large and extenced▪ declareth imbecillitie of mynde. And meane to bee manered and strong.
            The necke long, and slender, to bee fearefull, and euyll manered. The necke fatte, and long, to be furiouse, fearefull and obstynate.
            The necke meane betwene both, apt to learne, strong and vertuouse.
            The necke fatte, to bee rude, rude speakers, and dull to learne.
            The necke roughe to bee contumelyouse. The necke shorte, to bee foole hardye. The necke bendyng
                  •
                in, to bee necligente, and couetouse.
            The necke bowynge to the ryghte syde, to be reasonable of condycyons, but bowing to the leaft sydeto bee a rioter or Ruffyan, and a fole.
            The breaste greate to bee a manne worthy commendacyon.
            The breaste large, to bee hardye of courage, bold, 
                  •
               nd in whom reasteth honestye.
            The breaste small or narrowe, to bee fearefull.
            The breast corpulent or fatte, to bee furyouse, and cruell.
            
               The pappes hangyng downe fro the breast: declare that man to be violent & vnaduised of that he doth. The belly great, to be vndiseret, folysh, proude and leacherouse. The belly strayght, and broade breasted, (to be one) whose mynd may be perceiued, and a maker of agremente betwene man and man, or man and wyfe, & a counsayler. The backe large, to be gentle of nature: and the backe and breast indifferente brode: to be worthy prayse. The backe corked or bendyng: to be a niggarde and couetouse. The armes very lōg: to be bold, gentle honest and strong. The armes short to be a sower or worker of discorde, & leacherous. The handes very short: to be grosse, and rude manered. The handes narrow in the middle part, and brode at the vpper: to be in hys first age a wastful spender, in hys middle age couetous, and in hys old age, a spender or lyberall: And som at that age be ryper of counsayle, & couetous in that olde age. The handes & fyngers, fat or fleashy to be a thefe. The handes small: to be mutable, wyly, and expert. The flat or palme of the h
                  •
               des to the folde brode, & the vpper part narrow: declareth that man to be a rioter in hys first age. The legges slē
               bre: to be dul of knowledge. The legges grosse: to bee bold & strong. The legges larger to be mighty & strong The legges hauing great or many 
                  •
               inowes: to be strōg The legges short and fat: to be furious and cruel. The legges croked, and hollow or bending in the nether part of the legges: declare those men, to be euil. The legges soft and high pouffed vp: to be well instructed in good maners. The shankes or legges fro the knee down with the hele asper or rough, fleashy and short, and with the thighes fat: declare those men that they shalbe 
                  ••
               naticke. The fete fleashy: to be folish. The fe
                  •
               e small and lyght: to be dull wytted. The fete naked, or dare of heare: declare a most perfit notise of impotency. And much heary to be luxuryous and bolde.
            Finis.
            
         
      
   