
      
         
            
            
            POLITIQVE DISCOVRSES VPON TRVETH AND LYING.
            AN INSTRVCTION TO PRINCES TO KEEPE THEIR FAITH AND PROMISE: Containing the ſumme of Chriſtian and Morall Philoſophie, and the duetie of a good man in ſundrie politique diſcourſes vpon the trueth and Lying.
            First compoſed by Sir Martyn Cognet, Knight, one of the Kings priuie Councell, maſter of requeſtes of his houſhold, and lately Embaſſadour to the Cantons of Zwitzers & Grizons.
            Newly tranſlated out of French into Engliſh, by Sir Edward Hoby, Knight.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               It is better to truſt in the Lord, then to put any confidence in Princes.
               
                  Pſal. 118.9.
            
            
               printer's or publisher's device
               DESIR N'A REPOS
               1586
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Ralfe Newberie.
            
            
               Cum gratia & Priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis. 1586.
         
         
            
            
               
                  VNI SOLI ET SEMPER
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR VVILLIAM CECILL, OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER, KNIGHT, BARON OF BVRGHLEY, Lord high Treaſorer of England, and one of her Maieſties moſt honorable priuie Councell.
            
               MY good Lord: it may ſeem in the conceits of the ouercurious, that in ſome ſort it fareth at this inſtant with mee, as it did ſometime with the old Philoſopher Phormio: who amidſt the most ſumptuous entertainmentes at Epheſus, which K. Antiochus made vnto Hannibal in the time of his baniſhment from Carthage, for a further delight and recreation was willed to dilate vpon ſome theame: and accordingly he tooke in hand to diſcourſe of the duetie of a Captaine, and to teach what

was appertaining to the diſcipline of warre: which when he had finiſhed, Hannibal beeing deſired by the ſtanders by, to deliuer his opinion of him, anſwered, that he had before ſeene manie olde men doate, but neuer none more then Phormio.
            
            Like blame then I may incurre, in beeing thought too buſie in dealing with matters of Philoſophie, a matter as contrarie to my profeſsion as the other was to the Philoſophers, and in me to be turned to the raſhnes of youth, what in him was to the dotage of olde age.
            But howſoeuer theſe my endeuours may lye in the conſideration of the enuious or ouercurious, with which two humors this age moſt aboundeth, yet if by your Lo: they may be eſteemed worthie of your honorable protection, I ſhall not onely thinke it my greateſt happines to haue employed my time herein, but alſo with the like oportunitie and leaſure ſhalbe incouraged to wade into ſome argument of greater paines and moment: hauing at the firſt entred hereinto through the perſuaſion of a friend of

mine, who being in the Court of France the last yeare when the Author firſt publiſhed this booke, ſent mee one ouer highly commending the ſame, and praying mee for his ſake to ſpend ſome time in peruſing thereof, the which I was the more willing to performe, conſidering howe conuenient it was, when through the thicke miſtes and vnhoaleſome aires of this ſolitarie Iſland, I was hindred of other recreation, for the auoiding of idleneſſe, to betake my ſelfe to the contemplation of my ſtudie: and ſo onely that therby the matter might be the better vnderstood and carried away by mee, I beſtowed paines in the tranſlation thereof, which fully finiſhed, hath a good while ſince lyen by mee, and longer, (knowing mine own weakenes and imbecilitie) had done, had I not lately beene much preſsed by my good friend master T. D. to giue my conſent to the publiſhing thereof, as a matter neceſſarie, as he thought for the time, and eſpecially for ſuch as vnderſtoode not the French tongue.
            The matter contained in the booke may bee

                  〈1 page missing〉
               
            
         
         
            
            A commendation of this worke.
            
               SIR, with no ſmall contentation of minde, I haue according to your requeſt peruſed your tranſlation of Mounſieur Coggnets morall politicke or rather right Chriſtian diſcourſes, in commendation of Veritie, and deteſtation of her contrarie. And as that honorable Aucthor made moſt graue election, to handle ſuch matter and ſubiect as for this time and ſtate of his Countrey was more then neceſſarie, ſo can I not but ſingularly commende your choyce of this ſtranger, & your endeuour to make him an Engliſh Denizon, thereby to tranſport, and communicate with your countrey generally ſuch precious wares as will be founde no leſſe holeſome & commodious, then delectable and pleaſant to all degrees, but eſpecially to the beſt and moſt noble. For although Princes and great Eſtates haue many felicious bleſsinges, whereof priuate men can not bee pertakers, yet in this one reſpecte is their eſtate more miſerable, that they ſeeldome or neuer finde a faithfull friend that ſincerely wil or dare Auriculas teneras mordaci rodere vero. Wherby they reiect often the vnſauorie holeſome bitter medicine, that would reduce their health and preſerue their ſtrength. And in ſteede thereof ſwallowe vp the delicate ſweetened poyſon that finally workes their helpleſſe bane and mortall confuſion. And therfore haue the wiſe Philoſophers admoniſhed Emperours, Kinges, Princes, and other great and honourable perſons, that ſwymme in the Seas of felicitie, by reading Hiſtories and morall politicke diſcourſes to enforme themſelues of ſuch matters, as their Paraſites will not, and honeſt ſeruantes or freindes many times dare not reueale vnto them, thereby to eſcape the daungerous downefall of impendant calamities, whereunto the greateſt Princes are much more ſubiect then the moſt inferiour priuate perſons. Since then this treatiſe (conteyning a Methodicall abundance of ſuch godlie graue admonitions for all eſtates) may aptly be compared to a precious Poſie of moſt fragrant flowers (compendiouſly for that purpoſe gathered from infinite varietie of forren gardens, Hiſtoricall, Poeticall, Politicke, Morall, Humane and Diuine, grauely, diſcreetly and Chriſtianly, conferred and applyed) Depriue not your

ſelfe of dewe prayſe and thankes, for publiſhing and emparting with your Countreymen ſo rare a Iewell, whom you ſhall thereby alſo ſuſpend in reuerent expectation of more honourable fruits to ſuccede this your firſt right vertuous bloſſomes: The true enſignes and very originall cauſe of right nobilitie: Whereunto with your happie ſocietie of the Muſes, I wiſh and very hartely recommende you.
            
               Yours dutifully to commaund, Thomas Digges.
            
         
         
            
            The Contents.
            
               THat the truth is a vertue moſt prayſe worthy, by what it may be diſcerned, and of that which hindereth the knowledge thereof. Fol. 1.
               
               The definition of truth and fayth. Fol. 3.
               
               Properties of the trueth, and howe much it is requiſite in a Prince and Clergie. 5
               
               Extremities in the truth, and how men may ſpeake of themſelues, and of that which they vnderſtand, and that men ought not to publiſh any writing, but of their owne inuention and to ſome purpoſe, nor to attribute to themſelues the honour of a thing well done. 7
               
               Of fayning and diſſembling. 10
               
               That the deede ought to be correſpondent to the word, and to flie hypocriſie. 12
               
               That thoſe which loue the truth ſhould ſhewe it by good woorkes, and of the meanes which doe leade vs therunto, and of thoſe which are far from it. 15
               
               How much true men haue ben eſteemed and that all magiſtrates ought to be ſo, and of the riches of Princes. 21
               
               That it behooueth to keepe promiſe, with inſtruction not to make it with ones diſaduantage, and not to giue place to the importunate. 24
               
               Examples of euils hapned to breakers of promiſe, and of that which dependeth thereupon. 26
               
               Effects of the truth, with exhortation not to change the ſtatutes or lawes, and not to daunce vpon holy dayes, prayſe of Frenchmen, and a ſolution of that for which they are blamed. 29
               
               Of the meanes to withstande inconſtancie and lightneſse, and not to take in hande warre or fight without neceſsitie, of the point of honour, that one ought not to deferre a good purpoſe, that the reading of good bookes giueth hardineſse and prudence, that one ought not too haſtely proceed in criminal iudgement, that one ought to flie euill and ſeducing companies with other inſtructions to nobilitie, worthie to be noted. 42
               
               That the truth findeth good, that which many feare and flye, and giueth contentment. 51
               
               Of the care which men haue had that youth might be inſtructed in the truth. 60
               
               Howe requiſite it is to ſpeake little, and not to blaſe a ſecrete, with aduiſe vppon newes inuented, and of that which is to be ſpoken. 61
               
               That aſwell of friendes as enemies one ſhould learne the truth. 68
               
               That it is needefull to reade hyſtories, there to ſee the trueth which one is a frayde to ſpeake, with aduiſe vppon the reading of all bookes, and of the conqueſtes of Frenchmen, of the meanes to keepe them, and to aſſure a victorie, of the dutie of a captayne, and of that which is to be conſidered, in examples and alterations. 69
               
               
                  That one ought not to ſuffer himſelfe to be deceiued by prayſes, nor be carryed away from modestie, and that honour dependeth vpon vertue, with aduiſe vpon the ſame, or vpon the reproches or lyes of the people, and howe much it is requiſite to commaunde ones ſelfe. 74
               
               That without the truth there is nought elſe but darkneſſe and confuſion, and howe much the philoſophers haue laboured to finde it out, and howe farre wide they haue beene of it. 80
               
               Of diſguiſinges done to Princes, and what is their dutie for their honour and quiet of their ſubiectes, and of the miſeries of the wicked, of the obſeruation of ordinances, and of that which mainteineth or altereth an eſtate. 83
               
               That Princes ought to haue about them good councellours, which may not ſpare to tell them the trueth, and that their lyfe ought to ſerue as a rule and instruction to their ſubiectes, not to graunt to any vniuſt thinge, of exceſſiue giftes, an aduertiſement to ſuch as are in fauour, of warnings, and that in all actions of importance one ought to take councell, without trusting to his owne ſufficiencie. 95
               
               That one ought not to iudge too readely of another. 108
               
               Of reprehenſions, and force of the truth, with a deſcription of detraction. 109
               
               That anger hindereth the truth, of the euils which it bringes with it, and of the meanes to reſiſt it. 113
               
               Of the error of ſome authors which haue prayſed promiſe breakers, and the cruell, of puniſhments of ſuch, what our gettinges and dealing with the great ought to be, aduertiſements to the readers, and of pardonings. 119
               
               The definition of lying. 127
               
               The effectes of lying. 128
               
               The puniſhments of lying. 129
               
               That the periured and plaſphemers are deteſtable lyers, and the paynes for them. 130
               
               That lying, in doctrine is moſt pernitious, and that one ought carefully to ſearch for the truth. 134
               
               That thoſe which defer their amendment, doe wrappe themſelues in a daungerous lye. 142
               
               That ignorance is a lye, and the gappe of great inconuenience. 148
               
               That one ought not raſhly to borrowe money, nor anſwere for another man, for feare of lying. 153
               
               Of lying ingratitude. 155
               
               That lying hath made Poets and painters to be blamed, and of the garniſhing of houſes. 159
               
               Of backebiters, mockers, and euill ſpeakers, and why the Comedians ſtage players and iuglers haue beene reiected. 161
               
               
                  That accuſers, talebearers, falſe pleaders, and curious perſons are of the ſame brotherhoode of lying. 165
               
               Of flatterers. 168
               
               That enuie is a miſerable lye: and of the meanes to remedy it. 171
               
               Howe pride, ambition, vaine boaſting and preſumption are lying, and howe all paſsions leade cleane contrarie to what they pretende, and who may be termed men of humilitie, and of the meane which conteyneth vs therein. 174
               
               That painting is lying. 183
               
               That witches, ſouthſayers, ſorcerers, and vſerers, are repleniſhed with lying and how a man may exempt himſelfe from them. 185
               
               Of the puniſhmentes which haue befallen vnto ſuch as haue giuen eare vnto malitious ſurmiſes reiecting the truth. 190
               
               That we muſt auoyde ſutes in lawe, becauſe of the lying and cawtell of the practiſioners. 192
               
               That it is a lying in Iudges to receiue preſents, and what exerciſe is to be required to be meete with auarice, buying of offices, and couetouſneſſe. 198
               
               That it is a lye, to be intemperate, drunke, exceſsife, whoremonger, player, and ydle, and to ſay that one would be in health, of muſicke & Phiſicke, as wel for the bodie as the ſoule. 209
               
               What we ought to iudge of certaine examples of lying. 225
               
               Of the meanes howe to render a nation true and happie, and of the bringing vp of youth. 227
               
               Of certaine pointes which might be added to this diſcourſe. 236
               
               The concluſion. 245
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Politique diſcourſes vpon Trueth and Lying.
            
               
                  CHAP. I. That the trueth is a vertue moſt praiſeworthie, by what it may be diſcerned, and of that which hindereth the knowledge therof.
               
                  AMong the vertues contained in moral Philoſophie, the Trueth hath euer been eſteemed as one of the moſte praiſe worthie:Trueth, a vertue moſt praiſe vvorthie. The which Plato called the fountaine of all goodnes; and S. Auguſtine in his booke of the Citie of God, ordaineth it as the King, and faith as the foundation and piller of Iuſtice and all commen wealthes: for ſo much as there is nothing more proper to man, being formed according to the image of God, than in his words and manners to approche him the neareſt that he is able, & to make his words ſerue for no other ende, than to declare his good intent & meaning, whereby he may be better able to informe his neighbour. Agathius hauing written of the manners & religion of the Perſians ſaith, that they had two gods (as Marcion,
                  Marcion & Manichaeus hereſie.
                   & Manichaeus the heretikes haue heretofore helde) the one good, creator and aucthor of all good, and of the light, whome they called by the name of truth; the other wicked, aucthor of al euil,The religion of the Indians touching the ſoules departure out of the bodie. reſembling him to darkenes and ignorance. And Martir intreating of the Weſt Indies, declareth that a certaine old man of the ſame countrie, praying the firſt diſcouerer of them to behaue himſelf courteouſly, ſhewed him, that the ſoules of men departing their bodies, paſſed by two wayes, as alſo Philemon, and Plato in his Phedon, and tenth booke of his Common wealth hath written. The one darke and obſcure, thorough which the ſoules of all cruell men wade grieuouſly tormented; The other ſhining, & cleare,

full of all happineſſe, ordained for thoſe that loue peace, trueth, and quietnes. This the holie ſcripture ought more deepely to impreſſe into vs, hauing beene hitherto verie yl conſidered of the Spaniardes, who for hauing exerciſed all their crueltie, and inhumanitie which they were able to imagine againſt the poore Indians,
                  The crueltie of the Spanyardes. for the moſt part haue ended their liues moſt miſerably, as ſuch as haue entreated of this hiſtorie more at large declare: and that the ſame Spaniards counterfaiting as though they would inſtruct them in the trueth, thorough their wicked life and exceſſe, haue moſt eſtranged them from it, and of a moſt populous countrie, made a moſt horrible deſert. This trueth is called a vertue, becauſe they that vſe to tel the trueth doe loue it,Trueth called a vertue. and ſhee hath ſuch a force, that whereſoeuer ſhee is ſeene, ſhee cauſeth her ſelfe to be the rather deſired and loued. Now, ſince that our Creator, of his pure grace, performeth all the promiſes, which he hath made vnto vs, in the trueth whereof conſiſteth our aſſurance, and ſaluation, wee likewiſe ought to make good whatſoeuer in our chriſtian profeſsiō we haue promiſed to him, ſeruing for nought els then our owne good, quiet, and happineſſe. And leauing all togither the Philoſophers dalyings touching the true marke and knowledge of the trueth, nor reſpecting their opinions, who haue doubted of all things,Common ſenſe. and helde for certaine that no man knew ought, ſeeing how ſenſeleſſe they were, we wil wholie cleaue to common ſenſe, the onely meane betweene the ſenſes and vnderſtanding, and will thinke that reaſonable, which we haue ſeene, heard, taſted, and felt, and ſo haue recourſe to ech one in his ſcience,The Sunne 166 times greater than the earth, 6545 times greater than the Moone. l. 2. ca. 3. contra academ.
                   as Lawyers and others, yeeld to Phiſitions in their arte, and runne to Aſtrologians when they woulde vnderſtande by what meanes the Sunne is one hundred threeſcore & ſixe times greater than the earth, and ſixe thouſande, fiue hundred and fiue and fourtie times greater than the Moone, albeit there be no appearance thereof at all: And wil wholly followe the rules and maximes of Diuines, who thorough the verie worde of God declare his will & infallible trueth. And herein it behoueth vs to ſhunne two faults, which S. Auguſtine doeth thinke greatly hindereth the knowledge of the trueth, to wit deſperation & preſumption. But moſt eſpecially to haue a great deſire to knowe it, as a treaſor and true ſcience,
                     Prou. 2. according to the exhortation of Salomon.
                  
And humby beſeeche at Gods handes, that wee may learne and vnderſtande it: and let vs bende our ſelues thereto by readinge of good bookes, and frequenting of Sermons and honeſt companie, not imagininge wee ſee more then in deede wee doe ſee, following the leſſon of our Sauiour to the Scribes and Phariſees, in the ninth of Saint Iohn, and in the Chapter going before, where he ſayde to his diſciples: If you continue in my worde,
                  
                     Iohn. 8.32. 
                  you verilie are my diſciples, and ſhall knowe the trueth. So muſt wee heare the worde of God, as beleeuing it and perſeuering therein. For thorough faith is our entrance thereto. In this reſpect ſpake Saint Peter in the name of the whole, in the ſixth of Saint Iohn: Maſter, to whome ſhall wee goe, thou haſt the wordes of eternall life?
                  
                     Iohn. 6.68. 
                  And wee beleeue and knowe that thou art the Chriſte, the ſonne of the liuinge God. Saint Auguſtine likewiſe is of opinion that mans minde giuen to vice, cannot be capable of the trueth.S. Auguſtine. Some haue writen that Saint Peter ſayde,Hovv the trueth appeareth. that God did not couer nor hyde the trueth vnder a mountaine, to the ende that none, but ſuch as toyled farre for her, might finde her. But as with the heauens he hath enuironed the earth and the hilles, ſo hath he couered the trueth with the vayle of his charitie, whereby whoſoeuer will knocke at the heauenly dore, might eaſily enter in. Therefore it is a matter neceſſarie, that who ſo will loue the trueth, muſt firſt knowe her, and louing her, ſearch her out, and ſearching her, muſt knocke at the gate of the heauenly loue, our Sauiour hauing promiſed, that Aske and it ſhalbee giuen you,
                  
                     Matth. 7.7. Tvvo principall partes in man. 
                  Seeke and you ſhall finde, knocke and it ſhalbe opened vnto you. And thoſe of olde time haue ſet downe two principall partes to be eſpeciall in man, to wit, his vnderſtanding, and his will: which beeing once corrupted, turne him cleane from the waye of trueth, and leadeth him into an infinite number of diſcommodities and errours:
               And all good things haue this nature and propertie, that they be deſirous not onely to bee knowen, but likewiſe to bee beloued, and coueted; and the vnderſtanding doth ſerue as a meanes to affection, to ſhewe what it ſhoulde moſt of all purſue, as hereafter wee will more at large declare.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. II. The definition of the trueth and faith.
               
                  
                  VVhat truth is.
                  
                     CIcero writeth that the trueth cauſeth vs to ſpeake aſſuredlie without chaunging of oughte which hath beene, is, or ſhall bee: and that it is a vertue thorough which wee are enclined to ſpeake no otherwiſe then as wee thinke. The which definition Sainct Augustine followed in his Booke of true Religion, addinge it further to bee a true ſignification of the voyce:
                     Pſa. 119.105 2. Pet. 2.19. Iohn. 5.39. it is taken for the Goſpel, and the woorde of God, the which as Dauid, and Sainct Peter ſaieth, is A lanterne to our feete, and a light, that ſhineth in a darke place. And our Sauioure ſaieth, that this trueth ſhall deliuer vs from the Worlde, ſinne, and Diuell, through faith, which wee haue in him, beeing giuen vs from God, for righteouſneſſe,
                  2. Cor. 1.30. 
                  and ſanctification, and redemption, who came into the worlde to accompliſhe the trueth of the promiſes of God; who is as Sainct Paul ſaieth,2. Tim. 6.16. Iohn. 3.16. 
                  A light that none can attaine vnto, to the which Chriſte Ieſus doeth guide vs being the cleereneſſe of the worlde, and his reconciliation. It is likewiſe taken for an inwarde integritie, and a rule teachinge to liue well accordinge to the holye will of God. And when Ezekias deſired there might bee trueth in his dayes,
                     Iſaiah. 39.8. it is interpreted, that thereby hee meant the continuaunce of a quiet and peaceable ſtate.
               And as the trueth conformeth wordes, according to the meanyng of the hearte, ſo doeth faith in the promiſes, beeing a vertue which maketh our deedes aunſwerable to our promiſes,Faith. and a habite through which wee are enclined to perfourme whatſoeuer wee haue promiſed. And our Sauiour in the Goſpel of Sainct Matthewe, ſaying, that the weightie matters of the Lawe conſiſted in iudgement, mercie and fidelitie, by this word of fidelitie,
                     Math. 23.23. meant a trueth, farre from anie diſguiſing, and treacherie.
               And the Romanes in old time dedicated a temple to Faith, the better to cauſe the people to keepe and reuerence it. I leaue to the Diuines the definition of Faith, which conſiſteth in the ſubſtance of that we hope for, and in the knowledge of the good will of God towards vs,
                     Iohn 6. & 8. Heb. 11.1. of our reconciliatiō & iuſtification founded vpon the promiſes freely giuen vnto vs in Chriſt Ieſus which quickneth

the ſoule, and purifieth the heart,
                     Act. 15.9. Gal. 4.6. Epheſ. 1.4. Act. 19. Rom. 8.1. 1. Cor. 13.2. 2. Theſ. 1.3. Mat. 6.8. Ioh. 14.1. maketh vs the children and ſonnes of God, cauſeth in vs a deſire to walke holie and vnblamable, taketh away the poyſon, & abateth the ſting of death, and engendreth within vs an amendment of life, readie obedience, and loue towardes God and our neighbour, giueth vnto vs the hope of eternal life, and of obtaining what we ask at Gods hands, rendreth our conſcience peaceable, maketh vs to perſeuere in the good, giueth vnto vs a boldnes to addreſſe our ſelues to the throne of grace, bringeth with it ſelfe a conſtancie and pacience in all aduerſities, and comforteth vs cleane remouing away all feare, anguiſh, & vexation of minde. For this cauſe God is called by S. Paul in the beginning of his ſecond Epiſtle to the Corinthians: The God of mercie and conſolation.
                  2. Cor. 1.3. Ephe. 6.16 And in the ſixth to the Epheſians, he doth exhort vs, to take vpon vs the ſhielde of faith, wherewith we may quench all the fierie dartes of the wicked.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 3. Properties of the truth and how much it is requiſite in a Prince, and Clergie.
               
                  SAint Paul recommendeth this trueth vnto vs as an eſpeciall and principall part of the armour required to be worne by a Chriſtian Knight,
                     Epheſ. 6.14 and as a bulwarke againſt all aſſaults. And moſt excelent is that ſaying in the 8. chapter, of the propheſie of Zecharie,
                  
                     Zechar. 8.16. Epheſ. 4.15. where hee exhorteth, Euerie man to ſpeake the trueth vnto his neighbour: and as the bodie bereft of the ſoule, is nought elſe then ſtinking carrion, ſo man depriued of this trueth, is no better then a verie infection, and filthie carkaſſe.Plato. For this cauſe Plato in his commonwealth, ordained for a lawe that aboue all thinges,
                     Zenophon. A king to be faithfull. Ariſtotle.
                   the truth might be preſerued. And Xenophon bringing in a good Prince vnder the perſon of K. Cyrus, requireth eſpecialy that he be founde true. This was alſo the firſt leſſon which Ariſtotle taught Alexander the great.
                     Iſaiah. 32.1. And Iſayah ſetteth downe a King to reigne in Iuſtice, and a Prince to rule in Iudgement, being as an hiding place from the winde, and as a refuge for the tempeſt. And a byſhop

of Cologne,
                  
                     Fredericke emperoure. declared to Fredoric the Emperour, that the bare worde of a Prince ought to be of as great weight, as other mens othes, and that the trueth ought to bee his chiefeſt ornament. The aunſweare which Charles the fift Emperour,
                     Charles the 5 emperoure. made vnto ſuch as would haue perſwaded him by no meanes to ſende backe Luther,
                  Chriſt Ieſus the ſonne shining of iuſtice. being come vnto him vnder his ſafe conduit, is greatly praiſed, ſaying that though the performance of promiſes were cleane baniſhed the face of the earth, yet it ſhould be kept by an Emperour.
                     Iohn 14.6. Iohn 8.45. Our Sauiour alſo in manie places of the Euangeliſtes, commaundeth vs in any wiſe to keepe truth, and nameth himſelfe the ſonne of Iuſtice, and the eſſentiall truth. On the other ſide the Diuell is called a lyer,The Diuell a father of lies. and the father thereof: to the end that euerie one, abyding in God, who is the ſoueraigne good, and hauing him for a father, Lorde, Sauiour, and Protectour, might be founde true: and that we ſhould not ſerue ſo wicked a murtherer, and cruell deceauer, as Sathan, and that we ſhoulde abhor lying,
                     Iob. 24.13. with which he onely ſerueth his turne to extinguiſh the light of the truth, the onely life of the ſoule. And Iob ſayth, that the wicked abhor the light, they knowe not the wayes therof, nor continue in the pathes thereof. The Catholique Church is likewiſe called of S. Paul,
                  1. Tim. 3.15. Lactantius,
                   
                  The pillar and grounde of trueth. And Lactantius calleth it the fountaine of trueth, houſe of faith, and temple of God, into which who ſo doth not enter is cleane ſhut vp from anie hope of eternall life. For out of her is there no ſaluation to be found, but euen as it fared with them, that were without the Arke of Noah in the time of the flood.
                     Gen. 7.21. And our religion hath beene founded vppon faith, which dependeth of this truth which alone hath much more vertue than Cicero would attribute to Philoſophie, as in caſting out of ſpirits, remouing vaine ſolitarineſſe,Cicero. deliuering vs from luſts, and chaſing away all feare. For ſhe teacheth vs the true ſeruice of God, how to worſhippe his mightineſſe, admire at his wiſedome, loue his bountie, truſt vnto his promiſes, and rule our life according vnto his holie will. She cleareth and giueth light vnto the courſe of reaſon thorough the knowledge of thinges: and guideth our will vnto the true good and taketh away the clowdes of our vnderſtanding, as it is ſaide the North winde doth in the ayre. And wee daylie ſee, that the afflicted and wretched innocent taketh his greateſt comfort in

that the trueth is of his ſide. And this truth cauſeth that parte of our vnderſtanding wherein reaſon lyeth, to rule, and our will,To vvhat the doctrine of the lavve tendeth. affections and like partes willingly obey thereto and ſuffer themſelues to be gouerned therby. And we may the rather be termed men, in neare approching to God our patron. For all the doctrine of the lawe,
                     Deut. 6.14. tendeth to ioyne man through holineſſe of life vnto his God, & as Moyſes in Deutronomy ſayth to make him leane vnto him.Hovv man becommeth happie. For neither the worlde nor anie other creature can make man happie, but he alone which made him man. And thorough this truth are we deliuered from falſe opinions and ignorance, and in al actions ſhe is the light to guide vs frō ſtumbling, and bringeth foorth all vertues. And ſince that the end of Grammer is to ſpeake aptly and agreeably; and the end of ſpeech, ſocietie: of Rhethoricke to carrie all mens mindes to one opinion:The ende of all artes. And of Logicke to finde out a truth amidſt manie falſhoodes: all other artes doe likewiſe tende to this trueth. And let vs make our ſenſes to ſerue our vnderſtanding and that vnderſtanding of ours to ſerue him by whom it is, and doth vnderſtand. And ſince this truth is a light, her propertie is to chaſe away the darkeneſſe, blindneſſe, and ignorance of our vnderſtandings: and to reioyce and comfort vs, as the ſunne riſing doth to Pilgrims,
                     Ioh. 3.19. except they be ſuch as our Sauiour ſpoke of, who loue darkeneſſe more then the light, which maketh vs to perceaue what hath beene hidden from vs. And men are more afraide to do amiſſe by day, then by night, and we are better able to guide our ſelues, and can yeelde a better teſtimonie of what we haue ſeene, as our Sauiour ſayde in S. Iohn, we ſpeake that we knowe, and teſtifie that we haue ſeene.
                  
                     Iohn 3.11.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 4. Extremities in the truth, and how men may ſpeake of themſelues, and of that which they vnderſtande, and that men ought not to publiſh anie writing, but of their owne inuention and to ſome purpoſe nor to attribute to themſelues the honour of a thing well done.
               
                  SInce that this trueth is approued to be a vertue,All vertues holde a meane. ſhe ought to hold a mediocritie, & to be ſet betweene two vitious extremities of either too little, or too much, as it is ſaide of the reſt of the vertues, which make them ſelues more apparaunt in gayning vnto

themſelues by thoſe actions which conſiſt in the middeſt of two contrarie vices, as doeth the true tune among diſcords. The exceſſe and ouerplus ſhal proceede of arrogancie, pride, vaunting, diſdain, & inſolencie. The defect in diſſembling, when one ſpeaketh leſſe then in deede is, & ſo wandreth from the trueth, which reckoneth things ſuch as they are in deede, without cauſing any variance betweene the heart and the tongue, as if one ſhoulde fit himſelfe with a garment which is neither bigger, nor leſſe then it ought to be.
                     Democritus ſpeache. 
                  Democritus likewiſe ſaide, that ſpeach was but a ſhadowe of the effect, as if he would haue ſaide, that it ought ſimply to follow the plaine meaning. And as Euripides wrote: ſpeache agreeing with the trueth,Euripides. is ſingle, plaine, without colour, or counterfait. And the light which aſsiſteth it, is a demonſtration which manifeſteth, whatſoeuer is obſcure, diſcouereth the originall,
                     Plato. Methode. the ende, the vniting, and difference of two extremities. And Plato called a Methode, a fire ſent from heauen, which giueth the light that maketh the trueth knowen. Phocion was praiſed,Phocion. becauſe in fewe wordes he comprehended much matter; for ſith that all diſcourſe conſiſteth in wordes and the ſubiect: the wordes haue no place at all if you take away the ſubiect; nor the matter or ſubſtance hath any ſhewe without the ſpeach. For wee read in Eccleſiaſticus,
                  Eccleſiaſt. 
                  that the mouth of the wiſe is in their thought: for wee are to conſider, wherefore wee ſpeake, before what perſons,VVhat in ſpeach is to be conſidered. and in what time and place. And it ſeemeth that the truth doeth leſſe varie from the defect, and the ouerlitle extremitie eſpecially when a man ſpeaketh of himſelfe, as Salomon exhorteth vs to let another praiſe vs.
                  
                     Prouerb. 27.2 And we muſt take heede leaſt led thorough glorie and ambition wee be readie to giue that vnto our ſelues, which we ought to receiue from other: if it be not to turne aſide a reproch, or that occaſioned by the time, wee might the rather encourage and giue hart to youth, and pricke them forwardes to enterpriſe and atchieue, matters of vertue, & ſuch things as are praiſeworthie, and then, ſpeake of our ſelues the moſt modeſtly that we are able, not meant hereby that wee ſhould conceale ſuch benefits as we haue receiued from others.
                     Auguſt. vpon the Pſalm. 85 As Saint Auguſtine in like ſort reproued not the Chriſtians for attributing ſome holineſſe vnto them ſelues, ſo long as it proceeded not from pride and vaine boaſting, but only with intent

to acknowledge the benefites,Not to be vnthankfull for benefites receiued. and yeelde due honour vnto him which imparted his holineſſe vnto vs. And to the end we ſhould not be vnthankfull, wee ought to confeſſe ſuch good turnes as we receiue, and eſpecially at their handes, that for our aduancement beſtoweth them on vs. And they haue beene euer blameworthie, who like Aeſops Crowe dreſſe themſelues with other byrdes fethers, which being taken back againe of the right owners, they remaine all bare; as wee ſee in ſundrie writers of our time, who in their bookes ſet foorth manie leaues, whereof other men be the true aucthors, not perceiuing the difference of the excellencie of others writings, howe it cauſeth that which is their owne due, to looke with a pale and wanne countenance, neuer acknowledging ought to them by whome they haue been ſo much helped, albeit it be a great parte of honeſtie,
                     Plin. in his nat, hiſt. (as Plinie wrote to Veſpaſian) to confeſſe thoſe by whome we receiue profit. To this purpoſe I mought alledge, that which Vitruus wrote how Ptolomie, hauing ſet vp a moſt ſumptuous Librarie in Alexandria,
                  The Lybrarie of Ptolomie.
                   and furniſhed it with more then ſeuen hundred thouſand volumes, and proclaimed great rewardes to thoſe which ſhould make of the beſt inuention: ſixe of the Iudges awarded the price to thoſe, which were moſt pleaſing to the people, but the ſeuenth which was Ariſtophanes, adiudged it vnto another, and ſhewed, that he alone deſerued the priſe, hauing compoſed al of his own inuention, and that the reſt did but repeate what they had learned out of other aucthors, whereof he brought a booke of the ſame Lybrarie. Which was afterwarde approued by the king and the reſt of the Iudges. It becommeth one as yll, to ſpeake of matters hee vnderſtandeth not;Not to ſpeake of vvhat a man doth not vnderſtand. as one day Appelles aunſwered frankely to a great Lorde, diſcourſing in his ſhop about the arte of paynting. The children ſaith he, who grindeth colours, as long as thou heldeſt thy peace, beheld thee attentiuelie, as wondring at thy braue apparel; but ſince they haue heard thee ſpeak, they begin to laugh & mocke at the diſcourſes, which thou haſt made touching the ſhadowing of a picture, and matters which thou haſt neuer learned. He ſaide as much to a ſhoomaker, paſſing the controlment of his pantable. And the carpenter Apollodorus to Adrian the Emperour, ſpeaking of Architure. And a Muſitian to Antigonus diſcourſinge of Muſicke. And the wiſe

Captaines, haue euer obſerued for a rule, not to attribute all the praiſe vnto themſelues, but to God or their companion. As it is written of Titus the Emperor, & one Piton Fuius, who being praiſed for a victorie, he had obtained, anſwered, that it proceeded from god, who made his hands but the inſtrument to ſerue him. Plutarque writeth as much of Timoleon & in the life of Sylla, howe the gods were angrie with Timotheus an Athenian Captaine, becauſe he attributed his victories to his own wiſedom, and afterwards cauſed al his actions to goe cleane topſie turuie. Amaſias puffed vp with pride for the victorie he obtained againſt the Idumeans, now hit acknowledging it to proceede from God, & careleſſe of the Prophets reprehending him,2. Chr. 25.17. prouoked the King of Iſrael, of whom he was ouercome, taken, pilled & ſlaine. The like happened to Manaſſes & Amon. We read likewiſe that Minos, Zoroaſtes,
                  Lavves and pollicy ordayned from God. 
                  Trimegitus, Carondas, Licurgus, Solon, Draco, Numa, and other lawgiuers, haue euer fathered their lawes vpon ſome God, the better to haue them in aucthoritie, nature teaching them that it apertained to God alone, to dedicate their ſeruice, & that otherwiſe the lawes would not be obſerued, and the wit of man is too feeble, & his reaſons too ſhort to attaine vnto it. They in like ſort who attribute vnto themſelues the glorie of any vertue, diminiſh ſo much from the bountie & liberalitie of God, & doe not beare that loue, honor, & reſpect vnto him, which is due. The which the ordinarie words in the Bible haue taught vs, that God giueth them into our hands; God is our victorie, he is a like ſtrong in great or ſmall number, The Lord wil deliuer vs. The ſame doeth the wiſe man write Prou. 16. The anſwere of the tongue is of the Lord, and the Lord doth direct the ſteps of man,
                  
                     Pro. 16.2.9. Phil. 2.13. 2. Cor. 3.8, 
                  who worketh in vs both the will & the deede, & al our ſufficiencie is from him, as S. Paul ſaith Phil. 2. 2. Cor. 3.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. V. Of faining and diſſembling.
               
                  Counterfayting. Diſſembling.
                  TO faine and diſſemble, was euer condemned by Aquillius lawe, like lying and deceite, as the ciuil law and Cicero declare it to be: and haue euer been eſteemed parts vnworthie of a man to make ſemblance of one thing, & execute another. As Guichardin
                  
wrote of Pope Alexander 6. that hee neuer did,
                     Alexander 6. Duke of Valentinois his ſonne. what hee ſaid; and of the duke of Valentinois his ſonne, that he neuer ſaide what he would do, and pleaſed themſelues in counterfaiting and diſſembling, to deceaue and falſefie their faith. And when the ſonne had cauſed certaine Princes to be murthered contrarie to his othe, the father laughing ſaide, that he plaide a right Spaniardes parte. They both dyed moſt miſerably.
                     Fredericke emperoure. 
                  Fredericke the Emperour deſyred that his counſelors would at the entring in of his court, laye aſide al counterfaiting and diſſembling. I haue learned of ſome perſons worthie to be beleeued, that Paulus Iouius,
                  Paulus Iouius. demaunded why in his Chronicle, hee fained manie thinges as falſe, and diſſembled the true, which thereby might breede his hyſtorie to be ſuſpected, aunſwered, that he did it to pleaſe his friends, and thoſe from whome hee receiued penſions and rewardes, and that the poſteritie mought eaſily giue credite to the ſame. It is called fayning to make that to be which is not, or that which is, not to bee, or to be greater than in deede it is. And it is diſſembling, to make that which is not to bee,Ariſtotle. or leſſe then it is. Ariſtotle, imputed counterfaitinge to an exceſſe of trueth, and diſſembling to the defect. The Lawyers calleth that couin, when to deceaue another, a man maketh ſemblance of one thing, and perfourmeth cleane contrarie. Saint Peter in his firſt Epiſtle exhorteth vs to lay aſide all malice, guile,
                  1. Pet. 2.1. 
                  and diſsimulation. It is not meant for al that, that euerie one, nor at al times, nor of euerie matter, ſhould ſpeake what he thinketh. For it is wiſedome not to diſcouer, but for ſome good reſpect, what we would not haue knowen; as if a man woulde preach all the giftes hee hath receiued from God, or the vice or fault which by infirmitie hee is fallen vnto, or diſcouer to euerie one the ſecrete of his minde, he ſhoulde bee counted but a dizard. Euerie counterfaiting done to the ende to deceiue an other is reprooued; but if it bee to conceale a good counſell, fearinge leaſt it might bee preuented, then is it not to bee blamed, neither is it alwayes requiſite to make manifeſt what wee doe conceaue. Which hath cauſed ſome Emperours and Kinges to ſaye, that hee who cannot diſſemble, ſhall neuer raigne proſperouſly. And the olde prouerbe meaneth the ſame, that whatſoeuer is in the heart of a ſober man, is founde in the tongue of a drunkarde.

Our Sauiour in the goſpell made as though he would haue gon further,
                     Luke, 24.28. 1. Sam. 21.13. Great perſonages haue fayned them ſelues madde but it was to ſtir vp the burning deſire of his diſciples. And Dauid faygned himſelfe mad to eſcape the handes of King Achys. And ſo haue they written of Solon, Brutus, and other verie great perſonages.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 6. That the deede ought to be correſpondent to the worde, and to flie hypocriſie.
               
                  Speache a shaddovve of deades.
                  SInce therefore that ſpeech is but a ſhadow of deedes, there muſt be ſuch an vnitie as that there be founde no difference at al, for it is a verie great guile to ſpeake otherwiſe then the heart indeede thinketh. The Emperours Tiberius,
                  Emperoures of dubble hearte. 
                  Calligula, Nero, Domitian, Commodus, and ſome others, among an infinite number of vices wherwith they were poſſeſſed, were moſt of al blamed becauſe their heart was double, doing cleane contrarie to that they ſayd, and making a ſhewe in the beginning of their raigne to loue the trueth,Pertinax ſurnamed Chreſtologus. did moſt of all corrupt it, by their vices, and enormities. The Emperour Pertinax was likewiſe ſurnamed Chreſtologus, that is to ſay,Tiberius: wel ſpeaking but ill doing. And Dion wrote of the ſaide Tiberius (who was ſo called of a ſtreame defiled and ſtayned with bloud) that he was wont to ſay that one ought not to knowe the will of a Prince, and that he ſhould ſhewe good countenance to ſuch, whoſe death he ment to practiſe. Theſe men reſemble thoſe which rowe in a galley, who albeit that they looke towardes the hinder part, & beate the waue towards it, yet doe they altogither driue forwards the noſe. And the Diuines vpon the 32. Pſalme, and other places,Speake. ſhew that the analogie of this worde Speake, in the Hebrewe phraſe, importeth a ſignification both of ſpeaking and thinking, to declare that we ought not to ſpeake otherwiſe then we thinke,Homer. Othon 4. Frederic. 2. Innocent. 3.
                   as Homer did write of Vlyſſes, that his ſpeach proceeded from his heart; At what time Othon the fourth, and Frederic the ſecond, contended for the Empire, Pope Innocent the thirde made faire wether with them both, and neuer the leſſe

made a verie ſolemne and eloquent oration of the agreement and vnitie which ought to be among Chriſtian Princes: but a citizen of Rome preſumed to aunſweare him, Holie father, your wordes ſeeme to be of God, but your deedes and practiſes which thereto are ſo contrarie, ſurely proceede from the diuell.Guychardyne. 
                  Guychardin and others write of certaine Popes that they bended al their forces, to nouriſh thorough ſundrie ſleightes and diſsimulations, the Princes in diſſention, and that they were more politique, then good, and vnder a colour of procuring peace, ſet them worſe together by the eares. As Cicero ſaide of Auguſtus, when hee made as though he would not accept the Empire,Auguſtus. that his honeſt orations were not correſpondent to his diſhoneſt deliberation. And if the ſpeech of a Philoſopher, as it is written, is a lawe which men voluntarilie ſet before themſelues, to make their life conformable and aunſwerable to his doctrine, we Chriſtians, which profeſſe the true Philoſophie and holineſſe, as S. Peter hath written, ought to ſhun the two extremities of too much or too little, and followe the meane which is to doe well, and ſpeake accordingly, vſinge our wordes, as garments well beſytting the bodie.VVhy the Lacedemonians banished Cheſiphon.
                   The Lacedemonians baniſhed one Cheſiphon, for that hee vaunted that hee could diſcourſe a whole day long of anie theame, that was put vnto him: becauſe that ſpeech ought to be ſo precious a treaſure, as Heſiodus ſayde, that it is not to be vſed,Hipocriſie, an enimie to the trueth. but for neceſſitie. Hereupon will I not forget to declare howe daungerous an enemie hypocriſie is to the truth. For yeelding an apparaunce, and opinion of all truth and holineſſe, it is inwardly cleane contrarie, and diſguyſing and cloaking it ſelfe with a ſhewe of truth, it is within full of all wickedneſſe, coſinage and deceite. And as Plato wrote, it is a moſt extreeme iniuſtice, of him who maketh ſhewe to be iuſt, and is not ſo.Diſſembled equitie double iniquitie. And Saint Auguſtine writeth that diſſembled equitie is double iniquitie. For this cauſe the Lacedemonians condemned one that did open pennance, wearing hearecloth vppon his skin for that thereby they diſcouered his hypocriſie, in as much as it was wouen with pourpure. As Alexander ſaide to Antipater that outwardly hee ware a white garment but it was lyned with purple. And it ſeemeth that ſuch men woulde make God a meane of their deceite, who beholdeth the heart, and the pureneſſe thereof.1. Sam. 16.7. And for this cauſe are they often

puniſhed. The holie Scripture doth oft times call them paynted ſepulchers, deceauers, wolues, and eſteemeth worſe of them then of publicans and ſinners. A man might compare them to the Pottes of the Apothicaries which carie an inſcription in the front, of manie remedies and excellent drogues, but within there is eyther nought auaileable, or elſe peraduenture ſome poyſon which our Sauiour reproched the Phariſes with, that they clenſed the outſide, but within was full of rauening, and iniquitie. And God in the 29. of Iſaiah ſayth: This people commeth neare vnto mee with their mouth,
                  
                     Iſaiah. 29.13. 
                  and honour mee with their lippes, but haue remoued their heart farre from me, and their feare towarde me was taught by the preceptes of men. The ſame did he caſt in the Iewes teeth, Matth. 15. Mar. 7. and in the 48. of Iſaiah, You turne your ſelues from me, and make mention of me but not in truth nor righteouſneſſe. It is not without cauſe written in Iob, The hypocrites hope ſhall periſh, his confidence alſo ſhall be cut off,
                  
                     Iob. 8.13. 
                  and his truſt ſhall be as the houſe of a ſpider. Neither was it ill pictured of him, who in the right hand put a tongue, and in the left drewe a long a heart. All deceites are likewiſe proper, as Seneca writeth, to a baſe and miſcheeuous minde, and to be deteſted of an honeſt man. I would deſire euerie one that meaneth to eſtrange himſelfe from hypocriſie to conſider,The dutie of mā tovvards God. his debt vnto his creator, to wit, to imploye himſelfe, and whatſoeuer is giuen vnto him, our being, our life, our ſenſes, our ſpeech, our actions, brieflie all that wee haue in vs, or without vs for his ſeruice. And that contrariwiſe we turne all things to our ſelues as to their end. And if we make a regyſter of our life, what part thereof we giue to God to whom all is dewe? And ſee howe much we are mooued, if a body doe but ſpeake euill of our friend, and neuer regard nor care for blaſphemies againſt God, or iniuries againſt our neighbour being his image? We deſerue to be called the children of the earth, as they were woont to call baſtardes. For we doe followe earthly thinges, deſpiſing the ſpirituall, for which we were created. We muſt not thinke it ſtrange,Diogines. if the Philoſopher toke a light at noone day to ſeeke a man in the midſt of a preſſe, for the greateſt part ſerue to vanitie and leaſing, and no whit obey vertue. And if our eye ſight could but enter ſo farre, we ſhould finde manie ſauage beaſtes hidden in ſome men, which make ſemblance to bee vertuous, and yet

will not confeſſe their fault to the Phiſition, who by their confeſſion ſhould the nearer approch to iuſtice, according to the opinion of Ariſtotle, the Diuines, and other auncient writers, which ſay, that the confeſsion of ſinne, is the remedie thereof. S. Baſill prayſed the aboue ſayde opinion of Plato,
                  Confeſsion of ſinne a remedie. Ad pop. ho. 24. Pſal. 32.2. touching the vniuſt that counterfayted to be iuſt, and blamed that ſayde in Euripides that he rather deſired to ſeeme good then to be. Dauid after he had declared the happineſſe of them whoſe ſinnes the Lorde had pardoned and couered, addeth thoſe in whoſe ſpirite there is no guile nor hypocriſie, with which that faith which reſteth in the heart, not in bare countenance, hath no acquaintance.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 7. That thoſe which loue the truth ſhould ſhewe it by good workes, and of the meanes which doe leade vs thereunto, and of thoſe which are farre from it.
               
                  OVr Sauiour ſayeth,
                     Iohn. 18.37. that they which are of the truth heare his voice, & ſo conſequently obey him; And ſaint Iohn in his firſt Epiſtle after hauing ſhewed our inclination to ſinne, and that our ſauiour Chriſt Ieſus offred himſelfe for our deliuerance, and that he is our aduocate, and alſo that faith in the mercie of God, is ioyned with a loue and obedience, he addeth that he wrote thoſe things vnto them, that they ſinne not, and he that ſayth he knewe God, and doeth not keepe his commaundementes is a lyer,1. Iohn, 2.1. and the trueth is not in him. For as Paul writeth, we are deliuered from ſinne, to the end we ſhould liue to righteouſneſſe;
                     Rom. 6.18. and their ſinnes are forgiuen that acknowledge and confeſſe them, deteſting and ſhunning them, and hope for life eternall. And to this end as well the law as the goſpell tendeth that we liue no more in ſinne, but enforce our ſelues to followe truth, righteouſneſſe, and holineſſe. Yea the verie worlde was created for the vſe of men, that thereby they might glorifie God. The promiſſes were giuen, and Chriſt Ieſus came into the worlde to the ende that by participating his ſo great benefites, we ſhould learne to obey God, whoſe people we

are, called of him in his Church, that euerie one ſhould knowe how to poſſeſſe his veſſell in holineſſe and honour, and not in the luſt of concupiſcence, being iuſtified through him to the end we ſhould ſerue thorough righteouſneſſe, and not defile our bodies, being his temple. For The eyes of the Lorde (ſayth Ieremie) are vpon the truth.
                  1. Theſſ. 4.4. 1. Cor. 6.19. Ieremiah. 5.3 Iames. 2.20. S. Iames writeth, that they abuſe themſelues, who boaſt that they haue faith, and ſhewe it not by their good workes. S. Paul alſo requireth that faith that worketh thorough charity, for as much as the ſonne of God appeared, to the ende that they which are his ſhould be clenſed of all their filthineſſe: and required ſuch diſciples, who renouncing them ſelues ſhoulde followe him, not ſearching any more their owne pleaſure, but to obey God, and diſpoſe them ſelues, to pacience, long ſuffering, and all vertues. And we haue beene deliuered from the bondage of ſinne,
                     Luke. 1.75. to the end we ſhould walke before God all the daies of our life in in holineſſe, and righteouſneſſe. And the grace of God that bringeth ſaluation vnto all men, hath appeared vnto vs, and teacheth vs that we ſhould deny vngodlineſſe and worldly luſt, and that we ſhould liue ſoberly and righteouſly, and godly in this preſent worlde, looking for the bleſſed hope and appearing of the glorie of the mightie God,
                  
                     Titus 2.11. 
                  and of our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt. We be the temples of the holy ghoſt which we muſt not defile, we are conſecrated and dedicated to God, and are not our owne, nor darkeneſſe, but light in God, and therefore we ought to walke as children of the light, and to liue and die to the Lorde to whom we appertaine. And our ſanctification is the will of the Lorde, to the ende we ſhould abſtaine from all naughtie deſires. And S. Iohn ſaide in his firſt Canonicall, that in this the children of light differ from the children of darkeneſſe, in that they loue one another as members of one bodie,1. Iohn.
                   and that they who haue hope of life, ſanctifie themſelues, ſince their God is holie. And if we loue God, in reſpect of the benefites which we receiue continually at his handes, and beleeue that he is our prouident father, it is vnpoſsible but we ſhould manifeſt this loue by our obedience. Dauid ſaide, Mercie is with thee O Lorde that thou mayſt be feared.
                  
                     Pſalm. 130.4. As if he woulde ſaye that the foundation of the feare of God is to knowe his great mercie. And in reſpect of the accorde, which is betweene trueth, and mercie, they haue euer beene ioyned together, as in the Pſalmes, 25.36.45.117. and

138. S. Auguſtine in his booke of confeſsions writeth, that accurſed is all our righteouſnes,De la. & vita be. 1. ch. 6. if it ſhould be examined and iudged without Gods mercie. And ſaint Ambroſe faith, that a man ſhould not glorifie himſelfe as iuſt, but in that he hath beene redeemed, not in that he was without ſinne, but in that he hath pardon for it, not that I ſhoulde aduaunce my ſelfe ouer other, but in that Ieſus Chriſt is my aduocate towardes his father, hauing ſhed his precious bloud for me: for he came into the worlde to deſtroye the workes of the Diuell, to regenerate, and iuſtifie vs: not to the end we ſhould be vnprofitable, and without fruite, but to exerciſe our ſelues in all good workes. Firſt to the ende that thorough them,The effectes of good vvorkes. and the ſhyning of our light (as our ſauiour ſayde Matth. 5.) God might be glorified, we ſtande more aſſured of our vocation and election: and our fayth the more ſtrengthned, exerciſed,2. Pet. 1.10. Mat. 5.16. 1. Timoth. 1. 2. Cor. 9.2. and embraſed as Paul wrote to Timothe 1. Cap. 1. that likewiſe our neighbours, by our good example may bee mooued and prouoked to liue well 2. Cor. 9. and that we miniſter to the neceſsities of poore Orphanes, Widowes, and ſuch as haue neede of our ſuccour, as members of one bodie. Mat. 10. & 25. and ſince that faith purifieth the heartes as S. Peter ſayth Acts. 10. what faith I praye you can they pretende, that are full of filthineſſe, enmitie and corruption? and which are puffed vp with paſsions and diſordinate affections? This faith ought to regenerate vs, and make vs newe creatures, exempting vs from condemnation, and clothing vs with the righteouſneſſe and ſpirit of Ieſus Chriſt. The which ſpirite can not abide in our heartes, but it muſt worke, that is to ſaye, that it lighteth vs, quickneth and guideth all our counſelles, thoughtes, wordes, and actions. What is faith, except we ſhewe it by our holy conuerſation, mortifying our concupiſcences, eſchewing all vice,
                     Gal. 5.22. Epheſ. 4.4. 1. Theſ. 5.22. and applying our ſelues to all vertue, not onely abſtayning from that which is euill, but from whatſoeuer carieth any ſhew thereof? Perſeuering in this exerciſe, euen vntill the ende of our life. Nowe if we haue the feare of God and a good conſcience, how commeth it to paſſe that wee doe not abhorre any more to defile our ſelues hauing beene once clenſed?
                     Cantie. 5.3. 
                  I haue waſhed my feete (ſayth the faithfull ſoule) how ſhall I againe defile them?
                  Integritie of life required in a Chriſtiā. For God hauing made an alliance with vs, mutually requireth of all his children, ſeruants and creatures, an integritie of life. And we muſt diſcouer, a melodie, and accord, betweene the righteouſneſſe of God and our obedience. And by this meanes we ratifie the adoption, through which

God hath receiued vs for his children. And holineſſe is the chaine of our coniunction which tyeth vs to God, to whome wee ought to dedicate all our life as to the aucthor thereof. And to ſay the trueth, wee abandon our creator, wantonly and diſloyally, and renownce him for our ſauiour, when wee deforme our ſelues in ſinne,
                     Col. 3.1. where wee ought alwayes to aſpire to a heauenly life, and laye aſide all earthly affections, being rayſed vppe with Christ Ieſus, as Saint Paule writeth: and euen wee denye with Ieremie that hee hath receaued the trewe knowledge of God, except we put of the olde man, which is corrupt in his diſordinate deſires, to put vppon vs the newe.
                     Phil. 4.5. And to the Philippians hee requireth, that our patient minde be knowen vnto all men. The Lorde is at hande, let not vs take care for ought,
                  2. Tim. 2.1. 
                  but that in all thinges our requeſtes may be made knowen to God by prayers, and ſupplications with giuing of thankes.
                  
                     Phil. 4.8. 
                  And the peace of God, which paſſeth all vnderſtanding ſhall keepe our heartes and ſenſes in Chriſt Ieſus. Moreouer, whatſoeuer thinges are true, whatſoeuer thinges are honeſt, whatſoeuer thinges are pure, whatſoeuer thinges pertaine to loue, whatſoeuer thinges are of good reporte, if there be anye vertue, or if there bee any prayſe, let vs thinke of theſe thinges. And hee wrote to the Corinthians in his ſeconde Epiſtle,
                     Cor. 7.1.2 
                  Since wee haue receaued the promiſſes, let vs clenſe our ſelues from all fylthineſſe of the fleſhe and ſpirite, and growe vppe vnto full holineſſe in the feare of God.
                  
                     Epheſ. 4.20. And to the Epheſians: yee haue not ſo learned if you haue beene taught by him,
                        Tit. 8.16. as the trueth is in Ieſus. And hee complayned greatly to Titus,
                  
                     Mat. 7.20. howe they profeſſed to knowe God, but by their abhominable workes denie him. And our Sauiour ſayeth in S. Matthewe that by their worke ye ſhall knowe them. For ſuch as followe not the good which they ſpeake, reſemble monſters, which haue but one mouth, and one tongue, but no feete nor handes at all. He doth therefore falſly boaſt to knowe the truth, if his life be not good and correſpondent. For the doctrine of trueth is not a doctrine of the tongue, but of life. And if for good cauſe, the Philoſophers were woont to be angrye with ſuch as made profeſſion of their art, which they called the myſtreſſe of life, and in the meane time turned it but to a ſophiſticall babling, and did euer eſteeme wicked liuers and ſuch as were couetous not worthye to ſpeake, (as the Emperours Diocleſian, and Maximian wrote, that their profeſsion and inwarde deſire belide themſelues) howe muche greater reaſon haue wee to deteſt theſe bablers, which onely content them ſelues to haue the Goſpell at their

fingers endes, and in their life, rebellious and ſeditious cleane deſpiſe the ſame? Conſidering that the power and efficacie thereof, ought to pearce the verie bottome of our heart: and from thence to bee ſhewed in all our behauiours, grace, garmentes,
                     Col. 1.10. and all other our actions and comportmentes as Tertullian did wright. We haue heretofore declared, howe we ought to haue this ende before our eyes, to tende to that perfection which God hath commaunded vs, to wit an integritie, which ſignifieth a pure ſimplicitie of the heart, voyde of all faynedneſſe, and contrarie to a double heart. Euerie one ought thus farre to walke according to his might. And it ſhall auayle much, if to daye ſurmount yeſterdaye. And beeing entered into the liſtes, we ſhould enforce our ſelues to goe out to the verie ende, aſſured to obtaine a verie greate priſe. To declare perticularlie euerie vertue, would be too tedious in this Chapter, but I will adde that which doeth moſt entertaine and delight ſome men in lying, that is: that they be too much louers of themſelues, and are verie forwarde for their particular profitte,Hinderances to the trueth. which doeth altogether blemiſhe their ſight, and hindereth them ſo as they can not conſider the will of GOD nor his promiſſes. For whatſoeuer wee deliberate, couet, and pourſue, ought to be ioyned with the good and profitte of our neighbour. And wee muſt not be ſtirred vppe nor mooued with anie picke, againſt the lawe of Charitie.Charitie. Saint Auguſtine in his firſt booke of Chriſtian doctrine writeth, that hee liueth excellently well, which the leaſt hee is able liueth to himſelfe:De doct. ch. lib. 1. car. 23. becauſe the obſeruaunce of the lawe, conſiſteth in the loue towardes God, and our neighbour. And wee reade in manie places of Cicero and others, that the better a man is, the leſſe he tendeth al his actions to his owne profit, and the more he doth ſtudie to ſerue God and his commonwealth. Plato himſelfe wrote to Architas,
                  Man is not onely borne for him ſelfe that man was borne for his parents, friends and countrey: in ſort that the leaſt part of him remaineth to himſelfe, and for this cauſe man is named a ciuill and communicatiue creature. And as S. Paule wrote, Ieſus Chriſt was borne for vs to the ende that they which liue ſhould not liue anie more vnto themſelues, but to him which dyed for them. And exhorteth vs no more to purchaſe after our owne profitte, but that which may concerne our neighbour; and that we be made rich in good workes, which he calleth a treaſure and foundation to come. In which doing we ſhall followe the pathes

of truth,
                     Nilus a bishop. and ſhalbe counted moſt happie, eſpecially if wee retire our affections from vncleanneſſe, from whence Nilus an auncient byſhop ſayde, a ſmooke proceeded which blacked the ſoule with ſowte.Tvvo ſortes of Chriſtians There be then two ſorts of Chriſtians, the one in name and profeſsion only, the other in effect. The firſt care not but for their bodie, honours, riches and pleaſure, without ought regarding the feare of God. The other with all their affection dedicate themſelues to God, at whoſe hand they take all in good parte, and deſpiſe the worlde louing God, and his woorde, and commaundementes:
                     Iſaiah 52. and of theſe Iſayah writeth that they which ſhall ſee them ſhall knowe they are the bleſſed ſeede of the Lord: and in another place he calleth a naughtie conſcience a narrowe bed, in which a man cannot well ſtretch out his bodie nor lie at eaſe, for he which hath a wounded conſcience can neuer finde out anye condition, place, or ſtate that is not too little for him, and which may anye wayes content him.
                     Pſal. 4.1. &, 119. This is the cauſe why Dauid requireth at Gods hande to ſet at large his impriſoned heart, that is to ſay that he will do him the grace, to cauſe him to haue a ſound and neate conſcience. I will not here forget that as God is honoured by the good life of the faithfull,God is blaſphemed and dishonored by our vvickednes. (according as the holy ſcripture witneſſeth) ſo is he blaſphemed, and diſhonoured thorough wickedneſſe. And there is no doubt but the behauiour of Chriſtians, haue cauſed the Turkes and Infidels euen to deteſt the true religion. Lopes a Spaniard and Beuzo a Millanneſe, and other that haue written of the hiſtorie of America and the Weſt Indies, haue beene conſtrayned to confeſſe,The crueltie of the Spaniards tovvardes the Indians. that the crueltie, couetouſneſſe, blaſphemies and wickedneſſe of the Spaniardes hath altogether alienated the poore Indians from the religion, which the ſaid Spaniards gaue out they held for true, who did not long enioye thoſe goods, which by deteſtable meanes they had there gathered. And all men write, that they were leſſe worthe then the Idolatrous Indians. The cruell handling of thoſe Indians and that which the Turke did to them of Aſia, Africa, and part of Europe, who liued as we doe, the Turke notwithſtanding being the farther,Aduertiſmēt to amende our life. are ſet before our eyes as an example: to the end that we ſhould change our ſelues, and ſeeing the behauiour of Chriſtians and their obſtinacie to vice, wee ſhoulde looke but euen for ſuch curſedneſſe and miſeries, as we reade they haue beene enwrapped and fallen into. And wee may well ſay that we touch euen neare the end of the worlde alreadie quaking and doting thorough old age, and full of the wrincles of lying: which

notwithſtanding can not obſcure the ſonne of trueth, nor take away the light of them which feare God, which ſee,Godly exerciſe. and loue the way which we ought to follow, to attaine to life eternal. And that we neede not further wander, wee muſt exerciſe our ſelues in reading of good bookes, in prayer, faſting, and workes of godlineſſe. And as Xenophon writing of the dewtie and office of an eſquire, warneth him aboue all thinges, to beſeeche at Gods hande to make, his thought, ſpeech, and deedes ſuch as ſhall be agreeable vnto him, and contentment to all his friendes, and honourable and profitable to his commonwealth without moleſting of anie man; by farre greater reaſon the Chriſtians ought to praye vnto God, without intermiſsion, that he will teach them his will, and dreſſe their pathes, to loue and feare his name. When a man ſpeaketh of good woorkes, it is thereby meant ſuch as are furtheſt from all ſuperſtition and hypocriſie, and proceede from a fayth woorking thorough charitie, and a pure heart,
                     Mat. 25 34. 2. Cor. 9.8. 1. Tim. 6.18. witneſsing the great bountie and excellencie thereof, and profiting our neighbours, referring all to the glorie goodneſſe and grace of God, which bringeth foorth in vs good fruites, and giueth vnto vs both to will and to performe as ſaint Paul ſayth, and crowneth in vs his owne workes.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 8. How much true men haue beene eſteemed and that all magiſtrates ought to be ſo, and of the riches of princes.
               
                  IN Exodus Iethro counſelled Moſes,
                  
                     Exod. 18, 21. 
                  to appoint rulers ouer the people, men of courage, fearing God,
                  VVho ought to be rulers. 
                  men dealing truely hating couetouſneſſe, and in Egypt, the chiefe magiſtrate euer carried a picture of truth, hanging at his necke. The which Amian writeth alſo of the Druydes, ſhewing that a Iudge ought to carie it in his heart, his Iudgements, and all other his actions. And the tablet hanging with two chaines vpon the heart of the high prieſt, (whereof mention is made in Exod. 28.
                     Exod. 27.30. and Numbers 3.) was called VRIM which ſignifieth light.VRIM. For the kings in all their actions of importance, demaunded counſell of God by his high prieſt, or prophets. Pythagoras, and Demoſthenes,
                  Pythagoras. Demoſthenes. eſteemed to be trewe, and to doe good to another, the two moſt excellent

thinges that were giuen from heauen to mankinde. And the ſame Pythagoras,
                  Pythagoras. being demaunded, wherein men were likeſt vnto God, aunſwered in trueth. And it was a ſufficient reaſon for any thing he ſaid to ſay, He ſaide it. And the great Thebane captaine Epaminondas,
                  Epaminondas. was moſt eſpecially prayſed becauſe he loued the truth, and neuer made lie.Pyndarus. And Pyndarus prayſed him, as he did before one Pyttacus a Tarentine,Pyrrhus. for that knowing much he ſpake little. And albeit Pyrrhus was an enimie to the Romaines, yet neuertheleſſe did he giue this prayſe vnto Fabritius,
                  Fabritius. that a man might aſſoone turne him from the truth and honeſtie, as the ſunne out of his courſe. And the chiefeſt prayſe,Bishops in time paſt. which hyſtoriographers giue to Byſhops in time paſt, is, that they neuer lyed, and in the Pſalmes, and Apocalyps,Zachar. the ſaintes were euer honored with this title, that a lye was neuer founde in their mouth. And Zacharie prayſing Ieruſalem calleth it the citie of trueth.
                  Pſal. 38.56.135. Iſaiah 54. And in the holy ſcripture, this woorde of thinke, ſay, or promiſe, is interpreted in God to doe: becauſe all which he thinketh, ſayth, or promiſeth, is ſurely executed and put in effect. Pomponius a friende of Ciceroes, was extolled, for that hee had gotten ſuch an opinion to be counted true, that euery one truſted him,Demonar. and referred himſelfe vnto him. Which was likewiſe ſaid of Demonar in the time of the Emperour Adrian. And our chronicles doe greatly prayſe king Iohn,
                  King Iohn.
                   for that he was open, neuer making ſhewe of louing him, whom in deede he did not. Titus Liuius, in the 5.Titus Liuius. booke of his fourth Decade, and fourth of his 5. made a great matter that the Romaines kept their faith exactly. And in the firſt booke of his firſt Decade he writeth, that fayth, and a ſingle othe, (all feare of lawes and chaſtiſementes not thought on) gouerned the whole Citie,Attilius Regulus. to which he attributed the courſe of all their great proſperities. Attilius choſe rather to returne backe, to tormentes and death prepared for him,
                  Antiochus. Ptolome Epiphanes. Popilius. 
                  than to breake his fayth. And when Antiochus woulde haue vſurped Aegypt, vppon Ptolomie Epiphanes, whoſe protection the Romaynes had alreadie taken vppon them, they ſent vnto him Popilius, who made a circle about the ſayde Antiochus, and conſtrayned him before hee departed to promiſe him, that he ſhould enterpriſe nothing, ouer their ſayde pupill. Wee reade of manie other kinges and commonwealthes, that in their differences, referred themſelues to the people of Rome. Cato as Plutarke hath written, hauing layde to Murena his charge,
                     Cato. Cuſtome of the Romains that he bought the voyces of the people, the better to attaine to the Conſulſhip, went here and there gathering

his profes, and according to the cuſtome of the Romaines, had on the defendants behalfe, certaine gardes, which followed him euerie where, marking what he did for the better inſtructiō of his bill; Theſe watchmē would often aske him, if that day he ment to ſearch out ought, that appertayned to his accuſation, if he ſaide no then they departed, whereuppon is growne this prouerbe, when one telleth a thing that ſeemeth ſtrange, this is not to bee beleeued, though Cato himſelfe ſhould tell it. And Plinie in his preface, deſcribeth the opinion was then had of his manhood, and innocencie, which ſayth he cauſed Cicero to crie out, O gentle Cato howe happy art thou to haue beene ſuch a one, that neuer man yet durſt preſume to ſollicite thee in any diſhoneſt cauſe, or contrarie to dutie? He writeth alſo of Scipio ſurnamed Aſiaticus,
                  Scipio Aſiaticus. for to haue ſubdued Natolie, being called before the Tribunes, Gracchus being one, whom he held for his enimie, that he had ſuch an aſſurance in his ſpeech, that his very enimies were ſufficiēt witnes of his manhood.A good aduiſe of a liar reiected. And in Lacedemon, whē there was one that was knowen to be a diſſolute perſon, and a lyar, & that he had propoſed a very profitable aduiſe, & neceſſary for that time, yet was it cleane reiected of the people. And the Ephores, hauing choſē a Senator that was very true, commanded him continually to propoſe vnto them like councell, whereby they might reſtore their cōmonwealth, as it were from an vncleane and foule veſſell, into a pure & neate. Cicero in his oration he made for Balbus, maketh mention of an honorable perſon, who being called into the Senate at Athenes, to depoſe touching ſome matter, the ſenators would by no meanes haue him take the accuſtomed othe; knowing him to be a vertuous honeſt man. Such an efficacy hath the opiniō of māhood, in a perſonage accoūted true.
                     Artabanus iudge of the controuerſie betvvene Xerxes and Ariamenes. Parlement of Paris.
                   
                  Xerxes & Ariamenes in the great controuerſie which was betweene thē for the kingdome of Perſia, referred thēſelues to their vncle Artebanus, to whoſe iudgement they ſtood. I could here recken many forraine Princes, who in time paſt haue had ſuch an opinion of the court of Parlement of Paris, compoſed of graue, learned, and reuerent counſellers, choſen according to the right and ordinances, that they haue had recourſe thyther, as to a temple of iuſtice. We read of the Emperour Frederic the ſecond,Lether money. and certaine kings of Fraunce, that they haue beene ſo greatly eſteemed of their ſubiects that in ſteede of fine gold they haue receiued lethermonie, others haue borowed great ſums with good liking, which they haue reſtored againe, as ſoone as conueniently they were able. This is

the meanes which Cirus ſheweth,Cyrus. Zonare. in Xenophon, and Zonare, to Creſus,
                  
                     VVherein a princes treaſor moſt conſiſteth.
                     King

                           
                              Francis 1.
                           
                              Henry 2.
                        
Princes trevv and keping their promiſe beloued of their ſubiectes.
                     King Pharamonde named Warmond.
                     
                   wherby they may obtaine what they wil of their ſubiects: when they haue once gayned an opinion to be accounted trew he ſayth likewiſe that their treaſors cōſiſt moſt in enriching of their friends, without caring for any other gardes. We haue ſeene, what credit by this meanes, the great kinges Francis, and Henrie, obtained thoroughout all Europe, and what loſſe and diſhonour ſuch haue receiued as both before, and ſince haue fayled of their promiſe. I will not here omit, howe Pharamonde our firſt king was named VVarmond which ſignifieth truth. And a man is not able to declare what profit, and ſolace he which is true, bringeth to euerie man, as ending of ſuits in lawe, enmities, diſcordes, and other ſeedes of miſchiefes diſperſed through a countrey, by the reuealing of the truth which he diſcouereth,Xenephon. his wordes being receiued as an oracle. And Xenophon in his ſeuenth booke of young Cirus, ſheweth that the bare worde of ſuch a man preuaileth more, then other mens conſtraint, threates or puniſhment: and gaineth more by his bare promiſe then other doe by their rewardes. He ſayth moreouer that there is no greater, nor more excellent riches eſpecially to a Prince, then vertue, iuſtice, and greatneſſe of courage, becauſe ſuch can nether want friendes, nor ought elſe.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 9. That it behooueth to keepe promiſe, with inſtruction not to make it with ones diſaduantage, and not to giue place to the importunate.
               
                  Faith
                        •
                      of princes.
                  
                     TItus Liuius, in his third booke of his firſt decade, declareth what great dammage enſueth him who breaketh his faith, and looſeth his credit; for the ſocietie of men is only maintained by dewe keeping of promiſes. And al good Princes haue eſteemed, that their authoritie,Iſocrates. puiſſaunce, and ſafetie dependeth thereon. Hereupon Iſocrates wrote to King Nicocles, that he ſhould be founde true of his worde in all his promiſes: in ſort that one ſhoulde giue greater credite to his bare worde, then to others othes. And the wiſe man writeth in the Prouerbes, that VVeldoing and fayth conſerueth a Princes eſtate, but a lying talke becommeth him not. Himſelfe is the onely preſeruour of fayth among his ſubiectes, and their debtour for iuſtice. Dion
                  
reciteth that the Emperour Marcus Antonius was wont to ſay,
                     Marcus Antonius. Faith once broken, of vvhat importance. King Attalus
                   that it was a verie lamentable thing, that a mans faith ſhould be violat or ſuſpected, without which nought can be aſſured. King Attalus in his death bed, warned Eumenes his ſonne, to eſteeme fidelitie, & the good opinion of his ſubiectes, the chiefeſt parte of the inheritance he could leaue him. And Sueton praiſed Caeſar,
                  Caeſar. for that hee kept his faith with his enimies, though they broke theirs with him For as Cicinnatus ſaid in Titus Liuius, a man muſt not offende,Cicinnatus. Auguſtus. led by an other mans example. And Dion reporteth of Auguſtus, that hauing made proclamation, that he woulde giue fiue and twentie thouſand crownes, to whoſoeuer would preſent him with one that was the ringleader of certain theeues, the ſame man preſented him ſelfe, & obtained both the crownes & his pardon. Wee reade in ſundrie places of Titus Liuius,
                  The Romans performers of their promiſes. how the Romanes were euer verie curious in maintaining their promiſe, & Polibius being a Greeke writeth of them, that their verie word was ynough among the Romans; and in Greece although they had Notaries and ſeales, oftentimes they broke their faith, for which they were grieuouſly puniſhed.
                     Ioſhua. 9, 20. And in Ioſua it is written, that he kept his faith with the deceitfull Barbarians, to the end, ſaith he, that the wrath of God ſhould not be vpō his people, becauſe of the othe which they ſware vnto him, as it afterwards fel vpon al them of the houſe of Saul, who were hanged for hauing vyolated their owne. And the Prophet writing in his Pſalmes, of ſuch conditions as the faithfull ought to be endued with inſyſteth greatly vpon this, that they keeepe their promiſe, yea, though it were to their owne hinderance. Cicero in his offices ſheweth by many examples, that ones faith is broken,VVhen faith is broken. if one doe ought to the detriment therof, what colour ſoeuer he will ſet vpon it. But that we ſhould not runne further hedlong into theſe inconueniences, Seneca wrote that he which was not able to ſet light a ſottiſh ſhame, is no diſciple of Philoſophie; Which opinion Brutus was likewiſe of as Plutarque writeth. And it is an ouergreat fault in Princes,Remedie. either not to dare to refuſe, or too lightly to agree to whatſoeuer is demaunded of them: which they ought to endeuour to refourm, by cuſtome proceeding from leſſer things, refuſing greater. It is alſo required that we promiſe not ought, which proueth not to our aduantage, or ought els that lyeth not in our power, but diligently to take heede, that we ſuffer not our ſelues to be enforced,Nice shamefaſtnes. or led with a nyce ſhamefaſtnes, which manie haue, when they dare not contrarie, or refuſe to graunt what they are required: for which

oft times they much repent themſelues,
                     Zeno. Notable examples not to grant that is vniuſt. Rutilius.
                   as Zeno wiſely did reprehend him, who was not aſhamed to require a matter both vniuſt & vnreaſonable. And Rutilius to one that found fault, that his friendſhip was ſo light ſet by, as not to bee able to obtaine his requeſt, made anſwere, But what haue I to do with thine, if thou wouldeſt enforce me to do contrarie to al iuſtice?Ageſilaus. And king Ageſilaus, ſaid to certain importunate perſons, that a man ought not to demaund at a Kings hands, ought that were vniuſt: and being intreated by his father to giue iudgement in a cauſe contrarie to right, he aunſwered him: you haue taught me from my youth to follow the lawes, I wil yet now obey you in ought not iudging againſt them.Alexander. 
                  Alexander the great made the like aunſwere to his mother, adding further, that ſhee aſked to great a recompence for hauing borne him nine monethes: and becauſe of her yl cariage of her ſelfe, when Antipater (to whom Macedonia fel) dyed, he prayed his ſubiectes (as Diodorus wrote) neuer to leaue the managyng of affaires in the hands of a womā. The Emperour Frederick ſaid to certaine his minions about him,Frederick. that were verie importunate to get into their hands ſome of the auncient Domaine of the Empire, that he rather choſe to be accounted of ſmal liberalitie,Sigiſmond. then periured. They write as much of Sygiſmond.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. X. Examples of euils happened to breakers of promiſe, and of that which dependeth thereupon.
               
                  The punishment & vengeance vpon ſuch as broke their faith.
                  THE examples of ſuch miſeries, as they haue runne into which haue not performed their promiſes, ought to make vs thinke their faultes more ſtrange, then we win for. Titus Liuius recyteth of a Dictator of Albany, who was drawne in peeces with foure horſes, for that he had broken his faith, & the citie of Albe was raſed cleane downe, and Carthage diſſolued into aſhes, and the people of Capua murthered, and kept in bondage. He maketh likewiſe mention of ſundrie oſtages giuen in pledge for the better aſſurance of ſuch treaties as paſſed thorough the Volſques, Tarentines, and others, who were executed for the breache of promiſe their people made. Zedechiah king of Iuda, hauing rebelled contrarie to his promiſe, was led captiue, after

that, his ſonnes were flaine before his eyes, and had his owne eyes put out.
                  2. Kings. 25.7 
                  Caracalla, the Emperour hauing purſued the king of Perſia,
                  Caracalla. Iuſtinian. contrary to his promiſe, was himſelfe afterward ſlaine. Iuſtinian hauing falſified his faith to the Bulgares, was ſent into baniſhment. Cleomenes,
                  Cleomenes. hauing made a league with the Argiens, ſeeing that vnder the aſſurance therof they were lulled a ſleepe, murthered and impriſoned ſome of them; neuertheles not being able to ſurpriſe the towne, which was defended by the women, ran mad, & killed himſelfe.
               The king of Hungarie Ladiſlaus, after certaine victories obtained againſt Amurates, made a moſt honorable truce, during which hee ſuffered himſelfe to be perſuaded by the Cardinal Iulian,
                  Ladiſlaus. Cardinal Iulian. Embaſſadour from Pope Eugenes to break it: which was the cauſe why the ſaid turke, had a moſt memorable conqueſt, and the ſaid Ladiſlaus togither with the chiefe of his armie, & the ſaid Cardinal, were either ſlaine outright, or ſtifeled within the mariſhes. And after ſuch time as he had thus falſified his faith, there enſued an infinit number of miſchiefes thorough out all Chriſtendome. And euen ſo went it with vs, after we had conquered Milan, and Naples, for that we obſerued not duelie the treatiſe which wee there promiſed.
               And for the like cauſe before that, happened the Scicilian Veſpers,
                  Frenchmen. and for that we rather gaue credite to Pope Clement the fourth, then to the counſel of the Erle of Flanders,
                  
                     Adrian Pope Pope Adrian tooke a ſolemne othe to obſerue the peace concluded with the Emperour Frederick, and afterwardes breaking it, as he dranke he was choaked with a flye.
                     Alexander 6. Pope. It came in like ſort to paſſe with Pope Alexander the ſixth, who tooke himſelfe ſuch poyſon as he had prepared for the Cardinals he had inuited to ſupper: And to Iulius the ſecond,
                     Iulius 2. Pope. who was wont to ſay that the treaties he concluded, was but to abuſe and ruine the one through the other. Andronicus Conneus,
                  Andronicus Conneus. cleane contrarie to his faith giuen to the infants of Emanuel, and to them of Nice, vſurped the Empire, but after ſundrie other yll happes, hee was ſoone after hung by the feete, and hewen in peeces. Loys Sforce,
                  Loys Sforce. vncle to Iohn Galleace inueſted himſelfe in the Duchie of Milan. Hee likewiſe broke his promiſe made to King Francis; He was afterwards carryed priſoner into France. Michael Paleologue, beeing choſen Emperour of the Greekes,
                  Michael Paleologue. promiſed & ſwore, that he would render vp the Empire into the hands of Iohn Laſcaris when he ſhoulde come of age, but notwithſtanding he ſtil helde it. He died miſerably, & to his poſteritie enſued an infinite number of miſchiefs, & was occaſion of the firſt beginning of the

                  Turkiſh Monarchie.
                  
                     Charles duke of Burgondy 
                  Charles duke of Burgondie, hauing violated his faith, promiſed to the Suiſſers, and before that to the Earle of S. Pol was vanquiſhed, and all yl hap accompanied him euer after. Hildebran otherwiſe named Gregorie the ſeuenth,
                     Gregorie 7. Pope. Rodolph Emperour. ſware an accorde, with the Emperour Henrie the fourth, from whome as ſoone as he was departed, he created Rodolph Emperour, who afterwards was ouercome by the ſaid Henrie; and ſeeing his hand cut off ſaid vnto the Biſhops: Beholde the hande which I did lift vp, when I made the othe of fidelitie to the Emperour. And anon after he dyed, & the ſaid Pope was depoſed & put to flight. Which ought to ſerue for an example to great perſonages to hold their promiſes. I will not here forget what we haue ſeene of our time happen to Chriſtierne king of Danemarke, who for hauing broken his faith giuen to his ſubiectes,
                     Chriſtierne king of Danemarke. was depriued his realme, and afterwardes liued miſerably, for al the ſuccours which he receiued from Charles the fift, Emperour.Richard the 3. king of England. As alſo the hiſtories recite of one Richard, who cauſed his nephewes to be murthered, and his neaces to be declared baſtardes, to make him ſelfe king of England: but he was afterwarde vanquiſhed and put to flight by one as then ſcarce knowen. I omit ſundrie examples,Boccace. ſet foorth by Boccace in nine bookes which hee wrote touching the miſaduentures of notable perſonages, which euerie one may reade. And could here touch that which Plutarch writeth of Catoes oppoſing him ſelfe,Cato. to the ſacrifices which they would make, for the victorie obtained by Caeſar, againſt the Almaines, meaning that they ought to had deliuered it for them, whome he had outragiouſlie wronged, and contrarie to the peace, they had made with the people of Rome, to the ende to caſt vppon him alone, the fault they had committed in violating their faith. And without ſearching of any further examples, thorough the folliciting of Cardinall Caraffe,
                  Cardinal Caraffe. Troubles cauſed by religion. ſent from Pope Paul the thirde, & thorough other mens ambition, was there broken a moſt honorable truce, and thereby a great warre vndertaken, which had verie yll ſucceſſe. I paſſe ouer in ſcilence the great calamities, ruynes, diſſipations, diſorders, exceſſe, loſſes, diſſolutions, ſubuerſions of ſtates, rauiſhments & miſchiefes happened in Chriſtendome ſince thirtie yeres paſt, thorough a diſpenſation, which men take, to vyolate their faith, promiſe, and Edictes. And wee haue verie great occaſion to beſeeche God that hee will giue remedie thereto, and hinder theſe defiances, euill fortunes, diuiſions, and ſtormes, which as yet are like to happen.
               
                  And albeit, that according to Bias opinion,Hovv a man may diſpenſe vvith a promiſe. 
                  no excuſe is to be receiued, to make one able to breake his promiſe, neuertheleſſe he ought not to bee accuſed for a lyar, who maye not lawfully keepe it, for ſome iuſt occaſion, afterwardes happened vnto him. As if a mad man ſhoulde demaunde the ſworde which hee had giuen another to keepe, or if a more mightie man ſhoulde oppoſe him ſelfe, or if by that means another would attempt againſt his perſon, or eſtate which did promiſe, or if thee keeping of his promiſe,Nevv matters & ſtrāge, nevv and ſtrange counſell. l. 6. de iurieur.
                   ſhould turne him to any great diſhonor, miſchiefe, errour, fraude or any other preiudice not to be recouered. For matters not alreadie in practiſe, ſtrange and newe, require a newe counſell, according to the ſaying of the lawers, who euen diſpenſe with a promiſe, after an oth taken. And often times men promiſe, with an intent to accō
                  pliſh that which lyeth not in their power, through an indiſpoſitiō, or matter fallen out of more great importance.
                     Iudges. 11.30. Alexander. L. placuit. L. de iudi. Neceſsitie the mother of diſpenſations. As the vowe and promiſe which Iephthe made, ought to be otherwiſe interpreted.
               And as Alexander did, hauing promiſed he woulde ſlaye the firſt that ſhould come out of the town, killed an aſſe in lieu of him that led her: as by equitie the rigour of a lawe is often times moderated. And auncient men haue ſaide, that Neceſsitie is the mother of diſpenſation. It is likewiſe excuſable, if any preiudice, or intereſt happen not thorough the not accompliſhing of a promiſe.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XI. Effects of the truth, with exhortation not to change the ſtatutes or lawes, and not to daunce vpon holydayes, praiſe of French men, & a ſolution of that for which they are blamed.
               
                  IF the light of the truth take frō vs the vaile which blemiſheth our iudgement,The effectes of trueth. wee ſhall modeſtly behaue our ſelues, without any colour, or diſguiſing in our wordes, habites, or anie other our actions: We ſhal knowe how we ought to render vnto God, al reuerence, obedience, truſt, prayers, actions of thankeſgiuing, and praiſe with peace in our ſpirits: and how we ought to honour, loue, ſerue and ſuccour all kind of perſons: We ſhal be readie to obey our King, his lawes and Magiſtrates, and wiſely to commaund ouer ſubiectes: wee ſhall haue ſufficient of little, magnanimitie, eaſie acceſſe, humanitie, a nature

not diſſembling nor fained, conſtancie in our counſels and enterpriſes, with a reſolution alwayes to do that which our duetie commaundeth: we ſhall not be diſſolute in pleaſures, nor inſolent in proſperitie, nor too much carried away with our paſsions: wee ſhal contemne death, and the dangers thereof, in reſpect of a better life: we ſhal loſe no hart in aduerſitie, we ſhall rightfully followe what either is to be choſen, or left, treading vpon the thornes of this life without pricking vs,
                  
                     Ezech. 2.6. 
                  and vpon Scorpions without feeling their venome, as it is written in Ezekiel. And would to God that al French men might ſo know the beautie of this trueth, that they might become amorous thereof, & altogither caſt off their lying & vnconſtancie, to the end they might no more be caſt in the teeth, with not performing their promiſes, & that the citie of Paris might of euerie one be called the citie of truth, as the Prophet Zecariah called the citie of Ieruſalem,
                  
                     Zecha. 8.3. and according to his viſion God, placed a woman in the middeſt of the Ephah,
                  5.8. named Iniquitie, vpon the mouth whereof he caſt a weight of lead, becauſe ſhe ſhould not eſcape. Or as Philip king of Macedon, aſſembled togither the moſt wicked perſons and furtheſt from correction of al his ſubiects, and put them into a town which he builded of purpoſe, and named it Poneropolis, that is the citie of wicked perſons.
                     Poneropolis, a citie builded by k. Philip.
                   So that there mought be ſent & incloſed in ſome one place in France al ſuch as do delight in inconſtancie, lightnes, falſhod, againſt promiſe and trueth, ſeditions, lyings, pilling, extortion, knauerie, couſinage, pernitious inuentions, murthers, reproches, and periuries; to the ende that the reſt might liue in greater honor, peace, reputation, & credit. Nowe ſtanding not at all vpon the praiſe, which proceedeth from the beginning & aunceſtors of Frenchmen, not being pertinent hereunto, & may eaſily be ſeen in the hyſtoriographers, I wil thus much ſay for Frenchmē, that if we conſider their antiquitie,Praiſe of Frenchmen. pietie, valour, manhod, courage, humanitie, mercie, gentlenes, dexteritie, quickneſſe of ſpirit, and al other their vertues and perfections, they giue place to no nation vnder the Sunne whatſoeuer, but rather excelleth it, as a Frenche man ſaid to the Embaſſadours of Rome in Titus Liuius. And there be diuers graue writers,1. Dec. l. 5. and of good credit, which attribute vnto them a gentle heart,Rhenanus, Agathius, Odo, Regino. Chron. l. 1. v. 32.
                   fauourable, courteous, religious, vpright vertuous, louing one eche other, and keeping their faith more conſtantly, then any other people, and they haue beene called the inuincible and moſt noble. And if they haue any imperfections at al, as no man is without, yet are they couered with an infinite number of

vertues: for as much as reaſon cauſeth them to tame, and ſubdue this liuelineſſe, promptnes, and heate which they haue naturally. And hiſtories are full of the proweſſe of our aunceſtours, who with their victorious hande haue runne ouer wel-neare the whole worlde, ſetting downe orders and lawes to all prouinces, there plantinge the memorie of their name, and markes of their Empire. Italie, which ſpeaketh of enuie, hath beene well courſed and tamed and ſundrie other countries as well in Europe as Aſia, haue hence beene peopled and receiued their gouernours. And an infinite number of Emperours, Princes, and prouinces, haue had recourſe vnto them, for their owne aſſurance, and haue lefte behinde them moſte notable monumentes of their gouernement and iuſtice, to the profite of manie prouinces. This woulde gladſomly, encourage mee particularly to declare, and make recytall of the moſt famous in all diſciplines, and knowledge of tongues & ſciences, of a great number of Martyrs, which haue ſuffered for the teſtimonie of the faith, of excellent Emperours, Captains, and ſouldiars, that wee might well compare to the moſte valiant that euer was, during the verie flower of the Romanes and Greekes. I will not forget what Iulius Caeſar in the ſixth of his Comentaries,Frenchmen preferred before Almaine and Tacitus hath written, that the French men haue farre ſurpaſſed the Almaines, in proweſſe, valor, and courteſie, and haue euer had the firſt ſtarte of them.
               
                  Saluſt in the ende of the warre of Iugurth writeth, that the auncient Romanes, and ſuch as haue beene ſince, haue euer had this opinion, that by their owne valour, they eaſily attained to the ende of all other nations: but that with the Frenche men, they ſtroue for their owne ſafetie, and not for honour. And it is not to be red in al hiſtories, of any people that hath attained to their valour, and dexteritie, nor whoſe conqueſtes were more wonderfull, expeditions more remarqueable, and ſucceſſe of their battailes more happie, and pollicie or lawes better ordayned, or pietie, bountie, and religion better, nor their vnitie greater.
               And there is no nation whoſe brightneſſe is not darkened and obſcured thorough the high ſhyning of the glorie of the French men. But to ſatisfie what the ſayde Caeſar hath written,Frenchmen blamed. that Frenchemen are ſoudeine, headie, deſirous of nouelties, and deliberatinge vppon vncertaine purpoſes, and coyners of affaires of importance, whereupon they muſt needes quickely repent themſelues.
               
                  Other hiſtoriographers ſtrangers, condemne them of lightneſſe; And the Emperour Charles the fifth, ſaide to the Kinges Ambaſſador, the which before that hee had propoſed to the Conſiſtorie of Rome, that he was nowiſe able to aſſure himſelfe of the French, becauſe they began manie things, but brought nothing to ende: and did no otherwiſe by their wordes, then by their garmentes, which they diſguiſed into ſo manie faſhions, as one day they were of one minde, and tomorrow of another. And that a bodie could not beleeue ought except he ſawe it done: and that if they did anie good at all, it was by bountie, for the great deſire they had to drawe others to their owne aduantage. And that they had euer their foote, and their wit in the aire, & their purpoſes more changeable then the winde. And further diſcharging his choler at that time, as the Embaſſadour him ſelfe tolde me, he greatly blamed the diuerſitie and changing of Edicts and ordinances, which wee handle ſo yll, and publiſh ſo lightly, that anon after wee are conſtrained to change them: being a cauſe, that they were ſo little made account of. And then in his paſsion hee repeated certaine places, wherein he thought ſome words wanted, which ſpeach of his notwithſtanding he afterwardes excuſed. And in trueth Plato did not amiſſe compare,Plato. 
                  how manie more tauernes, ſo manie more drinkers:
                  Lavves not to be altered 
                  The number of Phiſitions, the encreaſe of diſeaſes; The more accompt the iuſtice is made of, the more ſutes: So the more lawes, the more corruption: as daily experience doth teach vs, profiting vs no more, then great varietie of Medicines doth to a verie weake ſtomach. And in the time of the Emperours Caligula & Claudus, were manie lawes made, and yet tyrannie and corruption tooke neuer more place. If youth were well taught in Princes courtes, vniuerſities & ſcholes, but conſtancie, grauitie, & the trueth, they ſhould be a great deale better receiued, and ſtrangers woulde more aſſure themſelues of our promiſes: and then mought we wel ſay of France, as S. Ierom attributed vnto it,The counſel of the Perſians. that it were a countrie refyned, and purged of monſters. I will not here ſylently paſſe ouer to this purpoſe, that counſel, which the Princes of Perſia & Media gaue to King Darius, as the Prophet Daniel witneſſeth,
                     Daniel. 6.8. Eſter. 8 8. Diodorus. Demoſthenes.
                   that he ſhould be founde true, and neuer change a lawe which was once made, according to the cuſtome of the Medes and Perſians which altereth not. It is alſo written in the booke of Heſter: that the writings written in the K. name, and ſealed with the Kings ring, may no man reuoke. Diodorus and Demoſthenes, tel of certaine people, that no man mought ſo much as ſpeak of the change

of a lawe, except he wore a halter, with which he was hanged, if his opinion tooke not place. So greatly in auncient time did they deteſt all changes and nouelties.Marſeilles. The citizens of Marſeilles were much renowned by Cicero and Titus Liuius, for that they remained conſtant in their lawes, cuſtomes, and faſhions,Paler. l. 2. ch. 15.
                   without changing ought, yea, and as a great treaſor they kept their olde ſworde of iuſtice in the ſmalleſt matters to ſhewe howe much they honoured antiquitie. And for the like conſtancie haue the Romanes receiued great glorie.Paulus Aemilius. And Paulus Aemilius writeth that the Frenche men euer tooke great heede, that nought in their lawes and cuſtomes ſhoulde be changed. And greatly was Lycurgus praiſed, for that after he had brought the Lacedemonians to receiue his lawes, he made them all ſweare that they ſhoulde alter no one iotte of them during his abſence; and after that neuer retourned into his countrie againe, which cauſed it to fare much the better with them. For as Plato hath written in the ſeuenth of his lawes, and Xenophon likewiſe. Change, in all matters, except they be miſchieuous,
                  Plato. Xenophon. 
                  is moſt daungerous, beit in the dyet of the bodie, or in manners. And according to the olde prouerbe, A man ſhoulde not awake a ſleeping Dogge. And euerie knowen euill, to which a man is vſed,Change, a matter dangerous. Titus Liuius. Ariſtotle.
                   is tollerable as Titus Liuius writeth. And Ariſtotle in his Politickes, ſheweth, it is much better to beare with ſome imperfections & faultes in lawes & Magiſtrates, if they be not too notorious then in thinking to change them, to ruyne a whole eſtate, which is as a great frame made of diuers pieces, ſo ioyned and linked in togither, that it is vnpoſsible to take away the leaſt parte, but the whole ſhall feele it. It is greatly doubted, whether wee ought to receiue a better lawe for a more auncient. For the principall matter which maketh a lawe to bee obeyed, is cuſtome which cannot bee confirmed but by continuance of time: ſo that alteration greatly weakeneth the force and vertue of a lawe.Plato. And Plato in his politiques, and fourth of his Common wealth, reprehendeth ſuch as by newe lawes imagine they may remedie miſchiefes: and deeme them rather an occaſion thereof, as if one cut off the head of Hydra, by and by ſeauen newe ſpring vp:Hydra. and by change is taken away that reſpect and reuerence, which wee ought to beare them, which once being loſt, there is no more obedience. Wee reade in auncient hiſtories,Orpheus. that Orpheus was cut in peeces by the weomen of Thrace, becauſe hee had changed their lawes. For this cauſe, as the Lawyers write, if wee bee not conſtrayned thereto

by an apparant and euident profit, we ought not to alter what hath bin before ordained. And as S. Bernard wrote to one at Lyons: Noueltie is the mother of raſhnes,
                  
                     I. in rebus de conſta. princi. Bernarde. Galba Emperour.
                   
                  ſiſter of ſuperſtition, & daughter of lightneſſe. The Emperor Galba was greatly prayſed becauſe hee woulde neither change ancient lawe, nor creat new. And Plutarque exhorteth Traian, to take greater care in ſeing his ancient laws to be obſerued,Plutarque. then in making of newe; and aboue al things, that his life ſhould ſerue for a law. One asked Pauſanias, why it was not lawful in Lacedemon,
                  Pauſanias. to alter any ancient law, he anſwered, that Lawes ought to haue aucthoritie ouer men, not men ouer Lawes. Otherwiſe, as Plato & Ariſtotle maintained,Solon. it was a ſubuerſion of an eſtate. The aunſwere which Solon made to Anatharſis, ſaying: that his lawes were like to Spyders cobwebbes, which holde but the little flyes, deſerueth to bee well conſidered of: that as men keepe their contractes, that it is not expedient that anye bargainer ſhoulde breake, ſo the Athenians woulde willinglye cleaue to his lawes, out of which no man ſhoulde receiue any domage, but euery one verie great profite. It were verie neceſſarie wee had ſuch officers as were wont to bee in Greece, called Nomothetes, who tooke great regarde that no man ſhould derogate from any good lawe, nor publiſh any that were pernitious or ſuperfluous:Nomothetes in Greece. which the Parlements ought to doe. Notwithſtanding a man may alledge the ſaying of our lawyers, that it is vnpoſsible to ſet downe an order certaine, ſimple, and of one ſorte, to thinges which dayly varie: And that which an auncient man ſaide, that a Mutton had but one voyce, but a man dyuers, becauſe wee muſt doe as time, and affaires require, all humaine affaires beeing in perpetuall motion, and France beeing compoſed of ſo manie kindes of people, and differing in faſhions and language. In the firſt booke of Thucidides,
                  Thucidides. the Corinthians ſet downe, that as in a citie, which is in quyet and peace, it is not meete their auncient lawes and cuſtomes ſhoulde bee changed: ſo where a common wealth is ouerpreſſed with diuerſe and vnlike affaires, it is neceſſarie they looke out manie newe helpes, as to diſeaſes ſtrange and vnknown, ſtrange remedies muſt of neceſsitie bee applyed.Gellius. l. 12. cap. 1. Colum l 2. c. 4. Plato 4. de legibus De
                     
                        •
                     ad. 4.
                   And in Titus Liuius it is declared, howe mens lawes alter according to the time. And Ariſtotle in the thirde of his Ethickes, compareth them to meaſures, and Solon to coynes, which are not alike in all. And in the ſixth he ſayeth, that lawes doe not proceede from art, or anie other ſcience, but from wiſedome, which regardeth things in particular,

as they change, and attaineth to experience by exerciſe & time: as Terence ſaide: This age requireth an other life,Terence. and other manners. For this cauſe Solon prayed his lawes might bee obſerued for a hundred yeares ſpace,Solon. to the ende that they mought not be afterwardes changed. Moreouer wee haue often ſeene, what credit they haue had about Princes, which haue counſelled them to alter the lawes for their owne lucre, or particuler paſsions. And ſuch as are ſtudied in the conſtitutions of the Cannon and Cyuil lawe, may ſee, howe Popes and Emperours, haue eſtabliſhed, & aboliſhed, and then put in vſe againe, certaine lawes, & what hath pleaſed one hath diſpleaſed his ſucceſſor. And what hath had his courſe in one time, is cleane reiected in another. So much is mans minde enclyned to contradiction and change.l. 2. c. 3. de baptiſ. com. Don. S. Auguſtine writeth, that the decrees of particular Biſhops haue bene corrected by Prouincial counſels, and prouincial by vniuerſal, and the former general counſels diſanulled by the latter, when through experience of things, that which lay cloſe is opened, & what was hid is brought to light, which may be ſeene more at large in hiſtories. Here I could alledge the opinion of an Athenian embaſſador,Policie in a Prince. recited by Thucidides, that a Prince ought ſomtime to be a friend, ſomtime an enimie, & to ply himſelf according to occurrents, & ſomtime it behoueth him to releaſe the lawes, as K Ageſilaus ordained that for an accident then happened they muſt be winked at, & afterwards be obſerued. Another ſaid to Pericles that ſince it was not lawful to take clean away the table, wherin the law was writen,Plutarque. yet they ought to turne the other ſide. And Plutarque praiſed Flaminius for that he knew how to cōmand ouer lawes,Tacitus. the neceſsitie of the time requiring it. And in Tacitus the Almains were praiſed, for chā
                  ging their cuſtoms found to be but bad. As alſo Valerus a Senator of Rome ſheweth in Titus Liuius, that it becōmeth men ſo to do.Titus Liuius. And ſome haue condemned the law of the Perſians & Medes, which was aboue recited, whē the vſage, & ſtate of a cōmen welth, hath found it vnprofitable & pernitious. Euery man alſo will confeſſe, that in mens deeds & ſpeeches, the meane called conſtancie is to be required: which is a meane between lightnes & ſtubbernes And to perſeuer in one mind, is not alwaies to be praiſed,Cicero. as Cicero in manye places declareth, yelding thoſe for an example, which vpon the ſea are conſtrained to yeld to tempeſts & windes, and oft times to alter their courſe, neuer ſtanding ſtiffe in one deliberation. And there is no nation, nor people which hath not ſome time beene

accuſed of inconſtancie, mans life being ſo full of contrarieties: as Hipocrates in a certain Epiſtle declareth it to be.Hipocrates. Euerie one ought alſo to conſider, that the cauſe why wee are ſo blamed and found fault with by other nations, proceadeth by reaſon of the notable victories which French men haue obtained againſt them, and that they haue ſo often beene ſubdued by the valor of the French: and not being able to reuenge with the ſworde,
                     Guychardine a true vvriter, iuſtifieth the Frenchemen, & condemne
                        •
                     h the Venetians.
                   they will doe it with the fether. And whereas Paulus Iouius, Bembus, Sabellicus, and Pandolphus, accuſe the French men for not keeping their promiſe with the Venetians, as well hee as other credible aucthors, diſcouereth the falſhood, and reproche of theſe writers, ſhewing it rather proceeded from the lightnes of other nations, as in ſundrie places in Cicero we may perceiue. And Titus Liuius calleth them of Syria, Aſia, and Greece, verie light perſons. Tacitus attributeth as much to the Almanes,
                  The inconſtancie of ſtrangers. & Scythians. What vnconſtancie and lightneſſe ſince two hundred yeres laſt paſt, haue we I praye you ſeene, among Romanes, Neapolitanes Genowaies, Milanois, Florentînes, and other Italians which they haue vſed towardes their princes & gouernours? And for the verie Almaines, haue they not oft abandoned their Emperours, endured, and made meanes, that ſtrangers enriched themſelues with the ſpoiles of thempire? haue they not ſerued their turne with the ſonne to ruine the father? And haue they not afterward left the ſonne as a pray vnto the enimie? And vppon the like occaſions Auentin Crans,
                  Auentin Crans. & ſome other Almanes, haue to ſmall purpoſe, and foliſhly blamed the French men of lightnes & fantaſticalnes, & named them by ſundrie other iniurious epithetons, ſo as they which ſee cleare may eaſily iudge by their verie writings, & by other authors better trained vp in matters of ſtate & ſeaſons of time then they, howe they haue written full of backbyting, lying, pride, & enuious malice. Beatus Rhenanus calleth ſuch hiſtoriographers ambitious, praiſers of their German nation, & blameth them for ſo robbing & concealing the praiſes, deſerued by the French. And the ſaide Italians vnable to excuſe the greate faultes, cruelties,Italian Prudence. Italian vvriters not of credit. treacheries, cowardneſſe, treaſons, and diſsimulations of their nation, goe about to diſguyſe theſe villanies with a name of Italian Prudence: and to diminiſh the noble exploytes and enterpriſes of the Frenche, they counterfait a letter of an Italian, as it were deſcended out of the clowdes, thereby to giue thereto greater honour. And yet in thoſe verie examples which they doe alledge, they ſhewe howe they of their owne nation, haue

with al their great diſcourſes, beene as yll aduiſed, irreſolute & vnconſtant in all their affaires, yea and more than any other nation. And howſoeuer they enforce themſelues to ſtaine the French, wee muſt needes confeſſe, that there was neuer nation that euer enterpriſed, wel guyded, nor more happily executed braue & loftie enterpriſes, and matters worthie of memorie, then the French: nor that euer with greater manhood, conſtancie & perſeuerance, hath conquered, defended, & recouered their owne countrie, then they did euen at that inſtant wh
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •
                  heſe men ſo paſsionately wrote of them. Ieroſme Beuzo a
                     •…
                  
                  ila
                        •
                     ois, who wrote of the Weſt Indies,
                  Ieroſme Beuzo hauing remained there aboue fiften yeres with the Spanyards, ſheweth how far the Spaniſh Chroniclers haue ſpared the trueth, & do go about to couer the cruelties, inconſtancies, and villanies of their nation, of whome parte at their returne home were wel chaſtened by the French, yea, and in the verie place by them ſelues, pilling and murthering one an other thorough the iuſt iudgement of God. Moreouer euery one ſeeth, that in that they blame the French to be too open, prompt, moueable & light, they might better conſter it to a vertue: and ſuch reproches ſetteth them againe in ſo good away, that they take away al occaſion of ſpeach: as Philip King of Macedon was wont to ſaie of the rayling Athenians: and cauſeth in them a habit to euerie vertue. And to perſons of colerique humor, as Frenchmen are, Galene attributeth prompneſſe and prudencie in their actions. And this worde of fantaſticalneſſe in reſpect of the Frenche, may be taken in a ſignification, as other authors vſe, for a courage and readineſſe, in all matters worthie praiſe. And they are not to be blamed if they take their partie the beſt to helpe themſelues, occaſioned by the incommoditie of their enemies, nor if they ſhewe themſelues careleſſe in ſmall matters, the better to be able to atchieue things of greater importance, nor if they keepe themſelues from the treacheries, deceites, diſſemblings, and falſhood of faith, which their enemies haue euer beene accuſtomed to vſe, nor if they render like for like as they are able, and occaſion may ſerue. And whereas K. Alphonſus,
                  Of danſing. and diuers other authors haue greatly blamed Frenchemen becauſe they delighted ſo much in daunſing, they might eaſily excuſe themſelues through an old auncient cuſtome, which hath bin receiued in ſundrie prouinces, and by reaſon of the exerciſe therin taken, ſo as a man modeſtly behaue himſelfe without counterfaiting a mad man. It is to be wiſhed for al that our pathes might bee

as wel ruled as our wordes ought to be, & that daunſing were in leſſe eſtimation then it is, eſpecially vpon holie daies, by reaſon of the inconuenience, diſorder, inſolencie & diſſolutenes that enſueth thereon. As in time paſt the Romanes, Lacedemonians, and other cōmen wealths wel ordered, yea, the verie king S. Lewys baniſhed out of their townes al vaine pleſures, which ſerued for nought els then to effeminate yong men, & allure them to vice, and aboue all they haue beene enimies to danſing, which a man eaſily may gather, in an Oration that Cicero made for Murena, aſſuring that no man danſed, except he were drunk or mad, & that ſuch a vice proceeded from the diſſolute banquet of drunkennes, loue & lecherie, whereof no man was able to accuſe the ſaid Murena, being a man giuen to all honeſt exerciſes. And the ſame Oratour, finding fault with an enimie of his called him a braue danſer. And in his offices he ſheweth that for nothing in the world, a vertuous & wiſe mā ought to danſe in publike, albeit he had ſo promiſed. And Frederick the Emperour was wont to ſay, that he rather choſe to haue an agew, then to daunſe. And Plutarke in his communings at boarde ſaieth, that the Perſians neuer durſt daunſe in preſence of their wiues. And Domitian depoſed one Ruffyn out of the Senate, becauſe he daunſed, as though he had committed an act vnworthie of an honeſt man. And it ſemeth they which ſo wel loue it, haue more braine in their feet then hed, & think to plaie the fooles with reaſon, as Terence ſaith. And Ariſtotle in his Ethicks writeth of the Mileſians,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . 3. c. 8. Prou. 4.26. that they were not fools but did the ſelfeſame things that fooles are accuſtomed to do. And herein they followe not the precept of the wiſe man, to ponder the path of our feete, & to let al our waies be ordered aright. For vanitie is ſo great in many men, that they altogether ſtudie to keep meaſure & folow the tune in danſing, & in their actions, countenance, ſpeach, & counſels; they go hedlong obſeruing neither meaſure, wiſedom, nor reaſon. It is the verie right occupation of ieſters & iuglers, noted of infamie in good commen wealths. And to cauſe laughture, & paſtime, they were wont in time paſt to counterfait perſons adiudged to die,
                     
                        •
                     . aut. damnat. de panis. whereto all great princes ought to take heede that their ſcepters ſerue not for a ſcoff to their ſubiects, & thēſelues ther by run in contempt.
                     Heb. 11.25. The pleaſures of the court of Pharaoh are caled in the Epiſtle to the Hebrues:
                  
                     Prou. 6.27. 
                  the pleaſures of ſinnes. And it is a harde matter as Salomon ſaith, for a man to take fire in his boſome & his clothes not to be burned. And in the 16. chap. he declareth, that ſuch pleſures are conuerted into teares, & torments. Men of auncient time haue

named danſes allurings, poyſonings, & bauderies of Sathan, who by the meanes therof corrupteth vs, as Lizander ſoftened the walles of Athens, & burned their ſhips, by ſound of flutes. The Lord reprehended them in Iſaiah for vſing banquets, harps, tabors, & other diſſolutenes.Iſaiah. And without any more repeating the places of holy ſcripture, wherin we are commanded to reſiſt the deſires of the fleſh,Dancing condemned by the doctors of the church to ſhun al apparance & occaſion of euil, & to ſhew a good example as I touched before. S. Baſil in a ſermon he made againſt drunkenneſſe, flatly forbiddeth prophan ſongs & danſing, as things repugnant to al the holy dueties of a chriſtian man,Baſil. in ſteed of bending his knees before god, which he ought to do.Chryſoſtome. Which likewiſe S Chriſoſtom doth in manie homilies vpon Mathew, the Epiſtle to the Coloſſ. and vpon Geneſis, ſpeaking of the mariages of Iſaac & Iacob,
                  S. Ambroſe. Auguſtine. & in another homely, he praiſed the peple for hauing left it. S Ambroſe in his third book of virgins, & S. Auguſtine againſt Petilian, declare that in the wel ordered churches, danſings were baniſhed & reproued, as vnworthie diſſolutenes, & vpon the 32. Pſalm, he is of opinion that it is not ſo yl to trauail, & plough the ground, vpon the ſunday, as to danſe. The which Nicholas of Clemenge, an ancient doctor of the Sorboniſts doth cōmend in a tretiſe he made, of not augmenting of holy days. And the ſaid S. Auguſtin in another place,Inconueniences happened by dancing. rather liketh the wife or maid, that ſoweth vpō the holy day, then her that danſeth. In the ſea of hiſtories, is mention made of an Archbiſhop of Magdebourg that broke his neck danſing with a damſel. Other haue been ſtroak down with thunder, or knocked & bruſed in pieces with the fal of the houſe, where they danſed. Our writers make mention of the great danger which K Charls 6. eſcaped, hauing like to haue bin burned in a danſe, as ſome other great lords were.K. Charles 6. And by danſing Herodias cauſed Iohn Baptiſt to be behedded. And by bills of inditements drawn againſt ſorcerers, it hath bin found true, that in their diueliſh ſinagogues they goe all danſing. And not without cauſe one of auncient time named danſings ſnares for maides, miſfortune for men, and a bayte for baudes. And the Voltes, courantes, and vyolent daunſes, proceede from furie, and hath cauſed many weomen to be deliuered before their time. And god in Iſaiah gretly threateneth the daughters of Sion, for that they went winding & prauncing, making their ſteps to be heard againe.Origen. 
                  Origen writeth that al perſons haue been forbidden them, but eſpecially weomen,Plutarcke. for feare of defyling their ſexe. Plutarque likewiſe writeth, that they ought to bee aſhamed to bee founde danſing.
               
                  
                  
                     Iudg. 21.23. Council. 30. & 33.And the daughters of Iſrael were by that meanes rauiſhed. I could alledge ſundrie counſels which haue forbidden it, yea, and of our owne ordinances,
                     Exod. 16.29. & 31.13. Deut. 5.14. Leuit. 23.3. Heb. 3.11. & 4.3. 1. Cor. 5.8. Iſaiah. 66.23 which we ought to keepe, and among other at the laſt aſſemblie of the eſtates holden at Orleans. For the ſanctification required by the law of God, vpon the ſabboth & feaſtdaies is thereby maintained, the which figureth in vs a ſpirituall reſt, which God worketh in his faithfull, ſanctifying them, regenerating, and making them aſpire to things heauenly & diuine, keeping their feaſt in ſinceritie & truth, as S. Paul hath written. And this ought to be a continual Sabboth to the ſaid faithfull, to the ende that euerie day, they may liue holily, renouncing the works of the fleſh,VVhy holy daies be ordained. & honor God both in bodie & minde. And the holy day is principally ordained to heare the worde of God, to ſerue him, to call vpon his name, to remember his benefits & free gifts, to giue him thanks, to dedicate our ſelues vnto him, to performe al works of pietie, to participate with the publique prayers made in the churches, & to ſet our ſelues far of from al apparance of yll. As S. Paul ſaith,Coloſſ. that God hath purifyed to himſelfe a people, making profeſsion of good workes, & this ſanctification is declared in Iſaiah to conſiſt in doing of no yll,
                     Iſaiah. 58.13 & in following the will of God not our own,Prophaning of holy daies & ſuffering our ſelues to be gouerned by him. For how can we name our ſelues Chriſtians, & keepe holy dayes, if we prophane them with danſing, banqueting, masking, ſpending exceſsiuely, & playing diſſolutely, prouoking the wrath of God vpon vs? which wil bring forth her accuſtomed effects & chaſtiſements, if we do not amend. And if according to the ſaying of our Sauiour We muſt render account for euerie idle worde,
                  
                     Math. 12.36. howe much more for our ſongs which men vomit out in daunſes from a heart impure, the more to giue fire to our couetous deſires, ſufficiently occaſioned by other meane to boyle, in ſteade of imploying our tongue to the praiſe of our creator, and giuing him thankes for his benefites? And as the myſteries of religion are ſpirituall, ſo doe they require the minde of man, to the ende to nouriſh it, inſtruct, refourme, humble it, if it be too much exalted, and lift it vp, if it bee too much throwne downe, to comforte and regenerate it, without applying it to vaine thinges, diſhoneſt and hurtfull, which was the cauſe that Saint Auguſtine and other doctors founde it ſtrange, that men are offended if they ſee one plough vpon a holy daie, but not if one be drunke, go a whoring, or worke any other iniquitie. It is to be feared that God will obiect vnto vs that in the

firſt of Iſaiah, My ſoule hateth your appointed feaſtes; I am wearie of them,
                  
                     Iſaiah 1.14. 
                  and I will not heare your prayers. And in Amos, I hate and abhorre your feaſtes dayes, and I will not ſmell in your ſolemne aſſemblies,
                  
                     Amos 5.21. & 8.10. 
                  though you offer me burnt offringes, and meate offringes I will not accept them, And I will turne your feaſtes into mourninges, and all your ſonges into lamentations, and I will bring ſackcloth vppon all loynes. The puritie of the Goſpell calleth vs to a profeſsion, that we ſhould reforme and cut off all euill cuſtomes, and eloigne our ſelues from all daungers, vanities,Antiſthenes. and lightneſſe. And not without cauſe, Antiſthenes being demanded, what a feaſt was, anſwered that it was an occaſion of ſurfeting and diſorders. And oftentimes no dayes are leſſe feſtifall, and leſſe obſerued, then the feſtifall dayes, which many dedicate to Bacchus and Venus. Which ſurely would require to be well reformed.Pleas and Saytes. And whereas they blame frenchmen for great pleaders, thoſe that are of the beſt aduiſed exempt themſelues, make a pointment, and quit one part to conſerue the reſt in peace, and winde themſelues out of the handes of theſe ſuckpurſes and palterers, thinking it a true ſaying of Chilo, that quarels, ſutes, and debtes, are euer accompanied with miſeries: as more at large hereafter it is declared.Chilo. Nowe to conclude the iuſtifying of our ſelues, wee will cleaue to theſe places of the holy ſcripture,All nations noted of vice and imperfections. which accuſe al nations of lightneſſe, vanitie, inclination to euill, lying, change, ſelfeloue, inconſtancie, infirmitie and hereditarie vices, which euery one by experience may finde in himſelfe. And no man in this worlde is able to glorifie himſelfe, but onely in that God hath ſhewed him mercie, in that he is called to his church, and put in the ranke of his children and heyres to be partaker of the heauenly benefites. And I will pray all them which will not be ſatisfied with my excuſes,Ciuill vvarres. to conſider, the ſaying of the Emperour Auguſtus, that ciuill warres cauſe many inconueniences and diſorders, which are amended thorough a good peace: as ſundry aucthors haue written of diuers people, eſpecially Xenophan of the Lacedemonians famous for a time, for their great diſcipline, but in ſucceſsion of time, yeelded themſelues to all diſſoluteneſſe. Some bewaile in France the diuerſitie of faſhions taken from ſtrangers, and deſire that it might haue the honeſtie, courteſie, gentlenes, humanitie, valour, iuſtice, honeſt exerciſes, frugalitie, and temperance, to cloth themſelues, drinke, eate, and ſpeake, which the auncient french men were accuſtomed to haue. And as Plutarke writeth of the Sicilians that their continuall wars made them like to ſauage beaſtes, ſo is it not ſtrange to

ſee a change in France, occaſioned thorough ſo often warres eſpecially ciuill, as Tacitus at large deſcribeth it in like ſorte to haue happened to the Romaines.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 12. That we ought to flye euill and ſeducing companies with other inſtructions to nobilitie, worthy to be noted.
               
                  Choler and headines enemies to good counſell.
                  CHoler, and headineſſe, haue euer beene taken for enemies to good counſell; and ſuddaine, and quicke natures, are euer ſubiect quickly to enterpriſe, and ſhortly after to repent themſelues. Wherefore it is neceſſarie, that wee accuſtome our ſelues by little and litle,Throughly to conſider of our deliberations and enterpriſes. yea in matters of ſmal importance, not to do or ſpeak any thing, but firſt throughly to conſider what may enſue thereon. For when one hath vndertaken a matter thorough counſell, it is a great contentment and occaſion to continue what he hath alreadie begun, if the time which is euer trewe ſchoolemaiſter, and correctour, teache not a better aduiſe.Iphicrates. To this ende Iphicrates ſayde, that the worſt ſpeech poſsible to come out of a Captaines mouth, is, I neuer doubted that, or elſe, I neuer once thought of it. And we ſee that wiſe men, haue euer in the beginning, to their power, applyed prouiſions to all accidentes and good counſelles, to the end they might not be ſurpriſed: being a matter neceſſarie in warre, and other affaires, to chaunge ſometime our deliberation, according to the courſe of affayres, hauing regarde to the diſpoſition, will and nature of thoſe, with whom we are to negotiate, and be readie prepared before the aſſault. I will diſpenſe with my ſelfe to ſay, that in charge that I haue had of great importance, I haue had ſent mee, manye remembraunces, commaundementes and letters, whereof I made no ſemblance at all, knowing the difficultie and impoſsibilitie to accompliſhe that,Exerciſe of vvhat efficacy and force. which was conteined therein. And I euer tooke heede not to aduaunce my ſelfe in wordes, and to holde backe from making anye promiſe. There is nothing ſo harde or difficile, that cuſtome will not render eaſie. And exerciſe in matters of vertue is of ſo great efficacie and force, that ſhee attayneth to the toppe of all. And wee ouercome the

vices and paſsions of the minde, thorough iudgement and exerciſe. Indgement, that is knowledge, preceedeth, becauſe no man doth exerciſe himſelfe in rooting out the vices of his minde, except he haue them in hatred; and we then beginne to hate them when we perceaue the filthineſſe, ſhame, and dammage that followeth thereon: as we ſee that flatterers, curious men, bablers, and lyars, whyleſt they woulde bee beloued, bring themſelues into further hatred; and the contrarie to that they pretende doth often happen to lewde perſons. The which wee ought firſt to conſider, and afterwarde that there is nothing more pleaſing to God and man, nor more agreeing to nature, then to be a vertuous man, conſtant, trewe, rounde, offenſiue to no man and deſpiſing all paſsion. Wee muſt likewiſe conſider howe wiſe they are reputed, who ſpeake little, and are conſtant in their deedes and woordes, wherereof there enſueth a good conſcience and hope, which accompanieth them all the dayes of their life. And ſince wee are created of God to ſerue to his glorie and the aduauncement of our neighbour,The ende of the birth of man. and to approche the neereſt wee are able to his holineſſe, and are borne, and predeſtinate to honeſtie, as Cicero himſelfe declared, by the opinion of Zeno, and Ariſtotle, wee ought to take great heede, that no vnconſtancie, lightneſſe, or lye be founde in our actions: and that no woorde proceede out of our mouthe, but aduiſedlye pondered. Wee ought alſo to conſider, that our Creator is good, iuſt, wiſe, and almightie, and proceedeth ſlowly to the chaſtiſement of the wicked: to the ende that thorough his example, we ſhould ſhun all beaſtly headineſſe, not doing ought raſhly or by aduenture, as being the fountaine whence all faultes ſpring, as it is taughtvs in the Prouerbes, that VVhoſoeuer is haſtie commeth ſurely to pouertie: and that there is more hope of a ſoule then of him.
                  
                     Pro. 21, 5. & 29.20. Conſtancye. Iuſtice. Temperance For conſtancie euer accompanieth the other vertues. And therefore iuſtice is defined to be, a conſtant will, to render to euerie one, what appertayneth of right vnto him. And temperance to be a conſtant moderation to vſe all things aright. And it commeth to paſſe, as Titus Liuius hath written, that good ſucceſſe euer followeth good counſel,
                  Good counſell cauſeth good ſucces. and abandoneth raſhneſſe: whereof we haue infinite examples, which ought to keepe vs backe frō being too ſoddaine, & to exhort vs to folow the properties that are in God, in ſhewing al vertue clemency & patience, taking the feare of his name for our guide and counſeller. And for this cauſe Alexandridas ſaid that the Lacedemonians ſtaied many days

in deciding their criminall cauſes,Criminall cauſes. where queſtion paſſed of mens liues: becauſe they which once erred in the death of a man, could no more ſufficiently make recompence for their faults. And there haue beene Emperours that haue ſayde, that there could not be too long time taken about the condemnation of a man: And the auncient prouerbe doth carry,
                     l. 3. ch. of the vvarreof the Ieuves. that we muſt long time deliberate, for that we would execute but once. Ioſephus attributeth the greatneſſe of the Romaines to be, becauſe they enterpriſed nothing, inconſiderately or vnaduiſedly. And they eſteemed thoſe accidentes of fortune which had ill ſucceſſe, much better being deliberated of by counſel, then if without hauing taken counſell they ſhould haue ſucceeded as they would haue had it: cōtenting thēſelues & reioycing,
                     Li. 2. ch. 16. in the misfortune which ariued vnto thē, after the matters were debated, and conſulted of. And in the ſecond booke Agrippa declared that nothing in the world ſoner remedied wounds, then long pacience, nor any thing bringeth more ſhame to the violent and furious perſons, then the patient, who endure their egerneſſe and violence without making any ſhewe or ſemblance.Patience. And in the 4.
                     Li. 4. ch. 1. booke Veſpaſian ſayth, that it is the faſhion of the Romaines, to beginne and finiſh all thinges, with order, knowledge and induſtrie, the contrary being proper and naturall to the barbarous, vſing immoderate haſtineſſe. The examples likewiſe of ſuch euils as hath fortuned to manie thorough this headineſſe and choler, ought to make vs more aduiſed, as that written of ſundrie in time paſt,Choler. who haue kept in, and retired them ſelues, feeling choler comming on them, and eſpecially of one Architas, who ſayde to his ſeruantes keeping ill rule, it is a good turne for you that I am in a chafe. And Ageſilaus counſelled the Athenians to ſet all their force againſt Epaminundas alone, adding that none but the wiſe and prudent were valiant, and the only cauſe of victorie, and that the other would be ſoone enough vanquiſhed. We ſee likewiſe that light braynes, goe themſelues vp and downe gathering of matter to inflame their paſſions, and voluntarily caſt themſelues hedlong into ſuch vices, as of themſelues they are inclined vnto: and ſo it commeth of neceſsitie, that he which is once diſpoſed to ſtumble, doth euer ſo continue. And ſince that vice is made a vertue,A cuſtome to euill moſt dangerous. and that the euill is turned into a cuſtome, there is ſmall remedie, as Seneca writeth, or as experience doth declare. And wee muſt in the beginning be well aduiſed howe we deliberate, becauſe we can not afterwarde without diſhonour and danger leaue it, or

take an other courſe, hauing long time perſeuered therein. And if the reaſons be contradictorie, we muſt followe the more reaſonable, and the moſt ſtrong coniectures, hoping for remedie, as well thorough time, as other accidentes. Men prayſed the prudence of Fabius, becauſe he broake the point of fortune,
                     Fabius ſurnamed the linguerer. and hindred the aduancement of Hanniball, in a ſhonning to fight, temporyſing & attending his aduantage, which is a vertue that is named long ſuffrance. And Scipio was wont to ſay,Scipio. that he might the better keepe his people in, that he was accuſtomed rather to buy ſuertie, then to ſubmit himſelfe to any hazarde. And did like vnto the Chirurgeons, who neuer worke with their inſtruments when they may finde any other remedie. Hee puniſhed the Carthaginians for their vnconſtancie, for which fault we haue ſeene as well french as other to be bitterly chaſtened. It is alſo very requiſite,To eſtrange our ſelues frō filthy talke & company. to eſtrange our ſelues from fooliſh talking, lewde companie and vnconſtant people. For men of auntient time, without any further enquirie,
                     Eph. 5 4 Tit. 2. Tim. 5. iudged a man to be ſuch, as they were whom he moſt frequented. Saint Paul teacheth vs diſcreetely to haue regarde to the humors of ſuch companie as we would frequent, for feare leaſt we be pertakers of their euill. In an auncient tragedie there was a wicked man brought in, forbidding any man to come neare him,
                     Eccleſ. 7 2. fearing leaſt by his ſhadowe the good might be annoyed. And Eccleſiaſticus doth counſell, that we depart from the thing that is wicked, and ſinne ſhall turne away from vs. Which moued Dauid in ſundrie his Pſalmes to proteſt, that he both hated and ſhunned all wicked companie, and was not able to endure within his court, any wicked or diſloyall perſon. Wherefore I beſeech the nobilitie and good wittes of France, becauſe it is a matter ſo eaſie to bee doone, that they will once mayſter their wils, paſsions, headineſſe, ſoddaineneſſe, and choler; and that they would for euer accuſtome themſelues to pacience, gentleneſſe, ſilence, and modeſtie, giuing as it were a bridle to their deſires, and as the Pſalmiſt ſayeth: a watch before their mouth, to the ende they may doe or ſaye nothing, but what they haue well before thought of. And that they will beginne by little matters to gaine vpon greater, which may be able to hurt vs,Eccleſ. for as it is written in Eccleſiaſticus, he which deſpiſeth ſmall thinges ſhal fall.
                  Casſiodorus. lib. 5.
                   And in Caſsiodorus King Theodoric writeth, that it is the lightneſſe of the wit, lightly to promiſe, what a man will not or is not able to perfourme. As we will more at large declare hereafter. He likewiſe that could accuſtome himſelf not too much to loue himſelfe,

nor his commodities,Not to much to loue ones ſelfe. nor that whiche they call ouerwinning, the which cauſeth the vſurpation of an other mans goods, but contrarie wiſe to followe the rule of charitie, ſo muche recommended vnto vs from GOD, ſhall not eaſily caſt himſelfe hedlong,Iſocrates. into this inconſtancie. Iſocrates wiſely counſelled his king, to conſider well, what hee would ſaye or doe, for feare leaſt hee fayled therein.Baſil. And albeit it be no light combat as Baſill ſayd to vanquiſh an euill cuſtome, yet by little & little muſt a bodie change itand of raſhe inconſtant and light, to become modeſt, conſtant and ſtayde.Commen. li. 7
                   Let vs conſider what Caeſar in his commentaries, layeth to the charge of the Frenchmen, becauſe they bare armes too lightly, mutinous, and not ſo ſubtle in warre, as hardie and couragious; and that hee no leſſe deſireth in a man of warre, modeſtie, and obedience,Obedience. Thucidides.
                   then prowiſe, and greatneſſe of courage. Thucidides the great Captaine and Hiſtoriographer of the Greekes, eſteemed, the fortunate and happie conducte of the warre, to hange on three pointes, that is, to bee willinge, to reuerence, and to obeye; as Paulus Aemilius was in like ſorte woont to ſaye. We haue manie examples, that may ſerue to inſtructe and teach vs, in the iourneyes that haue beene made into Flaunders, ſince tenne yeares paſt, of the euill fortunes and miſhappes, and diſorders happened during our troubles, and an infinite number of enterpriſes, to inconſideratelye and lightly vndertaken, vppon vayne imaginations and deceitfull hopes, hauing reaped nought elſe thereby,Dammages in vvarres. then loſſe and diſhonour: and the profitte of all the warres, ſince one hundred yeares paſt, is not able to be compared, to the dammages and euils that haue thence proceeded. Whereby we muſt confeſſe that God hath weyghed all thinges in an euen ballance, minglyng loſſes and victories togeather, that thereby he might ſet foorth his iudgementes, and make vs ſhunne lightneſſe,VVarly diſcipline. auarice and ambition, as well of great as ſmall. The diſcipline of warre conſiſteth rather, in not putting our ſelues without neceſsitie to daungers, and in making voyde the effortes of the enimie, and in turning vpſide downe their enterpriſes with induſtrie and patience, without ſhedding the bloud of ſubiectes, than to combate couragiouſlie, and valiantly. And there is often times more hope of victorie, in ſtanding onely to defende our ſelues, and let the time runne, then in putting our ſelues to the arbitrage of fortune. And there are infinite examples, what loſſes haue beene ſuſtayned by giuing of battayles, following the

counſell which Timotheus gaue to the Thebanes, except one bee thereto encouraged through a great aduauntage or conſtrayned by an vrgent neceſsitie: God being accuſtomed as he ſayde, to throwe downe the proude, and lift vp the humble. And it is no leſſe the dutie of a Captayne, which is valiant, to ſhewe himſelfe wiſe in his actions then couragious. It were very expedient that were practiſed, which happened in our time, in the yeare of our Lord, one thouſand fiue hundred fiftie and one, betweene Gonſtaue King of Sweden, and the Moſcouite, where all thoſe that were occaſioners of the warre, they had ſo lightly vndertaken,Aucthors of vvarre punished. were executed, and put to death. And not without cauſe did Pauſanias call all the Captaines in the warre, both Peloponeſians and Greekes, murtherers and deſtroyers of their countrey. It is to be deſired that the nobilitie of France would accuſtome themſelues to modeſtie, rule, order, conſtancie, and to mortifie this their great heate,VVarre vnneceſſarie. to armes, and warre vnneceſſarie. And as the Phiſition preuenteth ſickeneſſe, thorough ſmall preparatiues, and apoſtumes; ſo beginning with their leſſer inclinations, choler, and paſsions, they may the eaſilyer attaine to the ende of the more ſtrong: and conſider that which is written in the life of Saint Auguſtine, that hee would neuer pray for ſuch,Murther. as of their owne voluntarie motion had beene at a ſtrange warre: and greatly reproued, as ſaint Cyprian did Donatus and others, that killing of a priuate man, was in perticuler puniſhed, but he who had ſlaine manie in warre was greatly prayſed. In Titus Liuius Scipio ſheweth to King Maſiniſſa, that a man ought not ſo muche to doubt his enemies armed, as thoſe pleaſures which render a man effeminate and vnconſtant It was wiſely ſayde of an auntient man, that the foundations of all counſels and actions, ought to leane to pietie, iuſtice and honeſtie, without vſing of anie headineſſe. I woulde willingly giue that counſell to French men, which Archidamus gaue vnto the Aeoliens,
                  Archidamus. meaning to ayde the Argians in their warre, within a letter contayning onely theſe woordes, Quietneſſe is good. And ſayde vnto ſuche as prayſed him for the victorye hee had obtayned agaynſt the Argiens, it had beene more worthe to haue ouercome them by wiſedome then by force. Xenophon writing of the actes of the Greekes,
                  Xenophon. ſheweth, that all wiſe men abſtayne the moſte they are able from warre, albeit they haue thereunto iuſt occaſion. And that ſayinge of ſundrye Emperours was verye famous, that warre ought not to bee taken in hande without great neede.
               
                  
                  Auguſtus.And the Emperour Auguſtus was woont to ſay that a warre which were good muſt be commaunded by the Goddes, and iuſtified by Philoſophers and wiſe olde men. For the time ſeruing for lawes, & for armes is diuerſe, as Caeſar ſayd to Metelius. And we haue had too good experience howe much God, the weale publicke, order, and iuſtice hath beene offended herewith. And warre hath beene called a gulfe of expence, and a cruell tyrant ranſacking the people: and peace ordred with good pollicie, as a good king, moderating, charge, and exceſſe. And as Horace feygneth, that the place into which Eolus ſhut his windes being open, the ſea is troubled in euerie part: ſo by the opening of warre, partialitie, inſolencie, and all vices manifeſt themſelues. And warres are nought elſe then a horrible puniſhment of a whole people, a ruine of a whole countrey ſtate and diſcipline. And wiſely did Spartian write, howe Traian was neuer vanquiſhed, becauſe he neuer vndertooke warre without iuſt cauſe. The very which Titus Liuius declareth of the Romaines, in the ende of the firſt Decade. Otho the Emperour choſe rather to die, than to rayſe a ciuill warre. For which men likewiſe prayſe Zeno the Emperour: and Cicero in his Philippiques, calleth him which is deſirous thereof a deteſtable citizen.Study in learning. I am alſo of opinion that the conuerſation with the Muſes, and ſtudie of good letters, would render the nobilitie more aduiſed and conſtant, as we haue well marked elſe where. And am not of the Swiſſers minde, which thinketh too much ſtudie marreth the braine: nor of the Almaynes, who in the time of Galienus the Emperour after that the citie of Athenes was taken, kept them from ſetting a fire a great heape of bookes, they had there made, ſaying: let vs leaue them to the Greekes, to the ende that applying themſelues to them, they may be leſſe proper for the warre. For the reading of good bookes (as Alexander the great, and diuerſe other of the moſt valiant captaines ſayde) maketh the nobilitie more hardie, and wiſe, and contayneth them within the boundes of their dutie. And what good nature ſoeuer a captaine be of, he falleth into an infinite number of faults, for want of reading of good books. And that being true which diuerſe haue written of Xenocrates,
                  Xenocrates. that he did ſo pearce the heart of his auditors, that of diſſolute perſons they became temperate and modeſt, what ought wee to iudge of the inſtructions, taken out of the holy letters? And as ſome haue counſelled, before they ſleepe they are to demaund of themſelues a reaſon and account, of that which they ſhall haue gayned of

modeſtie, grauitie, conſtancie, and facilitie of complexions.Socrates. It is written of Socrates, that when he was drye, he would neuer drinke, but firſt he wold caſt out the firſt bucket ful of water that he drew out of the well: to the ende ſayde he that he might accuſtome his ſenſuall appetite, to attende the fit time and oportunitie of reaſon.Of the ſoule and bodie. Theophraſtes. Plutarque.
                   
                  Theophraſtus ſayd, that the ſoule payd well for her hyer to the bodie conſidering what ſhee there ſuffred. But Plutarke writeth, that the body hath good cauſe to cōplaine of the noyſes which ſo greuous and troubleſome a gueſt maketh him, which notwithſtanding is within the body, as in a ſepulcher or den, which ſhe ought to guide being before lightned by the truth, and ruling her ſelfe according to it, both in reſpect of her owne ſafetie, and of her hoſtes. I would alſo counſell them to ſhunne all diſſolutenes, be it in bitter,Diſſolutneſſe or vilanous wordes, vncomely garmentes, and vnſhamefaſt countenance. For it is all one in what part ſoeuer of the bodie a man ſhew his vnſhamefaſtnes, vanitie, pride, and lightneſſe. And the Lacedemonians were highly commended, becauſe they baniſhed a Mileſian out of their citie, for going too ſumptuouſly appareled. We ought alſo rather to deſire to be vertuous then to ſeeme, to vſe wiſedome and deſcretion in all aſſayes, auoyding debates and ſelfewill (without witneſsing whether it be true or falſe not hurtfull) following the precept of Epictetus, in yeelding vnto the greater ſort, perſwading the inferiours, with ſweeteneſſe and modeſtie, conſenting to the equall, to the end to auoyde quarelles. Aboue all thinges wee ought to enforce our ſelues to tame our couetous deſires and concupiſcences, eſpecially where libertie to take and enioye them is offred vnto vs,To refraine our concupiſcences. and to accuſtome our ſelues to patience & meekeneſſe, in keeping vnder the deſire of reuenge, knowing, as the great Monarch Alexander was woont to ſaye, that it is a ſigne of a more heroycall heart, and prayſe worthye, for a man that hath receaued an iniurie to pardon his enemie, then to kill him or reuenge himſelfe vpon him. And that reuenge proceeded of a baſeneſſe of minde, and vertue conſiſted in matters hardly reached vnto. And it is written in the Prouerbes, that it is a greater honour for a man to ouercome him ſelfe, and commaunde his paſsions, then to raſe cities, and caſtles. It is that which God requireth by his Prophetes to cut off the forskinne of the heart.
                  Prouer. The which Saint Paul to the Romaines recōmended to the end we ſhould cut off the bad thoughts and deſires of reuenge. And the Platoniſts ſayde that the ſhorteſt way to returne vnto God, was to mortifie our affections, and that

vertue was a victorie of reaſon ouer paſsions. I thinke they longe a goe that wrote,Monſters ſubdued. ſo much of monſters, perils, tyrants, and theues, vanquiſhed by Hercules, Theſeus, Vlyſſes, and Iaſon, ment thereby to teach vs,Reuenge forbidden. that men vertuouſly diſpoſed and well taught, haue ſubdued their pleaſures, deſire of reuenge, inconſtancie, lightnes, intē
                  perancie, & other paſsions and vices. Which alſo the Poetes figureth by Eolus, which moderateth & keepeth in his winds. The moſt valiant Lacedemonians highly extolled him, that endureth an iniury. And a Philoſopher gaue counſell if he which harmed vs were weaker then our ſelues to pardon him: if more mightie to pardon our ſelues. And by the lawe of God and man, all wayes of reuenge are forbidden; and reconciliation & atonement, commanded by God the King and the lawes: and the peacemakers are called the heires and children of God, who will neuer pardon vs, if we pardon not thoſe offences which other haue committed towards vs.
                     Mat. 5.5. S. Auguſtine calleth the obedience which we render to God, the mother and garden of all vertues. And when our ſauiour in S. Mathew calleth the meeke bleſſed ſome haue reduced to them that are not mooued with iniuries. And S. Paul commaundeth vs to liue peaceably one with an other. The which we haue handled elſe where, and deſerueth to be againe repeated, for that point in which the nobilitie iudgeth all honour to conſiſt, but amiſſe, and being carryed without the barres of reaſon, they hazard themſelues to the peril both of their corporall and ſpirituall life, willing to be the accuſer and ſlayer of themſelues, the witneſſe, iudge and hangman of ſuch as they pretende to haue offended them. And it is not poſsible to reuenge themſelues, but thorough a thouſande perturbations, which cauſeth them cleane to depart from tranquillitie, which an auncient writer termed to eate out ones heart, & to offend ones ſelfe more then his enimie. And often times thorough a little miſcontentment, which we coyne to our ſelues, we enter into choler, and melancholy, forgetting the pleaſures we receiue elſe where, and as if we were bewicthed ſuffer our ſelues to be ſo tranſported. S. Iohn in his firſt epiſtle,
                     Ioh. 4.20. 
                  calleth him a lyar that ſayth he loueth God, and hateth his brother: and we ought not to haue reſpect to a corrupt cuſtome or opinion, but to that which God and the King commaundeth. For as Demoſthenes was wiſely wont to ſay, VVe liue and rule by lawes not by examples. We reade in good aucthors that in olde time, that wordes were neuer reuenged but by wordes, and neuer came to handſtrokes. I counſell the nobilitie likewiſe, not to differ, anie

reſolution in a good matter. For ſlackneſſe doth often time make that harde, which is moſt eaſie to be brought to paſſe in his time.Not to differ As the loſſe of the Romane legions was attributed to the negligence of Varus. And it is a very eaſie matter, to note an infinite number of loſſes, happened through ſuch ſlackings. The anſwere which Alexander the great made to him which asked him,Alexander. how he had gayned & ſubdued al Aſia in ſo ſhort a time, is to be recommended to all Captaines, following Homers precept, neuer to differre or omit what was to be done.Diligence of Caeſar.
                   Which was in like ſort reported by Iulius Caeſar, and the olde prouerbe, is very notable, He that will not when he may, deſerueth when he would to haue a nay, and to abide the ſmart of it. The ſayde Caeſar ſheweth likewiſe, howe much quickneſſe and diligence is profitable, to the ende wee ſhould not giue time, to our enemies aſtonied, to aſſemble themſelues,Religion. Eph. 4, 14. Heb. 13.6. but to vſe the victorie, not tarying about the pillage. I will not here forget to exhort them to ſhunne all inconſtancie, in religion, fayth, and doctrine, not to varie nor ſuffer themſelues to be carryed about with euerie winde of doctrine, as Saint Paule teacheth vs: and Saint Iames Chap. 1. and 3. Conſtancie is preſerued by patience; as Tertullian declared in the booke hee made, and Impatience is the cauſe of all miſcheiues. It is alſo neceſſarie to prouide, for that which they ſo much reprooch French men with, that is, that they commence and purſue manie thinges happely enough, but for lacke of conſtancie, ſtaydeneſſe and diſcretion, they neuer come to the ende of their enterpriſes: and neuer conſider that they which doe not ſo lightly runne about their buſineſſe, proceeding with a ripeneſſe of iudgement, and a more ſtayde brayne, carryeth away the honour and profitte, of their enterpriſes wiſely vndertaken, and couragiouſly executed.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 13. That the truth findeth good that which many feare and flie, and giueth contentment.
               
                  IT were no ſmall happineſſe, if in life, we put in practiſe, that which we haue marked in ſundrie Philoſophers, who albeit they were deſtitute of the light of the Goſpell,Philoſophers deſpiſers of the vvorlde. and the certaintie of the promiſſes of God, yet haue they diſcouered the maske of this worlde, contemning the honours, riches, and pleaſures thereof,

delighting in their pouertie, patience, ſobrietie, and temperaunce, carrying meekely all loſſes, mocking at the fooliſh opinions which driue men into paſsions, condemning falſe apparaunces, and vanities, themſelues remayning in great tranquillitie, and calme in all perturbations: and hauing nought but their wallet and certaine vile garmentes did nothing but laugh all their life, as if they had beene at a feaſt, and eaten (as they ſaye) of a bride cake. And wee which haue ſo greate pleadges of eternall life,Chriſtians. and an aſſuraunce of the diuine promiſes, bountie, and more then a fatherly affection of our God towardes vs, haue much more occaſion, not to eſteeme theſe corruptible thinges, and to liue ioyfully in reſpect of that which hath beene giuen vnto vs, without beeing deſirous or coueting anye other thinge, then that which proceedeth from the will of the almightie. Seneca in the ſeconde of his Epiſtles writeth,Nature contented vvith litle. that ſuche as liue according to nature, are neuer poore, and according to the opinion of men they are neuer riche, becauſe nature contenteth her ſelfe with little, and opinion doth infinitely couet. And in his 4. booke, he counſelleth a friende of his, to deſpiſe all that which other ſo hotly purſue. For that which men eſteeme as great aduancement in honor, goods, or pleaſures, when they once approch to the truth, to vertue, and heauenly goodneſſe, it looſeth cleane his apparance, and luſtre, euen as the ſtarres, when they are neere the ſunne beames. For the diſpoſitions of ſuch as are moderated, and inſtructed in the truth, rendreth a life peaſeable, and like vnto her ſelfe, the occaſion of the quietneſſe of the minde proceeding thence, thorough his grace which communicateth ſo great a good, as it is written in the booke of Wiſedome, I doe reioyce in all thinges becauſe wiſedome goeth before. And it receaueth no griefe,Poſsidonius. but ſuch as our ſelues are content to yeelde vnto as Poſſidonius ſayde to Pompey. And there is an other ſauour giuen and an other kinde of face ſet vpon that which they call euill. And vertue, valor, force, patience & magnanimitie, can no waies play their part without griefe & paine. And as Diamans & other precious ſtones, haue either a more high or dimme colour according to the foile in which they are ſet; ſo fareth it with the euil happes, & griefe which taketh place,Mans life cō
                     pared to a game at draughts. as a man is eyther ſtrong or weake. And as all thinges in this worlde in the ende referreth it ſelfe wholly to the glorie of God, ſo doth all thinges turne to good to ſuch as are good. Plato and Terence compareth our life to a game at draughtes, where the

player muſt euer marke well what ſhal befall vnto him, and diſpoſe euery thing eyther to profit him, or little to hurt him. And they which care leaſt for to morrowe following the commandement of our ſauiour, ariue there moſt ioyfully, hauing not the will vnproportionate to the might, nor their minde afflicted.
                     Not to care for to morrovve.
                     Veſſels in heauen ful of deſteneis.
                   
                  Homer maketh two veſſels to be in heauen full of deſtinies, the one of good the other of bad; & he accounteth him happie, which equally partaketh as well of the one as the other, & as much hony, as gaul. And Seneca writeth that the deſtinies leade gently ſuch as conſent, & drawe by force ſuch as refuſe. Notwithſtanding the wiſe do temper, and turne the euill into good, drawing out of their good aduentures what naught ſoeuer is there mingled, & by this meanes paſſe away the more eaſily the courſe of this life. To which the old prouerbe agreeth, that euery man is the workman of his owne fortune, and faſhioneth her according to his maners. And if we doe contemne honours, riches, pleaſures, baniſhmentes, griefes, and ſickeneſſe, we ſhall be cleane exempt, from all couetous deſires, paſsions,VVhat profit enſueth the contempt of riches and pleaſures. Pheraulas.
                   and tormentes of the minde. As Xenophon in his Pedia reciteth of one Pheraulas, to whō 
                  Cirus gaue a Lordſhip, of a very great reuenewe: but hauing well conſidered the eaſe & contentment which he toke during his pouertie, and the care which he muſt then needes take for his reuenewe and domeſticall affayres, hee put all againe into the handes of a friende of his.Anacreon. As Anacreon hauing had fiue talents worth three thouſande crownes, giuen him by Policrates, after he ſaw that he had paſſed two nights togither ſtudying what he ſhold do with it, he ſent them backe againe, ſaying that they were not worth the care he had taken for thē. And when newes was brought vnto Zeno, and certaine other, that their ſhipps, goods,Zeno. and marchandiſe were loſte, they reioyſed, becauſe it was a cauſe to make them apply themſelues to Philoſophie, which yeelded them farre greater contentment. Philoxenes hauing purchaſed a farme, wherby he might liue the better at eaſe, quitted it againe and returned to Athens ſaying, Theſe goods ſhall not looſe me, but I them.Philoxenes. As Seneca wrote to a friend of his,Seneca if thou hadſt not loſt thy goods it might be they might haue loſt thee. And the brickleneſſe of the aduiſed, ſerueth them as it were to be ſhodde with ſhowes of yce againſt ſinne.Anacharſis. 
                  Anacharſis left the kingdome of Scithia to his younger brother, to growe to be a Philoſopher, in the ſayde Citie of Athenes. Ariſtides choſe likewiſe to remaine in his pouertie, though it laye in his power to haue made himſelfe a Lorde of greate

riches.Scipio 
                  Scipio hauing by force taken Cartharge, touched no whit of the ſacking or ſpoyle thereof.Epaminundas Camillus 
                  Epaminundas, and Camillus amonge all the victories they obtayned, neuer carried anie thing elſe away then honour. An infinite number of other, as well Captaines, as Philoſophers, haue contemned goods, albeit this moderation which was ſo greatly prayſed in them, was neuer ioyned together with a hope of eternall life,Hope of the Chriſtians as the Chriſtians is, who knowe that the creator of heauen and earth, is their father and Lord almightie, that he loueth them, and knoweth ful well the way they ought to holde, the medicines which they ought to vſe, and whatſoeuer is moſt expedient, to bring them to the promiſſed bliſſe; after this their pilgrimage and exile. Therfore they ſuffer thēſelues to be cō
                  ducted by him without murmuring, approuing for good whatſoeuer proceedeth from his fatherly hande, and by this meane remaine in the peace of the ſpirit, and calmeneſſe, what winde ſoeuer blowe, without being toſſed in the troubles & ſtormes of this life. They know likewiſe that if God doe ſtricke them downe with the left hande, he rayſeth them vp with the right againe, according to the promiſſe he made by his Prophet Oſe.
                  
                     Hoſea 11. And as all meates are agreeing with a good ſtomach, and to a bad the moſt delicate ſeeme corrupt, as it is written in the Prouerbes, that to a hungrye ſoule all bitter things ſeeme ſweete:
                  
                     Rom. 8.28. Eccleſ. 39.27 ſo, all things turne to good to the faithfull, as S. Paul hath written. And in Eccleſiaſticus, all thinges are turned into good to ſuch as feare God, but to the ſinners they are turned into euill, who turne light into darkeneſſe, and good into euill. And money is to good men a cauſe of good, to the wicked of euill and crueltie. And as the ſhowe is faſhioned according to the foote, ſo his diſpoſition which is wiſe, & moderate, leadeth a life like vnto it, to wit peaſeable,Cicero. and without paſsion, coueting nothing vnpoſsible, and contenting it ſelfe with the preſent. That is it which Cicero writeth, that vertue in trouble doth euer remaine quiet, and being caſt into baniſhment, neuer departeth from her place. For the goods of fortune, reioyce thoſe moſt which leaſt doubt their contraries: and the feare of looſing them, maketh the pleaſure of the enioying of them,Plato more feeble and leſſe aſſured. Plato gaue counſell not to cōplaine in aduerſitie, for that we know not whether it happen vnto vs for our hurt or no. And in his Phedon hee writeth, that looke what beautie, riches, honour, and kinred we here deſire, it is ſo farre off from being good, that indeede they doe rather corrupt and impayre vs. But a Chriſtian man, ought to eſteeme

all good, and for his health, whiche perſwaſion ſerueth vnto him, as the meale did which Eliſha caſt into the pot,2. King. 4.41 Exod. 15.25. which tooke cleane away all the bitterneſſe of the pottage, and as the tree with which Moſes made the waters ſweete. From thence enſueth that Chriſtian Parradoxe ſo often times verified, that there neuer happeneth euill to the good, nor good to the wicked, whoſe nature is changed by bleſsing. As it is ſayde of a diſeaſed bodie, that the more it is nouriſhed, the more it is offended. And as ſtrange dreames, ſhewe that there be groſſe and clammie humors, and perturbation of the vitall ſpirites; ſo the paſsions, couetings, and misknowledge, of the goods which God hath beſtowed vpon vs, are the bad vapours which obfuſcate and torment our ſenſes. And euen as to rid a man pained with a greeuous dreame, the next way is to awake him: euen ſo the trueth doeth declare, that that which many feare, is but an opinion and fooliſh imagination, and as it were a picture of a tyrant or cruell beaſte which aſtonieth no man. And as the fire which Moſes ſaw in the buſh did nether burne nor endamage him becauſe God was in the midſt therof;
                     Exod. 3.2. VVordly accidents hovv eaſie to be borne. ſo interminglyng God & his promiſes with our humane affaires and accidents, al ſhal be eaſie for vs to beare: And God being for vs none can anoye vs, as the Apoſtle ſayth. It is alſo called a wall of braſſe a rampire and a defence for vs to defende vs from all dangers.
                     Rom. 8.33 And as it is written in Iob: God maketh the wounde and bindeth it vp, he ſmiteth & his hand maketh whole, he ſhal deliuer thee in ſixe troubles, and in the 7.
                     Iob. 5.18. 
                  the euil ſhal not touch thee, In famine he ſhal deliuer thee frō death, and in battaile frō the power of the ſword: Thou ſhalt be hid frō the ſcourge of the tonge and thou ſhalt not be afraide of deſtruction when it cōmeth. And in Ieremie it is written of the faithful, that he ſhal reſt & be at his eaſe, & none ſhal make him afraid, becauſe God is with him to ſuccor him after he hath gently corrected him, and wil heale his ſtripes. And as the higher we clime, the leſſe thoſe thinges vnder vs ſeeme to bee, ſo the neerer that wee approche to the knowledge of God, and his trueth, the leſſe account doe we make of theſe earthly, baſe, and corruptible thinges. To be therefore contented and rich,Contentmēt and trevve riches. we muſt not ad goods vpō goods, but diminiſh & take away as Socrates ſaid from our couetous deſires And we ought to conſider, how many perſons in the world, are worſe at eaſe then our ſelues and to draw aſide as one may ſay, the courtaine & vale of apparance, & opiniō, which couereth them whom we eſteeme happie & great, the better to perceaue the trauales, troubles and griefes, which thy haue,

and howe often they hoyſe vp the ſayle of their ſhippe ſo highe, that they are forced to make ſhipwracke. For this cauſe Scipio being Cenſor,
                  A publique & ſolemne prayer changed by Scipio
                   made the prayer to be changed, which was wont to be ſayde vpon certaine high dayes, for the encreaſe of wealth to the people of Rome, ſaying: that it was ſufficient, and that they ought only to pray vnto God, to preſerue it ſuch as it was. It is written of Antiochus,
                  Antiochus. that when the Romaynes had gotten from him the greateſt part of his kingdome, hee ſhould ſay he was much beholding vnto them, for ſo much more care as they had eaſed him of. And Philip father to Alexander the great, being fallen vppon the ſandes,
                     Philip K. of Macedon,
                   and ſeeing there the marke and print of his bodie. O Lorde, ſayth he, howe little a plat of grounde is nature contented with, and yet we couet the whole worlde. When God ſeeth that high callinges, riches, health or any thing elſe doeth turne vs from him,God doth depriue vs of ſuch thinges as vve are to far in loue vvith for our ovvne good. (as in Zacharie proſperitie is called a canker and Pyndarus ſayth that nothing is harder to diſgeſt, and that it doth make vs drunke) he doeth depriue vs thereof, and ſundrie wayes correcteth vs remouing the hinderances of his approching nigh vs, to the end that ſhutting our eies at the miſerable eſtate of this world, we ſhould open our eares to the hearing of his promiſes, and according vnto the counſell which he giueth vs, laye vp our treaſures in heauen,
                  
                     Mat. 6.20. 
                  where there is neither feare of theeues, nor canker, and range our ſelues vnder the yooke and obedience, of his diuine, iuſt, vpright, and equitable will, holding impatience for a rebell thereunto. In hiſtories we finde examples enough of Popes, Emperours, Princes,The meane is to be kept both in proſperity and adverſitie. and other that haue euen dyed for griefe and anger, for reſoluing too much vpon the vnſtablenes of this life, and by weighing the incōmoditie, by other graces, which God beſtowed on them. In great proſperitie we glutten vp the benefits of God, without ſa: uoring of thē, and thereby become inſolent and blind: and in aduerſitie many looſe heart not thinking of any other gifts they haue receiued at Gods handes: by this meanes a man is miſerable, if he holde not the meane, & if this truth doth not open our eyes, that we may ſee God through al things, and therby diſcouer his bountie. For the accidents of this world, nor al that which they cal fortune, is no way able to make vs vnfortunate, except malice & vice aide them finding a faint heart delicate, effeminate, & not acquainted with the affayres & changes of the world, and retayne the corrupt opinion of the vulgar ſort, which hath been imprinted within it: but mingling ſuch thinges as are fierce, rude and ſower with the

ſweete and gratious, and obſcuring the yll aduentures, with the conference of the good, and mixing ſuffrance togither with hope, whatſoeuer is moſt diſagreeable, yea, the verie ſting of death, dieth it ſelfe, feare apprehenſion and opinion being caſt out; the which ſerueth for a receate to all miſchiefes.
                     Iudges. 14.8. And as Samſon found honie in the bodie of the Lyon, ſo the faithful findeth ioy in the bottome miſeries, and peace amidſt ſtormes, & through the vertue of faith reſiſteth al feares, and as a wiſe and wel experienced pylote, who euer doubteth a great calme, in the maine ſea, neuer abuſeth his good fortune,The abuſe of gifts and graces of God and helpeth himſelfe with all windes to ariue at his deſired port. But a man may ſay that the moſt parte of men paſſe ouer that which they call their fortune, through a ſtrainer, wherein all the bad ſticke and remaineth, but the good drop out. And as a cordmaker, that was pictured in an olde temple, had behinde him an aſſe, which eate his corde as faſt as he made it: ſo the chagraine, and melancholie, and the vnderſtanding fooliſhly ſetled vpon that which diſpleaſeth, doth cleane deface, deuoure, & paſſe ouer careleſly all other goods and commodities, without any ſauour at all, or better conſideration for their owne comfort. Or as a flye entered into a bottle, or a fiſh into the net, tormenting thē
                  ſelues, not able to take the right way to eſcape.True riches in heauen. Many do not temper their ſmall diſcommodities, with other infinite goods that they receiue from God, and neuer ſettle the diſcourſe of their vnderſtanding to conſider what falſe apparances and vanitie conſiſteth euen in that, which they make ſo much account of, & neuer thinke of the vnconſtancie of the things of this worlde, whereby they might find nothing ſtrange nor new, and faſten their ancre, treaſor, and hope in heauen, where it is moſt ſafely laid vp againſt all aſſaults and enterpriſes. And wee ought to put the ſaying of Eccleſiaſticus in practiſe, that he which feareth the Lord, ſhal not be afraid,
                  Eccleſiaſt. 
                  for he is his hope, piller & defence. And that which Dauid ſong,
                     Pſal. 112.7. that he whoſe heart is fixed, & beleeueth in the Lord, wil not be afraide of any euill tydings. Ariſtotle, Pindarus, Tacitus, Saluſtus & Cato, were wont to ſay that it was a harder matter to gouerne a mans ſelfe wel in proſperitie, then in aduerſitie, becauſe often times proſperitie is accompanied with pride, ignorance, wantonneſſe, contempt of others,The benefit of aduerſitie. licentiouſnes, intemperance and other vices, which prouoke the wrath of God: wheras aduerſitie doth quicken our ſlepie ſpirites, incourageth vs to modeſtie to feare, praiſe & cal vpon God, & to take better counſell, & reforme our life, as a French Poet wrote,

that aduerſitie and contrarie fortune, did profit men more, and do them more good then the ſweet & pleaſant: for by the latter they learn but ignorance, & through aduerſitie are taught knowledge. Which alſo Iſocrates moſt learnedly intreated of in his Areopagitique, thinking it a verie hard matter to iudge, which of the two, either pouertie or riches, a man ought to leaue behind him, & to couet for his children. The which made Ariſtides, Curius, & an infinite number of other to liue in a verie baſe condition, the which Demoſthenes & Lucain called a ſinguler gift of God, and vnknown of men.Pouertie a ſinguler gift of God. And Plutarque had reaſon to write, that Liſander did more hurt the Lacedemonians, in ſending them ſtore of riches and pretious mouables, then Sylla did the Romanes, in conſuming the reuenues of their treaſor. And Plinie in his ſeuenth booke declareth, what a number of men haue beene euen loſt thorough too much wealth.Riches an occaſion of the ruine of many And the wiſe man ſayeth in the Prouerbs, that fooles are clean ruined through proſperitie, and the end of all ioy is ſorrow. And the ſaid Iſocrates, entreating of peace, is of opinion, that it is a moſt hard matter to gouerne ones ſelfe well,
                  
                     Prou 2. & 14 
                  in great eſtates and dignities, the which he compareth to a courtiſan and ſtrumpet, who entiſeth to her loue the vnwiſe, as a bait to the ruine both of their bodie & ſoule: and declareth that men are often times more ſharpe, & addicted to euil matters, & ſuperfluous rather then to the good & neceſſarie.Men more giuen to naughtines, then goodnes. And in what is to be deſired, they haue want of iudgement. He likewiſe deſcribeth how much more pleaſant & happie their life is, which are accuſtomed to litle, then other to great riches. And Seneca aloweth the ſaying of Demetrius, that nothing is more vnhappie, then him who neuer knewe what euil fortune or aduerſitiement, and that the more torments be endured, the more honor; and that the more yll that happeneth vnto vs, the more God is mindfull of vs, as the Pſalmiſt ſaieth. In this life fewe are exempted from affliction, be it in minde, body, or goods.
                     Ierem. 32.41. And albeit that God delighteth to doe good as Ieremias ſayeth Chapter 32. yet doeth hee ſometime, what is not proper vnto him, as to afflict to finiſh his worke, and what good hee pretendeth to doe, ſayeth Eſay Chap. 21. & Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 11. Heb. 12. And Oſea writeth Chap. 2. that God wil ſtop the waye with thornes,
                  
                     Hoſea 2.6. 
                  and make a hedge, which leadeth to deſtruction, to make vs returne vnto him. Afflictions instruct vs to patience, & hope, Rom. 5. They make vs humble, & incline vs to obey God, Pſalm. 119. they retaine vs back from pleaſures, & worldly things, & make vs haue recourſe to God. Which hath moued ſome to name affliction the ſaulce of

prayer, as appetite is of meate.Affliction the ſaulce of prayer. Moreouer we perceiue thereby that God hath a care of vs, and doeth not account vs vnworthie of his viſitations, & often times doth recompenſe vs doubly: as we read in Ioſeph, Iob, & others. And S. Paul ſaieth, that they are not to bee compared to the glorie promiſed vs. It is not to be doubted but a ſenſible man, will carrie him ſelfe euen in eche fortune, promiſing no certaintie at all vnto himſelfe in matters of this worlde, beeing by nature ſo vncertaine. And hauinge conſidered the vnſtableneſſe of humane things, and the fatherly care which it hath pleaſed God to take of his, hee cannot bee ſurpriſed at vnawares,A wiſe man in eache fortune behaueth him ſelfe alike. as in a ſuddaine incurſion of the enimie. And knowing hee holdeth all thinges from God, as borowed ware, hee rendreth them voluntarily, and without griefe, when hee which lent them doeth redemaunde them, giuing him thankes for the time it hath pleaſed him to ſuffer him to enioy them, that hee might not be founde vngratefull. They alſo which deſire but little, cannot want much,Content with little. leading their barbarous and coueting paſsions by reaſon, as the maiſters voyce maketh the dogge to couche.Chriſoſtome. Sainct Chriſoſtome intreating of couetous deſires ſayeth, that as the forme of the ſhooe is the foote, and if it bee greater then it ſhoulde bee, bee it of veluet or of cloth of golde, yet is it vnfit; ſo the bodie ought to bee the forme of whatſoeuer wee poſſeſſe. And if wee ſwarne from this forme and vſage, then is there nought els but a confuſion, diſorder, ſuperfluitie, abuſe, and exceſſe. And oftentimes, lacke of experience, and want of good diſcourſe, and not knowing wel how to apply our ſelues to the preſent ſtate, cauſeth vs to wrap our ſelues in an infinite number of paſsions and tormentes. Wee ought then earneſtly to deſire this trueth, to the ende wee ſhould not bee diſmayde, if God doe not ſuffer vs to wallowe and tumble in too much eaſe. Beſides wherefore doeth wealth ſerue,To what ende welth ſerueth. but onely as a teſtimonie of his fauour, and an occaſion to acknowledge it from him, well to vſe it to his honour, and releaue of our neighbour? And Apollonius had reaſon to ſaye,Apollonius. that vertue and riches were two contrarie thinges, and that the one encreaſing the other was euer diminiſhed. And as the greater wee ſee our ſhadowe, the nearer we draw towards night: ſo muſt we feare, leaſt the more that we ſee our ſelues charged with honors & wealth,Goodnes and riches ſeldome coupled together. the further off trueth & the light eſtrange themſelues from vs. And Platon in the fourth of his lawes, thinketh it a matter vnpoſsible for a man to bee both honeſt and riche.Diogenes. 
                  Diogenes was wont to ſay,

that vertue neuer found any place in a rich citie or houſe,Seneca. and that it was a great happines to haue both wealth and vnderſtanding. Seneca wrote that he was a mightie man who eſteemed himſelf poore amidſt plentie of riches, and did not in reſpect of them, carry himſelfe more loftely:
                     Matth. 5.3. but that he who had none at all, went a great deale more ſurely,Proſperitie doubted and ſuſpected. and in greater ſafetie: following that which our Sauiour taught vs, when he called the poore in ſpirit bleſſed. And as men in olde time, euer helde in ſuſpition the ende of their fortune,K. Amaſias. ſo haue they done in great proſperitie: as King Amiſias ſaied to Policrates, ſeeing that one had brought him backe againe his ring which he flong into the maine ſea. Theſe good happes do not pleaſe me, becauſe I feare me they wil turne into calamities & miſeries:S. Ambroſe. as afterwards it befel vnto him. Saint Ambroſe happening into a rich mans houſe, and vnderſtanding that he had euery thing as he would wiſh it, neuer hauing occaſion of diſquiet or anger, preſently departed, fearing leaſt hee ſhoulde bee partaker of ſome misfortune: anon after was the houſe ſwalowed vp with an earthquake.S. Ierom. Saint Ierome alledgeth an auncient prouerbe, that a riche man is either wicked of himſelf, or heire to a wicked man. And he wrote vnto Saluia, that euen as pouertie is not meritorious if it be not borne with patience, no more are riches hurtful if they be not abuſed.S. Chriſoſtom. The which S. Chriſoſtom in his homelie of the poore man and the rich, more amply entreateth of.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XIIII. Of the care which men haue had that youth might be inſtructed in the trueth.
               
                  PArents haue beene commanded to bring vp and inſtruct their children, but eſpecially to teach them how to knowe,
                     Exod. 12.26. & 13.8. & 14. and feare God, in Exodus Chap. 12. & 13. Deut. 4.6. & 7. in Saint Paul to the Epheſ. 6.
                     Deut. 4.25. & 6.7. & 7.3. Eph. 6.4. in ſundry Pſalms. In Perſia, Lacedemonia, and ſundrie other prouinces, the moſt vertuous graue, and learned men,The inſtruction of children commaunded. had the charge of the education, & inſtruction of youth, and endeuoured moſt eſpecially to make them true and hate lying, following Platoes counſell in ſundrie of his treatiſes. And in Alcibiades he writeth that there was giuen vnto the Princes of Perſia their children, a tutor which had care aboue

all things, to make them loue the trueth: for of the foure vertues, which concerne manners, to wit, Prudence, Iuſtice, Fortitude,Moral vertues & Temperance, the trueth eſpeciall draweth neere vnto Iuſtice, which rendreth vnto euerie one what appertaineth vnto him, and kepeth equality, being the ſpring and foundation of all vertue, and preſeruer of the ſocietie of man. Which was the cauſe that in time paſt they had ſo great care to teach their children, togither with their mothers milke, a habite and cuſtome to be true, and hate lying, diſſembling, and hypocriſie, and that they imploy that time which is giuen vnto them, to all matters of vertue, and reforme them, making them more aduiſed, and capable to ſerue God, the common wealth, and their parents. Diuers Emperours haue been greatly praiſed, for erecting of common ſcholes,Comō ſchooles erected. the better to inſtruct youth to diſcerne truth from lying. And thoſe Princes which gaue ſtipends to ſcholemaſters, were accounted to haue don more good to the common wealth, then they which ordained wages for Phyſitions, becauſe the former bettered the wit, the other onely the bodie, which is the leſſer parte, and of leſſe account. For this cauſe Alexander the Emperour, Commenes, and diuers other,Alexander. Commines. Leo Emperour Guichardin. li. 10.
                   are recommended to famous memorie, for prouiding for all things neceſſarie to ſcholemaſters, readers, and poore ſcholers. Great account was made of the ſpeache of Leo the Emperour, who wiſhed that ſcholemaſters might receiue the paye of men of armes. Guichardin writeth, that ſundrie Popes gaue conſent to the Venetians, to gather money of the Clergie, the better to encourage, and find ſcholers in learning. And there were in the olde time, certain perſons choſen out of the quarters, & wardes of good townes, which they called Sophroniſtes, who had a continuall charge, and care,Sophroniſtes. to controll, moderate, and rule the manners of youth: which being well inſtructed, all things proſper more fortunately,Learning. and euery one doth his duetie, without neede of any more lawes. For as Diogenes ſaid, and ſince Cicero: Learning is the temperance of youth, the comfort of old age, ſtanding for wealth in pouertie, and ſeruing for an ornament to riches, as more at large is diſcourſed of hereafter.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XV. How requiſite it is to ſpeake little, and not to blaſe a ſecrete, with aduiſe vppon newes inuented and of that which is to be ſpoken.
               
                  
                  
                     ECcleſiaſticus doeth counſell vs to vſe but fewe words:Praiſe of ſcilence and few wordes. becauſe manie multiply vanitie, and a man of good vnderſtanding ſpeaking litle ſhalbe much honored. Pithagoras willed all thoſe he receiued into his ſchoole, to tarrie fiue yeares before they ſpoke.
                     Pithagoras his ſcholers. And it is euer ſeene that children which are long before they ſpeake, in the end do euer ſpeak beſt: as amōg manie, it is written of Maximilian the firſt: & that they which cannot hold their peace, doe neuer willingly giue eare to ought. And by a good occaſion one made anſwere to a prater. It is great maruel that a man hauing feet can endure thy babling. And thoſe that haue beene long time paſt, haue ſaide, that men taught vs to ſpeake, but the Gods to hold our peace: as alſo it is written in the Prouerbs, that God hath the gouernement of the tongue, and that a wiſe men doth euer hold his peace, & he that can countermaund his mouth, keepeth his own ſoule. Ioyned with all, that by a light worde, oftentimes great paine is endured, whereas ſcilence doth not onely no-whit alter,
                     Lycurgus the law giuer of the Lacedemonians. but is not at al ſubiect to accounte nor amendes. For this cauſe one being asked, why Lycurgus made ſo fewe lawes, aunſwered, that ſuch as vſed fewe words had no neede of many lawes, and woulde accuſtome their youth to deedes,The anſwer of K. Francis the great. and not to writing. And the great K Francis made aunſwere to one that asked pardon for one ſpeaking euil of him, if hee will learne to ſpeake litle, I wil learne to pardon much. And Cicero in his booke of the Oratour, writeth,Cato. Piſo. that Cato and Piſo, eſteemed breefenes, a great praiſe of eloquence, ſo as thereby they make themſelues to bee fully conceiued. Among ſuch as ſpeake much I comprehende, following the opinion of them of olde time, ſuch as ſpeake either what is hurtfull, or ſerueth to no ende, or as Saint Paul calleth them, thinges pleaſing for the time which doe no whit edifie.Geeſe, Cranes, and quailes. 
                  Plutarque ſetteth vs down certaine Geeſe, and Plinie certaine Cranes, which when they paſſe ouer Cicilie vppon the mount Taurus, fill their becke full of flintes, for feare of making any noyſe, leaſt they ſhoulde ſerue for a praye to the Eagles that are there. The like experience wee haue had of Quailes after harueſt,Caliſthenes. Simonides. in France. Ariſtotle ſending Caliſtenes a kinſman and friend of his to Alexander, counſelled him to ſpeake but little, which he not obſeruing, it fared with him but badlye. Simonides was wont to ſaye, that hee repented himſelfe oftentimes in ſpeaking, but neuer in holdinge his peace. The which Valerius
                  
attributeth to Xenocrates, folowing the rule which is in our lawe,Xenocrates. that thoſe thinges hurte which are expreſſed, but not ſuch as are not. And Apollonius ſaied, that many words breede often times offence, but that holding ones peace was the more ſure.Apollonius. Greatly was the breefenes of the Lacedemonians prayſed in their letters, as amongeſt other thinges of a Prince, which put in his aunſwere but this worde No: and that which wee touched aboue of Archidamus to the Aeoliens diſſwading them from warre,K. Philip the faire. ſaying that quietneſſe is good. And K. Philip the faire, aunſwering a letter of Adolphe the Emperor, gotten by the Engliſhmen, in al his pacquet had but theſe two wordes too much Almane. An Embaſſadour hauing long time ſpoken before Agis king of the Lacedemonians, aſked him what aunſwere he ſhoulde carrie backe: Thou ſhalt ſaye (quod hee) that I haue ſuffered thee, to ſpeake whatſoeuer thou wouldſt, & haue heard thee cōtinually without replying any word. And the great K Francis,
                  K. Francis. 1. to an Embaſſador of Charles the fift Emperour, who began his Oration with theſe words: Whē Scipio ariued before Carthage, ſaid, Growe to your end, for we know wel enough he went not a foote but a horsback. The Athenians made a feaſt to K. Antigonus Embaſſador,Zeno. & among other called thither Zeno the Philoſopher, who was held in great reputation: and for becauſe he had not ſpoken one worde all the whole banquet, they asked him what they ſhould ſay of him to their Prince: he anſwered,Speach hardly tempered. what you haue ſeene: becauſe ſpeach is hardly tempered, & as Bion ſaid: it is vnpoſsible for a foole to hold his peace at the table, & it is not ſo dangerous ſtumbling with the foote, as with the tongue.Alexandridas 
                  Alexandridas, to one which made a verie good diſcourſe, yet longer then needed. My friend, ſaid he, you ſay as it ought to be,Cleomenes. but not as you ought. Cleomenes to a long Oration of the Embaſſadors of Samos anſwered: As for your exordium I do not wel remember it, nor ſo conſequently the midſt, and I will ſay little to your concluſion.
                     Philip king of Macedon.
                   Of like ſort was the anſwere made by K Philip to an other Embaſſadour. Wee haue not vnderſtood your concluſion, becauſe wee forgot your beginning. And after he had asked the Athenian Embaſſadors, if they deſired ought els at his hands then to haue him their friend, & that they aunſwered that they wiſhed, that he had hong himſelf: he told them that hee which bare theſe wordes, was much more modeſt then the Athenians, who had not the diſcretion to keepe them in. And another was caſt in the teeth, that for a drop of wit, hee had a flood of words: and that he which is liberal

and abounding in words, is euer ſparing in deeds. Salomon ſayeth: He which hath knowledge ſpareth his wordes. Euen a foole when he holdeth his peace is counted wiſe.
                  
                     Prou. 17.27. Which gaue occaſion to men of olde time to write,Harpocrates. that Harpocrates was the ſuperintendent, & correcter of mans ſpeach, being drawen with a ring faſtened on his lippes. And they ordained certaine ceremonies to vſe men to ſcilence, & not to ſpeake but vpon good deliberation. Other worſhipped Angerona the goddeſſe of ſcilence, drawen with her finger vppon her mouth,Angerona. ſhewing in what reuerence they ought to hold ſecrecie. It is written of S. Pembo,
                  Pembo. that he was wont to ſaye, that hee had ſpent nineteene whole yeres, to put in practiſe the beginning of the 39 Pſalme: I though I will take heede to my wayes, that I ſinne not with my tongue: I wil keepe my mouth bridled. The Embaſſador of the Rhodes greatly accounted of before K. Ptolome,
                  
                     Pſal. 39.1. that in his countrey weomen were giuen to ſolitarines, & litle ſpeach. To this commeth the cuſtom which the Popes obſerue, that when they receiue any Cardinall,Cuſtome obſerued in receiuing a Cardinall. they ſtop his mouth, & after certaine dayes that hee maye learne of his ſeniors, they open it againe. Iob alſo fearing to haue ſpoken too lightly, ſaid that he would holde his hande vppon his mouth. And S. Ierom writeth how he ſaw ſome that in ſeuen yeres neuer ſpoke.Amb. lib. 2. de virgin. S. Ambroſe caſt the Chriſtians in the teethe, for that the infidels in their temples, & ſacrifices, vſed great ſcilence, but that Chriſtians did not ſo. And to ſhew howe a ſecrete ought not lightly to be reuealed,Metallus. we haue the anſwere of Metellus a Romane Captaine, to one that asked of him his opinion: that if his ſhirte knew his counſell, he would preſently throw it off, and caſt it into the fire.
                     Charles 8. The which our French writers haue noted to haue beene ſince that,Antigonus. the ſpeache of Charles the eight. And Antigonus anſwered his ſonne, demaunding of him when he ſhoulde goe fight: Art thou afraide for not hearing the ſound of a trumpet? for it is a verie harde matter, not to publiſh what one hath heard, which maketh vs often times, loſe manie good occaſions. As an indiſcreete worde of one man,K. Lycimachus. hindered the whole citie of Rome, that it was not deliuered from the tyrannie of Nero. King Lycimachus asked Philippides, what hee woulde haue him graunt vnto him: hee aunſwered,
                     Prouerb. 25.3. what it will pleaſe you (Mileeche) to parte with ſo it bee not any of your ſecretes;
                     Eccl. 27.16. for as it is written in the Prouerbes: The Kinges heart can no man ſearch out, and a ſecrete thinge muſt bee concealed. And in Eccleſiaſticus: He which diſcouereth ſecrets, loſeth his credite.
               
               
                  
                  Alexander perceiuing that Epheſtion had red a letter,Alexander. Epheſtion. whiche hys mother hadde ſent him, with his ſignet cloſed his lippes, as who would ſaie, he ought not to diſcloſe what hee had read.Pompey. 
                  Pompey ſuffered a finger of his owne to burne, becauſe hee would not reueale the counſaile of the Senate. The like is noted in Papirius. And Plyny telleth of one, that cut out his tongue, and caſt it at the face of a Tyraunt, becauſe he would not diſcouer a conſpiracie. One aſked Anacharſis (who inueſted his yonger brother in his kyngdome) why when he lay downe,Anacharſis. he alwaies held his right hand vpon his mouth, he aunſwered, becauſe he might neither reueale any ſecret, nor ſpeake raſhly: for that hee to whome one reuealeth it,Diodorus. gayneth the libertie of the other. Diodorus writeth, how the Egiptians did euer cut out his tongue, that had diſcloſed any ſecret, or reuealed any practiſe to the enemies. And one Valerius a Poet was executed at Rome. King Seleucus, called the conquerour,Valerius. Soranus. hauing loſt a battaile, fled by manie crooked waies, and in the ende ariued at a poore Peſantes Cottage, who gaue vnto him what hee was able to come by: in the ende he knew it was the king, and not being able to keepe in his ioye, nor diſguiſe with the king, who deſired nothing but to be vnknowne, he guided him, into the highway, where taking his leaue he ſaid: farewell my Leeche Seleucus.
                  K. Seleucus. The king made a ſigne to one of his companie to kill him: whereas if he had held his tongue, for a while vntill the king had better fortune, he might haue bene highlier rewarded for his ſecriſie, then for his good cheare, for ſince that a worde iſſueth out of ones mouth as out of his hauen, there is no more harbour,A vvord eſcapeth the mouth returneth not. where to ſhrowde, nor ancker to truſt vnto, but in the ende burſteth againſt ſome rocke or goulfe, to his great danger that ſuffered it to paſſe. And as the Vyper is torne aſunder, when ſhe bringeth forth her litle ones, ſo ſecretes comming out of their mouthes, that are not able to conceale them, doe but vtterly vndoe and ruine ſuche, as haue reuealed them, and thorough the intemperance of theyr tongue caſt themſelues downe headlong, as one made an example of cruell beaſtes, that were penned vp, who if they once goe abroad, dyd much harme, and oftentimes men were conſtrayned to kill them. In the time of Auguſtus one Fuluius,
                  Fuluius. for hauing diſcloſed a ſecret to his wife, cauſed themſelues both to be put to death. And Quintus Curſius ſheweth what great puniſhmentes the Perſians ordained for the like. Amaſis king of Egipt,
                  Qu. Curtius. lib. 4. Amaſis king of Egypt. ſent vnto Pittacus, one of the ſeuen wiſe men of Greece, that was come to ſee

him, a mutton, willing him to ſend backe that peece which he accounted as beſt, and that which he iudged to be the worſt, in ſteede of the two peeces ſo differing,The tong the beſt and vvorſt peece of the body. hee ſent vnto him the tongue, as the inſtrument both of the greateſt good, & greateſt harme that might be: and that therein (as it is ſayd among great wits) conſiſted moſte excellent vertues, and notorious vices: as it is written in the Prouerbs,
                  
                     Prou. 13.3. that death and lyfe are in the power of the tongue, and that he which keepeth his mouth and his tongue, keepeth his ſoule from tribulations. Let vs then I pray you conſider that we haue two eyes, and two eares, but one onely tongue, and that to incloſed within the teeth, and lipps, betweene the braine and the hart, ſeruing as their truche man,The ſeat and piece of the tongue. hauing aboue it the inſtrument of all the ſences, the eyes, the eares and the noſe obedient vnto reaſon, to the end ſhe put foorth nothing, before ſhee haue taken counſell of the ſayde ſences her neighbours, and of the inward faculties of the ſoule, which are the vnderſtanding, and reaſon placed within the brayne: whereby we maye eaſely iudge how faultye they are, who are ſo lauiſhe of their tongue, before they haue fully pondred and conſidered, what they ought to ſpeake.Homer. 
                  Homer blamed Therſites, for too much ſpeaking, and prayſed Menelaus, becauſe he ſpoke little. The which Plutarque did of Phocion,
                  
                     Phocion ſpoke better then Demoſthenes.
                   by whom it was wrytten, that he ſpoke better then Demosthenes, becauſe when he ſpoke in few wordes he comprehended much matter. The ſayd Demoſthenes likewyſe termed him the knife of his wordes. And was wont to ſay, that ſuch as knew much ſpoke little.Pericles. 
                  Pericles before he mounted into his cheyre, was wont to pray vnto God, that no word might eſcape his mouth that ſerued not to the matter he had in hand. And Zeno reproched a great prater,Zeno, in that his eares was founded vpon his tongue. And to an other he ſayd he was borne of a druncken father:Drunkennes ſubiect vnto much babling The Pie conſecrated to Bacchus.
                   for drunckennes is myxed with this vice, that it cauſeth one to ſpeake more then appertayneth. The Pye in this reſpect was conſecrated to Bacchus. Certayne of auncient tyme ſayde that wine deſcending into the body, cauſed the wordes to aſcende. Eccleſiaſticus called, the comprehending of much in little ſpeach,
                     Eccle. 22 good muſique. We muſt then ſet before our tongue the bulwarke of reaſon, which hindreth flowynge, and the ſlypperineſſe of inconſtancie. And as ryders when they breake their coultes, firſte teach them to haue a good mouth,
                     Cato of the Greekes and Romanes. and obey the brydle: ſo ought we to teach our children, to heare much, and ſpeake little. Cato ſayde of the Greekes, that

their ſpeach came but from the teeth outwarde, but the Romanes ſpoke from the hart, (as Homer wryteth of Vliſſes,) and in his youth he ſayde hee refrayned from ſpeach, vntill he knew how to ſpeake well: and that it was the propertie of Lelius to ſpeake too muche. And if there proceeded but this benefite vnto a man which had once gayned this reputation to bee accounted, diſcreete in his ſpeach and true, that he is beloued of God and men, hee is honoured and beleeued in what ſo euer he ſayth, he goeth with his heade lyfted vppe; and contrarywyſe he which is once caught with a lye, or is a pratler, is hated, blamed, and deſtitute of friendes, looſeth his credite, and meanes to teach, it were ſufficient to make vs to embrace the truth, and ſhunne lying. And whereas Caeſar in his commentaries founde fault with the french men, becauſe they receaued for certayne ſuch brutes as ranne vp and downe,Caeſar. Comment. lib. 6
                   and vncertayne aduertiſementes whereof ſhortlye after they repented, as before I touched: it were very requiſite that that order which he then wryteth to haue beene obſerued, were at this preſent practiſed, that hee which had learned ought that concerned the ſtate,Counterfaite nevves ſhoulde preſentlye make relation to the magiſtrate, and not ſpeake thereof to anye other perſonne: for that ſayth hee we haue often ſeene by experience that men beeing light and ignoraunt, eaſelye made them ſelues afrayde with falſe and counterfaite newes, which ledde them to a reſolution to vndertake matters of importaunce, and daungerous,To be ſilent is dangerous. as wee haue ſundrye examples of our tyme: and all hiſtories are full of the miſfortunes which haue happened to ſuch, as haue ſpoken, enterpriſed, and beleeued too lightly. Moreouer in ſome caſes to bee ſilent is as daungerous, as if anye knowe anye conſpiracie, agaynſte their countrey, or kinge, or anye that mighte greatlye preiudice their neyghboure they ought to diſcouer it. To them lykewyſe, whoſe dutie is to teach Vertue, and reprehende vice, and to preache, ſilence is forbidden both by GOD and the lawes. And as Saint Ambroſe learnedlye wryteth, if we muſte render account to GOD for euerye idle worde, ſo muſte we lykewyſe for our idle ſcilence, if at anye tyme wee haue omitted (accordinge to oure duetye,) to inſtruct or correct oure neighbour, there by beeynge able to tourne him from his euill waye or errour. Wee muſt lykewyſe conſider the time and place to ſpeake, or hold

our peace:Circumſtances of time and place to ſpeake. as it is written that Socrates being requeſted at a feaſt that he would ſpeake of his arte, had reaſon to aunſwere, it is not now time for what I can doe, and that which the time now requireth can I not doe.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 16. That as well of friendes as enemies one ſhould learne the truth.
               
                  By friends, & enemies truth is diſcerned from falſhood
                  DIuers haue written, that the better to diſcern trueth from falſhoode, it were requiſite to haue either very entire friendes or enemies: for theſe meaning to anger one, do vpraide, and blame whatſoeuer ſeemeth vitious vnto them, and as out of a watche diſcouer ſuche imperfections as oftentimes men doe not thinke on, and ſo are a meanes that they are corrected.Xenophon. Philip King of Macedon. As Xenophon writeth that a wiſe man is able to reape his profite by his enemies. And Philp king of Macedon ſaid, that he was bound to the Athenians which reuiled him, becauſe they were an occaſion to make him the more vertuous, and aduiſed, and enforced hym all hys life long, both in his actions, and wordes to make them lyers. And in truth they are a cauſe, that maketh men contain theyr faſhions and maners,The profite vvhich men reap by their enemies. Scipio.
                   as in a ſtraight dyet. And this habit that one vndertake nothing vpon the ſuddaine, cleane taketh away all occaſion from our enemies of mocking vs, or reioyſing: For this cauſe Scipio anſwering them that immagined the eſtate of the Romanes to be in verie great ſuretie, the Carthagenians being ouerthrowne, and the Acheens ſubdued, ſaid, Nay now are we in greateſt daunger, hauing taken away all thoſe, whome either we ought to reuerence, or mought iuſtly feare. A Lacedemonian captain, anſwered to the complaint of a Athenian: If the Athenians tooke good heede to what they did, they ſhould neuer be troubled nor neede to care, what the Spartiates reported of them. Contrariwiſe friendes, I meane without flatterie or diſguiſing,The profite of friendes. Euripides. Diogenes.
                   declare freely what they thinke amiſſe, and il beſeeming. Which mooued Euripides to exhort men to get ſuch friendes as would not ſpare them: As Diogenes ſaide that other dogges vſed to bite their enemies, but he his friendes, for their owne good. And ſuch an amitie, which is a beneuolence, a conformitie of wils and pleaſures, and a deſire of the good of an other ioyned with vertue,Amitie. is (as ſom haue ſaid) a beaſt of the company,

but not of the troupe, becauſe there be very few true friends.Menander. And Menander ſayde not without cauſe that he was happye, that could meet but with the ſhadow of his friend,
                     Eccleſ. 6.16. who is called by Eccleſiaſticus a treſure, and the medicine of life.
                  Pithagoras. Plato. A man muſt not ſhake euery man by the hand as Pithagoras ſayd Plato wiſely diſcourſed how the greateſt of all euilles doth ſpring vp with vs, and that we deſire not to be deliuered of it, to wit that euery man loueth him ſelfe,Loue of it ſelfe is blind & delighteth in his owne opinions: becauſe loue is blinde, and one eaſely deceaueth him ſelfe, in what he loueth, being preuented and abuſed thorough fanſies before conceaued. Therefore he ſayde it was very requiſite to ſhunne this fooliſh loue,The ſimilitude of Demoſthenes.
                   which taketh from vs our iudgement. And the ſimilitude which Demoſthenes made is very true, that as the payne in the eyes hindreth one from ſeeinge what lieth before his feete, ſo the firſt conceates and fanſies, obfu. ſcate the vnderſtanding. Wherefore to the ende we may ſee the naked truth, we muſt be voyde of all pasſions, louing to heare of our faultes and to bee corrected,To be warned by our freindes. which the wiſe man eſteemeth as a chayne of gold about ones necke, and ought rather to deſire it might proceede from our friendes, then from our enemies, becauſe wee muſt eſchew vice, led therevnto thorough vertue, and ſhame, and not by the contrarie way, or by feare. And it is a great deale better to abſtaine from doing ill following the counſel of our frends, then to repent our ſelues for hauing done ill, when we ſee our ſelues accuſed and blamed by our enemies: and ſuch warninges as goe before diſorders, are a great deale more fit, and render better fruite then ſuch as follow after.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 17. That it is needfull to read hiſtories, there to ſee the truth which one is afraid to ſpeake, with aduiſe vpon the reading of all bookes, and of the conqueſtes of French men, of the meanes to keepe them, and to aſſure a victorie, of the dutie of a captaine, and of that which is to be conſidered, in examples and alterations.
               
                  
                     DEmetrius gaue counſell to Kinge Ptolome, that hee ſhoulde diligently reade ſuch bookes, as intreated of the gouernmentes of kingdomes, and ſegnuries,Knowledge of hiſtories neceſſary for princes. to the end he might be inſtructed in thoſe thinges, which men dare not ſo freelie, deliuer them ſelues to princes: for the penne is of a more free condition then the

tongue. We reade likewiſe how the Catoes, Aemiles, Scipios, Caeſars, and ſundry other Emperours, haue beene ſo ſtudious in readinge of them, that they haue copied out with their owne hande, whole hiſtories, and euen them ſelues compoſed ſuche as were in their owne time. And haue bene more curious to haue of them in their handes, then their ſwoordes by their ſides, to the ende to ioyne the written diſcipline of war,To take coū
                     ſell of the deade. with the practiſe of the wars. For this cauſe Alphonſus ſayd of Qu. Curſius, that he was ſoner healed by his hiſtory, then his Phiſitions, and that he tooke counſell of the dead. Which Ferdinand king of Spaine likewiſe ſaid by Titus Liuius. And the reading of Xenophon moued Scipio to vndertake thoſe proweſſes which he performed. And the great Selim hauing cauſed Iulius Caeſars commentaries, to be tranſlated into his owne tong, and heard them,
                     Caeſars commentaries tranſlated by the commaū
                     dement of Selim
                   by imitating of him he knew the greateſt parte of Aſia and Africa. And the ſayd Iulius endeuoured altogeather to imitate Alexander, who likewiſe ſet Achilles before him ſelfe as an example. And the Emperour Charles the fift, had in hand the hiſtorie of Philip of Commines. Laurence of Medices ſurnamed the father of learning,The loue the weomen of Bavire bare to their huſbandes. recouered his health in reading the hiſtorye of Conradus the Emperour, who reſolued to make Guelphe the Duke of Bauire to dye, and to ruine both the place, and the inhabitantes of the citie, which hee had longe time beſieged, in the ende ouercome with the interceſſions of the weomen of the citie, ſuffered them to depart, their liues and baggage ſaued, with all that they could carrye vpon their owne ſholders: but leauing all their goods they carried their Duke, their huſbandes, fathers, children and friendes, as many as they were able: of which the ſaid Conrade conceaued ſuch contentment,The monuments of our aunceſtors inflame vs to vertue. that hee gaue pardon both vnto his enemie, and all the reſt. And if the Fabians and Scipioes, as Polibus and Salustus haue witneſſed, haue beene greatly enflamed to vertue, when they haue beheld the ſtatuas and monumentes of their aunceſtours, and by the remembraunce of the high feates of armes which they moſte proſperouſly haue atchieued, this flame encreaſed in the heartes of generous perſonnes, and was not quenched vntill ſuch time as their vertue had equalled their glorye,
                     Themiſtocles awaked through the trophees of the Miltiades.
                   and high renowne: and if Themiſtocles ſayde that the victories and trophees, of the Miltiades kept him, that he could not ſleepe: how much more ought it to pricke vs forwarde, when we reade in hiſtories of the proweſſes and magnanimous feates that haue beene conſecrated to immortalitie, and more liuely repreſenting ſuch manners, counſels, occaſions, and

meanes as haue beene helde in enterpriſes and executions of braue attemptes, togeather with the euentes, the better to reſolue in all affayres, and to iudge what we ought to follow, or flye in like occurrence of humaine accidentes? And there maye Princes learne without haſarde, expenſe, or daunger, how deeply they are charged: and the better impreſſe within their memorye the preceptes eyther of politicke lawes, or of the art of warre, then they ſhoulde doe in Philoſophers bookes, ſeeing what praiſes are gyuen to the well doers, and what blame and puniſhment to the wicked, as in the middle of a Theatre. And they are awakened, to take the way of vertue, as out of a trompet of honour, and the ſeedes thereof are taken out of the valour and gentleneſſe of oure aunceſtours. And albeit there be great difference betweene the actions of our aunceſtours, and ours,, yet we ought to follow, and practiſe according to the reaſon, by which they haue guyded their inuentions, carrying the like ſpirite, iudgement and hardineſſe that they did. And ſince that as Seneca hath written in the firſte booke of his Epiſtles, if one haue a minde to doe ill, and eſpieth one preſent by him that will be a witneſſe thereof, he ſinneth the leſſe, ſo is there no doubt but manye tyrauntes haue refrayned the executing of a number of miſchiefes they haue determined,Feare of blame and diſhonor cauſeth the wicked to refraine. for feare of the ſpotte which a hiſtorie woulde ſtaine them with. As Democritus likewyſe rehearſeth, how manye kinges of Aegipt haue heene brideled from committing of euill, fearing a cuſtome which the people had, to oppoſe them ſelues to the pompes and magnificences, that were wont to be celebrated at the obſequies of their good kinges. Without hiſtories,Cuſtome of Aegipt. Diod. lib. 2
                        •
                     . cap. 3 we are neuer able to know the benefites which GOD hath beſtowed vppon men, nor the chaſtiſementes with which he correcteth the wicked: nor the beginning, progreſſe, and ſucceſſe of all thinges, nor the miſcheefe which both the publique and particular weale ſuffer, nor what doctrine is more auncient, and to bee followed. For this cauſe Cicero calleth it, the light of trueth, the witneſſe of tymes, the Miſtreſse of lyfe, the Meſsenger of antiquitie, and the life of memorye preſeruinge from obliuion deedes worthye of memorye, atchieued thorough longe proceſſe of tymes. And this ſame ſeede of vertues, whiche Plato ſayeth is in oure ſpirites, lyfteth it ſelfe vppe thorough the emulation of them, whiche haue beene ſuche as wee nowe are: And wee doe gayne more

by reading thereof in our youth, then by whatſoeuer is either attributed to ſence,Charlemagne. or experience of old men, or to ſuche as haue beene in farre voyages. It is written tht Charlemagne, woulde euer haue a hiſtory read vnto him during his meales: and that, perceauing the ſmall regarde the auncient Gaulois had, of ſetting downe the monumentes of their aunceſtors in writing,Songs containing the high enterpriſes of vertuous perſons. he cauſed certaine ſonges to bee made, commaunding they ſhoulde teach their children to ſinge them by hart, to the ende the remembraunce therof might endure from race to race, and that by this meanes other might be ſtirred vp to doe well, and to write the geſtes of valiaunt men. Which they ſay was likewiſe obſerued by the Indians, and Homer writeth the ſame of Achilles. And the like is mencioned in the 78. pſalme. And Caeſar in his Commentaries, Lucane and Tacitus, maketh mention of certaine philoſophers, that were french men,Bardes. called Bardes, which ſong the praiſes of valiaunt men, and the blame and reproch of lewde perſons, tyrauntes and baſe minded: and Polibus ſheweth that a hiſtorie doth teache and prepare the way to the affaires of Policie: and to carrie well the chaunges of Fortune,Tyme left. and to know what we are. And if that which Plinie writeth be true, that all that time which is not imployed to the ſtudy or exerciſe of good things is loſt: and that which Seneca hath written, that they are all fooles, that in this greate ſcarcetie of time which is beſtowed of them, learne but matters ſuperfluous: Wee ought much to lament, that the deſire which the common ſort haue to hiſtories,Fables and olde vvyfes tales. is an occaſiō that they giue themſelues to fables and old wiues tales, where is nought els but a vaine delight without anie profite: where as in hiſtories, beſides pleaſure, there is great learning, to teach vs not to vndertake vppon the fiske and flying, either any warre that is not neceſſary, or any quarrels, ſuites in law, or other affaires of importaunce. And we ſee how manie miſchiefes,Prudence required in reading hiſtories loſſes, and faultes, ignoraunce hath beene the cauſe of. But Prudence is greatly required, eſpecially in holy hiſtories. For there muſt we confrant the examples to the commaundementes of God: becauſe the very ſaints them ſelues haue had their faultes which we ought not to follow, and the holye ſcripture is a good looking glaſſe, which repreſenteth as Saint Auguſtine ſaide, thinges as they in deede are, ſetting before vs vertues to follow them, and vices and imperfections to ſhunne them, and to praiſe the mercie and bountie of God in that he couereth them. And as touching the prophane, we muſt carry the like iudgement, and therein conſider

the particularities, the cauſes, the conduct, and Prudence which men haue vſed, and the fortune, and ſucceſſe that hath proceeded from aboue. It ſhall not here be amiſſe, for the readers, if I admoniſh them not to take for good monye, not to account all that which prophane aucthours haue writen as articles of their faith,All prophane authors write not trulie nor indifferently to truſt therevnto without examining them further. I comprehend herein all ſuch, where they which can ſee clearely may diſcouer lies and vntruthes amidſt good things, and ſome beaſtes come from a penſell, and not by nature. Therefore we muſt apply thereto a good ſife, to ſifte, and ſeperate, the one from the other. And me thinketh what knowledge ſoeuer thoſe bookes teach vs, is verye ſmall if one bee not acquainted with the vſe and practiſe of the world,A reader of hiſtories muſt not be too quicke of beliefe nor too credulous. and be likewiſe accompanied with a iudgement, and quicknes of ſpirit. And it was verye wiſely written by Ariſtotle that in reading of hiſtories a man muste not be of too quicke a beliefe, nor too incredulous, for feare he take not falſe for true, or els profite no whit at all. And what color or diſguiſing ſo euer, men ſet on to flatter great ones, they which prie narrowly into their behauiours, & take their counſels and actions in time of peace and war, are not deceaued: and diſcerne toyes, and cauillinges amidſt deepe counſels, and do diſcouer pretexts, cloaking, and occaſions, with the true cauſes neuer hauing their iudgement there by deceaued, referring and examining all things to the rule of the holy ſcripture.The holy Scripture the rule of all thinges. Beſids we ought to eſteme moſt, of ſuch hiſtiographers, which haue had leaſt pasſions, and partialitie, and the beſt meanes to diſcouer the truth, either beeing there them ſelues in perſonne, or hauinge certaine intelligence from them that were preſent, men of faith, and ſincere iudgement, ſpeaking without affection: to the ende they ſet not out fables, and lies, as many of our time haue done: and that which they ſteale from other, is as a precious ſtone, ill ſet in worke. It were alſo requiſite, they ſhould be conuerſaunt, and nouriſhed in affaire of ſtate,VVhat vvriters ſooneſt to be credited. and acquainted with the proceedinges of the worlde: and not giue them ſelues ſo much to pleaſure as to ſpeake the truth, not beeing inough not to write falſe, but to declare the very truth, without anye partialitie at all. For if in anye one place, a writer be founde a lier, the reſt of his hiſtorie is cleane reiected as Alexander the great was wont to ſaye. It is alſo needefull to obſerue, what ſundrye Italians, Spaniardes, Fleminges, as Almames, of an enuious malice, and want of right iudgement, haue euen enforced them ſelues to praiſe their countrie, and couer

their faultes,Enemies enuying the frenche. and diminiſh the greatneſſe, and excellencie, of matters done by the french men, to the aduancement of whole chriſtendome,Affections & paſsions of men ſtaine the trueth. and profite of ſundry nations. And it is no ſtraunge thing to ſee how much the pasſions and affections of men doe ſtaine the truth, which is the very eye of hiſtories, (Polibus him ſelfe reherſeth the exāples of ſundrie hiſtoriographers before his time) and diſcouer contrarieties betweene them ſelues, and by other greater authours then they are condemned of lying, as we haue marked in the Spaniardes before, which haue written the hiſtory of the new world, and of the weſt Indies, who couer and make leſſe, their owne exceſſe, and incredible vilanies, the greateſt part of them beeing reuenged and puniſhed thorough the iuſt iudgement of God. The Engliſhmen haue ſomewhat runne awry, in handling the affaires on this ſide the ſea. Paulus Iouius, was wont to ſay, that to doe fauour to ſuch great perſonages as gaue him penſions, he ſet thinges downe, in ſuch ſort as they that liued in that time, were well inough able to diſcouer them, mary the poſterity ſhould hold them for true. And in truth ſundrye hiſtoriographers of all times, thorough ignoraunce, hatred, couetouſnes, or ambition, take a colour to warrant their lying and diſguiſing, vpon a beleefe they haue, that few ſhall bee able to diſcerne their coſeninges. And for becauſe thorough this error of diſcourſe, they name ſundry wiſe and prudent, which in deed haue beene moſt wicked, and blame french men that haue bene vertuous, of a good conſcience, and haue ended their liues honeſtlye, and laudablye, condemning them of fole hardines and vice, men ought therin to carry a good ſound, and right iudgement. Conſidering that ſuch authours doe not alwaies meaſure,Not to iudge things according to the euent. the maners and actions of men according to the vnmooueable rule of the worde of God, and morall philoſophy, nor diſtinguiſh the vitious by the intention or conſcience, but onely by the iſſue, dexteritie, and induſtrye, or rather ſubtiltye of ſuch as know how to applie each thing, to the end which they pretend, neuer regarding whether it be honeſt, laudable, and iuſte or no. They do not in reſpect of the french men referre any of their actes at all to vertue, if they be not led thereto by that which they account prudence, but rather to raſhnes: as they doe in regarde of their owne nation, imputing their owne actes of cowardneſſe, baſenes of minde, diſceat, diſſembling, treaſon, crueltie, diſloyaltie, infidelity and ambition, to wiſedome and prudence. Neuertheleſſe here we may well conſider for what cauſe, they haue made

the like compariſon of french men that Antigonus did of Pirrhus, to a gameſter, whome the diſe fauoured well, but knew not how to ſerue him ſelfe, of thoſe chaunces that happened vnto him:To make conqueſts aſſured. (for that loke what he got by the effect, he loſte thorough, hope, coueting in ſuch ſort what he had not, that he cleane forgot to aſſure himſelfe of what he had gained) becauſe they are more ready to get then wiſe to keepe, and that by feates of armes they make braue conqueſtes, but they preſerue them but a while, not knowing that a countrye conquered by ſuch as obſerue not diſcipline, is both vnprofitable, and hurtfull. Therefore they coniecture, that valour and dexteritie in armes, is a greate matter: but that nobility not brought vp in learning, nor in reading of hiſtories, hath not this wiſedome to moderate it ſelfe, and to prouide by ſuche meanes as they ought to take, to bee able in peace to conſerue what they haue conquered, and ſuffer themſelues to bee led by the coloured wordes of their enemies: who after that the firſte fire, and french boyling is extinguiſhed, they know wel inough how to vſe their occaſion, and ſerue their owne turnes, with the ignoraunce of ſuch as eſteeme nought but armes, without running ouer, the courſes held by their aunceſtors, in keeping their conqueſtes, and vſing of their victories: as we haue but too manye examples, which is the cauſe that Caeſar writeth in his Commentaries,Comment. li. 6
                   that french men are more hardie and couragious, then fine in warre, (which they make great account of) ioynct, that they giue them ſelues more to the hope which they take of conquering,Men differ from beaſts by reaſon. then they doe to anye feare of loſing. Euery man confeſſeth that men differ from beaſtes in reaſon: if this good nature be not manured, with the reading of hiſtories & good letters, what other thing is it thē a pretious ſtone hid in a donghil?Caſsiod. lib. 1.
                   We ought to account the ſaying of K. Theodoric true, that what was begon with good aduiſe & prudence, & preſerued with care, is of long laſting & ſtrong. And if victories be not made ſure with temperance, & prudence, they dim through ſome vnloked for accident, the glorye which was before gotten: and in ſhort time loſeth the whole fruit through inſolency, careleſnes,Cauſes of loſſes. delicacies, arrogancy, violentnes of taking vp of lodging, & yet to be well entreated, in capacity of a gouernor, couetouſnes confuſiō, & to make no diſtinction betwene perſons, in giuing, taking away, or changing, and ſomtime a cōmandement amiſſe conceaued, an ordinance ill executed, raſhnes, & vanity of ſpeach, carrieth the victorye awaye cleane vnto ſuch, as before ſeemed already vanquiſhed.

And a marueilous prudence is required, to foreſee an innumerable number of other accidentes in matters of warre, and ſometime to apply counſell to necesſitye: beeing no leſſe the dutye of a valiaunt Captaine to ſhew him ſelfe wyſe in his actions then couragious, to the end hee approoue, deliberation leſſe difficile, and daungerous, and cleane reiecte all raſhe counſelles attendinge likewyſe the oportunities of times, and ripeneſſe of occaſions, not for all that preſuppoſing for certayne, thoſe perilles that are vncertaine, beeing more afrayde then he ought, calling hope no leſſe to his counſell,More laudable to keepe then to gette then feare. Cirus likewiſe in the ende of the ſeuenth booke of the Pedion of Xenophon, thought it a matter more laudable to keepe then to get, becauſe often tymes in conqueſtes is nothinge but hardineſſe, but a bodie can not conſerue what hee hath taken without temperaunce, continence, care and diligence beſides valour. And as it is a greater greefe to become poore, then neuer to haue beene riche, ſo is it to loſe, more bitter, then neuer to haue gotten. I doe not thinke that garriſons ſerue to ſo great an ende, as if the conquerours ſhew them ſelues meeke, and louers of good thinges: and that no thing can ſucceede well to ſuche as abandon vertue and honeſtie. Ariſtotle dedicatinge his Rhetorique to Alexander, writeth vnto him, that as the bodye is entertayned thorough a good diſpoſition,Vſe & practiſe. ſo is the witte by diſcipline and erudition: which were the cauſes that not onelye hee had euer an addreſſe to doe well, but alſo to conſerue what he had gotten. It is likewiſe requiſite, that we put the ſayde reading in vſe and practiſe, thereby to becomme more vertuous, wiſe, and aduiſed, and that we conferre, thinges paſſed with the preſent and ſuch as might enſue: and to apply examples, to the rule of veritye, iuſtice,Aug. cap. 131 mor. epise. and equitye. And albeit that Sainct Auguſtine, attributed much to hiſtories, yet doth he adde, that hee can not ſee how all that which is written by the witte of man can bee in euerie point true, conſideringe that all men are lyers, and that it commeth to paſſe often tymes,Mens vvritings in all points can not be true. that they which follow the reaſon of man in anye hiſtorie, builde vppon the brutes of the vulgar ſorte, and are abuſed by the pasſions of ſundrie men, which report nothinge of certayne. Notwithſtandinge they are to bee excuſed, if they keepe a libertye, and write not to the ende to deceaue. But in the holye hiſtorie, they oughte to feare no ſuch thinge ſince that it proceedeth of the holye Ghoſte, and thence a man maye take out certayne witneſſes and ſoueraigne arreſtes.

Now that wee may the better reape our profite out of Hiſtoryes,The beginninges and motife cauſes of al things as to be conſidered. we muſt conſider the beginning, and motyfe cauſe, of all enterpriſes, the meanes which therin they haue held, and afterwardes the iſſue thereof, which cannot poſsibly be good proceeding from an euil beginning. And after hauing known the root, and cauſes therof, we muſt iudge what may happen in like caſes, and conſider other circumſtances which bewtifie the actions, and referre all to the glory of God, through whoſe bountie the euents haue ſucceeded well, and gloriouſly,To prayſe and thanke God for our good ſucceſſe Rom. 15.4. to the ende wee may render prayſes and thankeſgeuing vnto him, which are due vnto him; for aſmuche as by weake and vyle perſons, hee oftentimes compaſſeth high, and mightie things.VVhatſoeuer is vvritten, ought to ſerue for one learning. And becauſe that whatſoeuer thinges are written afore time, are written for our learning, We ought to apply vnto our ſelues whatſoeuer we read, and to behold as in a looking glaſſe our own affections: to the end we might follow good, and eſchew euill, and cleane remoue from vs, all diſguiſing and corruption, and aboue all things we ought to acknowledge the iudgementes of God, againſt the wicked, and contemners of his law. And for becauſe that great dangers enſue thoſe which indifferently gouerne them ſelues by examples. I thought good to aduertiſe,Examples. that it is diligently to be conſidered, whether there be a concurrence of lyke reaſons not onely in generall, but alſo in particular. It is alſo neceſſary to rule ones ſelfe as prudently, as they did whom we would imitate, and to demaund of God like ſucceſſe.Mutations is common vveales. And in our enterpriſes we muſt not onely conſider, the ſuperficies and beginnyng of thinges, but to looke more inwardly what may happen in time. We muſt not likewiſe take too exactly, what is written by ancient Hiſtoriographers, but conferre them with the newe, hauing regard to the great chaunges which happen in all countreyes: and that there are fewe Cities or Nations which hold theyr former name, nor their auncient ſeates, and faſhions: otherwiſe we ſhould wander awry, and iudge amiſſe. And this conſideration of the vnſtableneſſe, ſubuerſions, diſsipations, and lamentable chaunges of ſundry peoples and families, ought to prepare vs to beare all accidentes ſent from God: knowing that this life is but a ſorrowfull exile, ſubiect to ſtormes, and continuall tempeſtes:This life but a ſorrovvfull exile. and that there is no ſeate nor hauen ſure, but in the heauenly and eternall lyfe, to the which the ſonne of God, our Lord, and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, hath prepared the way for vs, and let vs humbly beſeeche him to guide vs therein.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. 18. That one ought not to ſuffer him ſelfe to be deceiued by praiſes, nor be carried away from modeſty, and that honour dependeth vpon vertue, with aduiſe vpon the ſame, or vpon the reproches or lyes of the people: and how much it is requiſite to commaund ones ſelfe.
               
                  Praſes deceaue men.
                  WHo ſo woulde not ſwarue from the truth, ought not to be mooued with praiſes, which for the moſt part are diſguiſed: for as Sainct Auguſtin hath written, He which often praiſeth one, abuſeth him ſelf, confirmeth an errour, and proueth in the end a lyer: and he which is praiſed becommeth thereby a great deale more vaine. And Dion ſayd, the ouer great praiſes and honours out of meaſure carrie with them a misknowledge, lightnes, and inſolenſie, yea among ſuch perſons as of them ſelues are modeſt ynough: becauſe they are perſwaded that they deſerue them, and euery man pleaſeth them, and puffeth them vp as Xenophon wryteth, though in deed they might well be termed mockeries. And ſuch excesſiue honours, are neither more nor leſſe, then as portractures ill proportioned, which fall to the grounde of them ſelues, as the three hundred ſtatuas of Demetrius, which neuer engendred either ruſt or filth,
                     Statuas throvvne dovvne and broken. beeing in his owne life tyme broken in peeces. And thoſe likewiſe of Demades were bruyſed, & made to ſerue for chamberpots, and baſins in cloſe ſtooles: and ſo haue ſundry other princes their monuments beene ſerued. The inhabitants of the city of Pilles,
                  Honours refuſed by Theopompus.
                   in their counſels, ordained moſte mightie honours for Theopompus: he wrote backe vnto them, that time was accuſtomed to increaſe honours moderately beſtowed, and to deface the immoderate.Niger. When Niger was choſen Emperour, they recited certayne verſes in his praiſe: but hee ſayde, that they ought rather to prayſe Hanniball, or the proweſſe of ſome other great captaynes, to the ende they might be imitated, and that it was a mockery to prayſe men while they liued, which peraduenture might alter. And that there was great preſumption, that either they did it for feare, or for hope to obtayne ſomwhat of them, and that for his part he rather deſired to be fauoured and loued during his life, and prayſed after his death. Other were wont to ſaye, that they neuer acknowledged ſuch prayſes, but wiſhed to God that they were worthye of

them.Bracidas 
                  Bracidas his mother was highly commended for aunſwearing the embaſſadours of Thrace, comforting her for the death of her ſonne, affirminge that he had not left his like behinde him, that ſhee knew well ynough, that the citye of Sparta had manye Citizens a great deale more worthie and valiaunt then him. As Antigonus ſayde vnto a Poet, who called him the ſonne of the ſunne,Antigonus. that hee whiche emptied his cloſe ſtoole knew well ynough there was no ſuch matter. The ſhadow ſhunneth thoſe which follow it, and followeth thoſe which ſhunne it, and ſo fareth it with prayſe. Sigiſmond the Emperour, ſtroke one that prayſed him too much,
                  Sigiſmond. Iuſtinian. 
                  ſaying that he bitte him: So was it likewiſe reported by Iuſtinian. When they offered to Titus a crowne of golde, togeather with great praiſes, for his taking of Ieruſalem, he aunſweared,Titus. that he himſelfe was not the authour thereof, but that GOD ſerued him ſelfe thorough his handes, in that he made manifeſt his anger agaynſte the Iewes.Fabritius. Timoleon. Antiſthenes. As much is ſayde of Fabritius, for the deliuerie of Greece, and of Timoleon, for reſtoring Sicilie to libertye. And Antiſtenes commaunded his children, neuer to conne any thankes for prayſing of them: for often tymes it is with men as with an number of beaſtes, which ſuffer a man to doe with them what he will, yea to tumble and drale them on the grounde, as long as hee tickleth them. Galien entreating howe the ſickeneſſe of the minde might be diſcerned wryteth,Galien. that he learned of his father to deſpiſe glorye, as an intiſement to euill, and ennemye to truth.Offices and dignities called charges. And Ioſephus wryteth, that honours beſtowed on young men, are as matches of follie and raſhnes. And in our french tongue we call offices, and dignities, charges. And Varro in his fourth booke of the Latin tongue writeth, that this name of honour proceedeth from a name which ſignifieth an honeſt burthen, which bindeth vs to doe well, and to take care, and trauaile:Honours. becauſe that prayſes are alyed with vertues, and are as the badge thereof, and followeth it as the ſhadow doth the body. The auncient fathers haue likewyſe noted, that in the holy ſcripture, the triumphes and honors of the common ſort, are not termed glory, but only vertuous actes.Glory. The temple of glory adioyning to that of vertue And Cicero in his Tuſculanes queſtiōs defineth glory to be a cōſent of praiſes, by vertuous men, which iudge without corrupting vertue: for they which are of good iudgmēt know better our valor then the groſſer ſort. And there was ſome miſtery in that the Romans builded the tēple of glory, adioyning to that of vertue, throgh which they muſt of neceſſity

paſſe that will goe to the other: as if one would ſay that there were no honor without vertu.Epictetus. 
                  Epictetus ſaid likewiſe that glory, and vertue wer two ſiſters which could not be ſeuered one from the other. And Cicero calleth prayſe the hyer of vertue.
                  Cicero. Salomon. Eccleſiaſticus. 10.
                   And Salomon in his Prouerbes writeth that the noblenes of yong men is their vertue. And when it is ſaide in Eccleſiaſticus, that the lande is happie when their king is noble he meaneth therby vertuous and not yong of vnderſtanding. The which is well marked in the firſt law de cond. in pub. hor. l.x.C. & L.I. de dignitat. l. 12. C. Marius mayntayneth in Saluſt, that they may be called noble and gentle,Marius. which are moſte honeſt, and vertuous: and that all nobilitie proceeded at the firſt from vertue. And it is better to bring it into a mans houſe, than to diffame it, when hee found it already there. And the glorie of our anceſtors ſerueth vnto the poſteritie as a light which ſuffereth neither good nor euill actions to lye hid.Maieſtie pictured. Some haue pictured Maieſtie apparelled with a cloake of admiration, tiſſued, with great vertues and honeſtie, the markes whereof are in her geſture and actions, and that great perſonages ought to conſerue and maintayne her. And they whiche commaund ought derogating vnto her or that is vniuſt, cannot excuſe themſelues of high treaſon, and diminiſhing her Maieſtie. And ſometimes it is a great honour, when benefites are not proportioned according to the valour of deſertes. And it is farre better to be worthie of honor then to receaue it:Cato. as Cato ſaid that he had rather one ſhould ask him why he made not a monument for hymſelfe, then why he had erected one. He ſaid likewiſe that euery man, being well borne, and of an honeſt harte, ought to carrie in his minde and remembrance his nobilitie and his anceſtors, to the ende he ſhoulde doe nothing worthie of reprehenſion, and might be aſhamed of all actions of reproche. The auncient kinges of Fraunce vſed manie ceremonies in making of a knight, the better to induce them to all honeſtie, and aboue all thinges to keepe their faith and trueth,A knight. Maximilian.
                   which cuſtome as it is tolde me remayneth yet in England: and at that tyme euery man contented himſelfe with a ſingle promiſe. Maximilian the Emperour aunſwered one that deſired his letters patentes to ennoble him, I am able to make thee riche, but vertue onely to make thee noble. And there is great likelihoode that that which moued the Lacedemonians to ſacrifice vnto the Muſes, at ſuche time as they went to warfare, was to giue courage to men to doe ſo well that they might afterwardes be prayſed. Aboue all thinges wee muſt take heede of prayſing our ſelues

with our own mouth, as the wiſe man warneth vs. But if our life & holie conuerſation do ſhew it, vertue ſhal euer be folowed with praiſe. I doe not for all that thinke that a wiſe man ought to deſpiſe the true honour, which conſiſteth in the good will of ſuch as haue receiued any pleaſure.Honour to be accepted. And from this reputation proceedeth faith and confidence, which puſheth men forwarde to the enterpriſe of all good actions, and ſerueth as a rampiar againſt the enuious. And it is to be excuſed in young men,Youth ſtirred vp to vertue through praiſe if they pleaſe themſelues in doing wel: becauſe vertues do double and flouriſh in that age, and doe increaſe through moderate praiſe giuen vnto them. And the common wealth hath an intereſt, in making the praiſes of famous men to remaine engrauen, to ſerue for an imitation pricking forward, & example to al ages. Pope Iohn the 23. ſaid vnto the Cardinals, who had heard what was ſpoken in his praiſe,Pope Iohn. 23 that they mingled therin many things not true, & yet he tooke pleaſure to heare them.Themiſtocles. And Themistocles being asked what muſicke or voyce he deſired moſt willingly to heare, ſayde, ſuch a one as prayſed his vertue. Yet ſuch as ſo loftily carrie themſelues, are like ſuch as brag they haue receiued falſe and naughtie monye.Remedy againſt praiſe and glorie. And that wee may not be abuſed, it is verie good to conſider thoroughly the infirmitie of man, the ſhortnes of our life, the defilings of our fleſh, & that whatſoeuer is in vs to be praiſed, proceedeth from the pure liberalitie & loane of god, which is able to take all from vs againe in a moment; to the end that we containe our ſelues in modeſtie & humblenes of mind. Pyndarus likewiſe compareth the life of men vnto a dreame of a ſhadow, the which is as the Pſalmiſt ſaieth,
                     Pſal. 62.9. & 144.4. 
                  more vaine then vanitie it ſelfe, and as a flower vaniſhing away. But becauſe that many fearing to be falſely blamed of the common ſorte, are thereby fallen into great inconueniences, I willingly would aduiſe quicke wits, not to ſurceaſe the purſute of a good enterpriſe, nor to vndo themſelues through the feare of ſuch a blame.Plutarque. As Plutarke ſaid in his Proeme of the liues of Agis & Cleomenes, that hauing wel conſidered the accidents of the brethren named Gracchi,
                  Gracchi. who hauing beene wel borne, brought vp, & nouriſhed, and now attained to the managing of the affaires of the common wealth & that with a verie good intent, yet were they both deſtroyed in the end, not ſo much through an vnmeaſured deſire of honor, as through feare of diſhonor, the which for al that proceeded not, but from a great & noble hart. Vertuous perſons in like ſort, haue euer made ſmall account, of counterfait wordes & falſe lyes imagining, their

conſcience, & the vertuous courſe of their life, & the behauiors of themſelues before time, would ſufficiently warrāt & defend them, & the contempt which one hath of a fooliſh word, maketh the enuious cleane confounded:Demoſthenes. and railing as Demoſthenes ſaide, which maketh him neuer the worſe againſt whom it is vſed, is not eſteemed among any vertuous perſons. That is to ſay, that the reputation of a good man, is not diminiſhed through any blame that is vniuſtly laid to his charge. And ſundry of our kings were willing to meete with the quarels & lightnes of the nobilitie, that a man might know by good & ſufficient proofe,The Lye. if the lye were well or yll giuen, to the end it might be iudged vppon whome it ought to fall.Titus 
                  Titus the Emperour was wont to ſay, that becauſe he did nothing that deſerued blame or reprehēſiō, he cared not for any lies wer made of him.Fabius. As alſo Fabius ſurnamed the moſt high, anſwered ſome that rayled on him, that a Captaine & ruler in the field, who for feare of ſpeaking, or of the opinion of the commons, ceaſed from doing what he knewe to be profitable, or to deſiſt from a purpoſe fully deliberated of, & wherof he wel vnderſtood the cauſes & reaſons, ought to be eſteemed more faint, then he which feareth to proue his ſtrength, when hee ſeeth occaſion giuen for his aduantage. And choſe rather that his wiſe enimy might feare him, then the foliſh citizens ſhould praiſe him, & that being wel aduiſed he cared not for being accounted too fearefull or too ſlack. It is the leſſon of Eccleſiaſticus. Set not thy heart vppon euery worde that is reported.
                  Eccleſiaſticus. Plato. And Plato in Criton admoniſheth vs not to regarde what euery man ſayth, but what he ſaith that ſeeth al things, & the truth. And not without cauſe an auncient father ſaid, I wil loſe the verie reputation of an honeſt man,Cato. rather then not to be an honeſt man. Cato was accuſtomed as Plutarque writeth in his life time to bee aſhamed only for diſhoneſt things, but euer to deſpiſe what was reproued by opinion. S. Auguſtine attributed the death of Lucretia to her imbecillitie,Lucretia as fearing the euil opinion & ſuſpition of the common ſort. And there is no enterpriſe or execution ſo right, & worthie of praiſe, that is not ſubiect to the reproche & detraction of the ignorant, to the paſsions of the malignant & enuious, & to raſh iudgements.A good conſcience. For this cauſe in al our actions we ought to cō
                  tent our ſelues with a conſcience well informed. And but that I feare I ſhoulde be too tedious, I coulde alledge a number of moſt notable examples, of the inconueniences that haue happened as wel to them of old time as of ours, for eſteeming more the iudgement

of the ignorant then the truth. Which detractions K. Demetrius was wont to ſay, he cared not for,K. Demetrius
                   not eſteemed them better then a fart, not much paſsing whether it made a noyſe before or behind, aboue or below. Marius likewiſe ſpake wiſely in Salust,
                  Marius. how no report was able to offend him, becauſe if it were true it woulde ſound to his praiſe, if falſe his life & manners ſhould proue it contrarie. By this diſcourſe I deſire to impreſſe into the nobilitie a ſound iudgemēt, of true honor, which is engendred but by vertue & good deedes: and to make them laye aſide that fooliſh opinion which they haue of falſhod, vnder colour whereof, vpon light occaſion and offence they vndertake combates, neuer regarding the lawes of God, nature, ciuil, canonical, priuate, nor their owne ſaluation, or duetie of charitie, hazarding their liues, ſoules, goods & friends, for that ſtale, infected paſsionate, & fantaſtical tyrant, termed honor, neuer embraſing ſuch meanes of concord as the lawes commaund. And remaine ſo ſtubborne & blind, that whereas the true honour conſiſteth in obeying God and his laws, in maſtering ones paſsions, in louing, forgiuing, & ſuccouring ones neighbour, they make it to be in diſobeying of God & his holie lawes, going about to diffame, deſtroy, & murther their neighbours, & render themſelues ſlaues to their owne choler. And how can that be honorable which God forbiddeth, deteſteth, & condemneth to eternal death? And alſo to be meeke, peaceable, & reconciled to ouercome wrath and paſsions, to aproch neere vnto God through his clemencie, and mercie, (which are the actes of vertue, and of true Chriſtians,) how can theſe I ſay, breede vnto the nobilitie either diſhonor or infamie? Conſidering that by the auncient diſcipline of warre, it was adiudged diſhoneſt, & worthie of puniſhment,VVarly diſcipline. if one combatted with his enimie without his Captaines leaue, or if he left the place giuen to him in gard. And the auncient Emperors and Kings eſteemed it a point of greater magnanimitie and nobilitie to pardon and commaund ones ſelfe, then to be reuenged, & as a murtherer of himſelfe, to laye open his owne life to euident peril. Wee proceede all of vs from God our creator, not of our ſelues: into his handes wee ought to put all our reuenges,Vengeaunce reſerued to god as hee himſelfe willeth vs: and not to make our ſelues the accuſers, Iudges, and hangmen, of him, whome wee pretende to haue caſt an eye vppon the ſhadowe of this delicate honor, as I haue els where touched, for the importance of this pernitious error.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XIX. That without the trueth there is nought elſe but darknes, and confuſion, and how much the Philoſophers haue laboured to find it out, & how farre wide they haue beene of it.
               
                  Trueth in Policies and gouernments.
                  HE made no bad compariſon in my opinion, that ſaid, that pollicies, gouernements and kingdomes, were like an emptie lampe, or lanterne: and that the trueth was the match with the oyle, and the waxe, or the tallowe that gaue the light: for without this Sunne ſhine of trueth, there is nothing but darkeneſſe and diſorders in this life, and we may ſay with the Prophets, that without it, the people remaine lying in darkeneſſe, and in the region of the ſhadowe of death. And with Ieremie that the wiſe boaſt not in his knowledge, nor the ſtrong in his force,
                     Ierem. 3. Luke 1. nor the riche in his wealth, but that all our glorie bee to knowe him which is the verie trueth: for whatſoeuer men maye alledge vnto vs, of victories, tryumphes, honours, eloquence, force, and other gyftes and graces, they are nought elſe if this trueth bee taken awaye, but as if one ſhoulde ſayle in a darke nyght, among the floodes, rockes, and tempeſtes of the ſea,
                     Phil. 3.8. and in the ende prooue a ſorrowfull tragedie. Sainct Paul iudged all thinges to be doung in reſpect of this knowledge, and the excellencie thereof, which hath lyen hidden manie ages, and made moſt clearely manifeſt, thorough our Lorde and Sauiour Chriſt Ieſus, who hath imparted vnto vs the heauenly treaſures, and hath beene made for vs, iuſtice, righteouſneſſe, life, ſanctification,Philoſophers of olde tyme haue not attained to the light of the trueth. and redemption. And albeit the Philoſophers of olde time, attayned not vnto this light, yet did they not ceaſe to purſue the ſhadowes thereof, of which in parte wee entreate, leauinge vnto the Diuines the deepe inſight into this light, and maieſtie of the eſſentiall trueth. The ſayde Phyloſophers, as Socrates, Plato, Democritus, Ariſtotle, Plinie, Architas, Tales, Tianeus, & an infinite number of other, haue made verie farre & long voiages the better to be inſtructed in this trueth, & in the knowledge hereof, to the end they might not ouerlightly beleeue or ſpeake out of purpoſe.Tales. The ſaid Tales being demanded, what diſtance there was betweene the trueth and a lye, aunſwered, as much as betweene the

eyes, and the eares; as if he would haue ſaid, that we may boldly declare what we haue ſeene, but that often times one is deceiued, truſting vnto anothers report. And albeit, the ſaid Plato, Ariſtotle, and other Philoſophers, haue written many notable things concerning the vertues, yet haue they not declared,The ignorāce of the Philoſophers. at whoſe handes they ought to be demaunded, nor whither they ought to bee referred: neither haue they knowen the beginning of the corruption of mans nature, nor the remedie of al euils, which is reuealed in the Goſpel, by the knowledge of the trueth, and the adoption of the Chriſtians, the remiſsion of ſinnes, and the promiſes, which giue vs a certaintie, of the fauour, bleſsing, and good will of our good God, whereof enſueth a good conſcience, hope, and peace in the ſpirite, which conſumeth all the greefe and ſorrowe, as the Sunne doth the morning dewe. And there is none of the ſaid Philoſophers, except Plato, which was able to ſet downe, that the ſoueraigne good of man, was to be ioyned with God, but he had no taſt at all what this coniunction meant,Mans ſoueraigne good. nor the meane to attaine vnto it. And as touching the comfortes of the Philoſophers, the complaint which Cicero made, in his Epiſtle to Atticus is true that the medicine is not of force enough for the diſeaſe,The Philoſophers cōforts. & that neither the diſcipline, learning, nor bookes ought profited him. Which a body cannot auerre by the holy ſcriptures, as Dauid ſaide,Holy ſcripture Pſal. 119. that hee was quickened, comforted, & inſtructed, & that they gaue light to idiots. And there is another manner of efficacie, then the drougg which Homer called Nepenthes, which he ſaid was able to keep one from ſmelling yll ſauours, & charme greefe,Homers Nepenthes. vnderſtanding therby a diſcreate ſpeaker, & one able to apply himſelf, to the preſent affections, times & affaires: as more at large we haue before declared. Which maketh me to diſproue, the opinion of Seneca,
                  Seneca & Horace reproued.
                   which attributeth it to god in that we liue, but in that we liue wel to Philoſophie; which in deede ought rather to be referred to God the aucthor of all good. Horace ſpoke as ignorantly, writing, that God gaue him life & riches, but that he furniſhed himſelfe with a good and right vnderſtanding. For God cauſeth the eye to ſee, the eare to heare, and giueth the right iudgement, both to will and to perfourme,
                  Phyloſophie the loue of wiſedom. as S. Paul ſayth, and he diſpoſeth the pathes, & intentions of men. This word Philoſophie hath beene interpreted for the loue of wiſedome, and Ariſtotle in his ſecond booke of his Metaphiſicks, taketh it for the knowledge of the trueth. Many haue noted great varietie,
                     Ariſtotle reprehended. ambiguitie & vncertaintie in the doctrine of Ariſtotle, and that he was ignorant

of the moſt excellent things of nature, & vſed verie neceſſarie demonſtrations. The which men in time paſt wel marked, picturing behind his portracture a woman, which had her face couered with a vayle,Phyſis. named Phyſis, that is to ſay, Nature. And it is no maruaile at al, if all of them were not able to attaine to thoſe ſupernaturall things, ſince that the moſt excellent treaſors of nature, were concealed from them. The which ought to make vs admyre at Gods ſpeach in the fiue laſt Chapters of Iob, diſcourſing of the mouings of the heauens,Iob. force of the ſtarres, of the earth founded vpon the waters, & of the waters hanging in the middle of the worlde: and ſundry other wonders which a body may perceiue, able to declare the knowledge of man to be verie ful of ignorance.The lyfe of the Paganes. S. Auguſtine compared the life of the ancient Pagans which were accounted ſo wiſe & vertuous, to a wandring courſe, & their argumēts to a glaſſe which is ſhining, but verie brickle: Concluding it better to halt in the way of truth, then to runne lightly without it. He wrote likewiſe that their vertues were impure, & imperfect; becauſe there is nothing good, without the ſoueraigne good. And where there is defect of the knowledge of eternal life, there vertue is falſe & mens intentions go awrie.The promiſes of God are certaine. And there is no man that can haue any quietnes of conſcience, but through the promiſes of God (from which they were ſhut out,) & alſo by the inward obedience, required of God, by truſting in him, by repentance, righteouſnes, & iuſtification of the faithful, by the free forgiuenes of our ſinnes, by hope, patience, confidence in aduerſitie, confeſsion & giuing of thanks, & by referring al things to the glorie of God, & to charitie. And S. Chriſostom vpon the firſt to the Corinthians & fourth Homelie,Chryſoſtome. cō
                  pareth the ſubtile diſputations of the Philoſophers to cobwebbes which breake & rent aſunder with the wind, & ſpeaking of a happy life,
                     Rom. 1.22. were neuer able to attaine vnto it, and as S. Paul writeth, profeſsing themſelues to be wiſe, they became fooles. And not without cauſe Socrates in Plato,
                  The lamentation of Socrates.
                   lamented that the Philoſophers ſtudyed more the contemplation of nature, & knowledge, then to liue well, or giue good precepts. And towards the end of the treatiſe of his lawes, as through a diuine inſpiration, he giueth hope of the comming of one more excellent, more redoubted, and more holy then any man, whoſe office was to open the ſecrete places of truth, and the hidden fountaines, who ſhould be folowed & honored of al men, which ſurely could not be vnderſtood, but by our Lord Ieſus Christ, which is the waie,
                  
                     Iob. 14.6 
                  the truth and the life. S. Chriſoſtome ſetteth downe in

the ranke of Philoſophers, Ariſtides, Cato, Solon, Lycurgus, Epaminundas, & ſundrie other, who beſides their knowledge, were excellent in matters of ſtate & gouernement, (as was our lawyer Vlpian) and ſtudied more to do good to euery one, then to bee conuerſant in contemplation. For the Sophisters counterfait to be wiſe,Sophiſters. & in deed their ende is but glorie, and proud boaſting. And S. Augustine thought that all Philoſophers were rather giuen to the ſeruice and ſearching out of the intelligences ſeperate,Lib. 10. Cap. 2 de ciuit. Dei. which we call angels & diuels, and which they called gods and ſpirites, then of the true God, albeit they confeſſed there was one only almightie, father of the Gods and men. And it is eaſie to gather out of their writings,
                     Againſt Atheiſts and Epicures. how they confeſſed one only God in three perſons, the Father, the Sonne & the holy ghoſt, and other Articles contained in the Apoſtles Creede, to conuict Atheiſts and Epicures withal.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XX. Of diſguiſings done to Princes, and what is their duetie for their honour, and quiet of their ſubiects, and of the miſeries of the wicked, of the obſeruation of ordinances, and of that which maintaineth or altereth an estate.
               
                  PRinces were ordained of God, to be fathers, protectors,VVhy God ordained princes. and ſhephardes ouer the people cōmitted to their charge, to ſerue to maintaine their libertie, and to defende them againſt all iniuries, and to ſhewe them good example, to entertaine iuſtice and peace, to cauſe vertue, learning, ſciences and good lawes to flouriſh, to prouide for the inſtruction of youth, to eſteeme of the good, and chaſtice the wicked.
               
                  Plato did write, following the fixion of Homer, that children,Kings children. born of Kings were compoſed of a pretious maſſe, to be ſeperate from the common ſort. And it is ſaide of Scipio,
                  Scipio. and certaine other great perſonages, that they were deſcended from a diuine race; becauſe God giueth particular graces to ſuch as he ſetteth ouer others. Horace likewiſe named Kings Diogenes, that is to ſay, the generatiō of Iupiter, & Diotrephes, nouriſhed by Iupiter, & Ariſtes, of Iupiter, which ſignifieth as Plato interpreteth, the familiars, & diſciple in politike ſciences. And Frederick is as much to ſay, as the k. of peace. And for as much as Artaxerxes Mnemon, delighted in peace, was affable and vertuous, the reſt of the Kings of Perſia ſince his time

haue beene called by his name. And it is incredible, howe ſo many ſhould fall headlong into ſo great diſhonors and misfortunes, as we haue both ſeene and red of, had the trueth beene laide open before them. It is written that K. Lewys the eleuenth was wont to ſay,K. Lewys. 11. that he found euery thing within his kingdome, but only one, which was trueth. K. Lewys the twelueth, permitted al commedians and ſtage players, to ſpeake freely and to reprehend ſuch vices as were manifeſt,K. Lewys. 12. to the ende they mought bee amended: And ſaide that for his own part he knewe many things by them, which he was not before witting of. Dyoniſius the tyrant of Sicille, being retyred to Athens,
                  
                     Dyoniſius the tyrant of Sicil.
                   after he was depriued of his kingdome bewayled the eſtate of Princes, but eſpecially, in that men neuer ſpoke freely vnto them, and that the trueth was euer hidden and concealed from them. The Emperours Gordian the younger, and Diocleſian,
                  The cōplaint of Gordian & Dyocleſian Emperours. made the verie like complaint that euery thing was diſguyſed and coloured vnto them, and that flatterers caſt duſt before their eyes, making them beleeue, the euill to be good. That they were often times coſened, and ſolde vnder hande; that they put the ſworde into the handes of furious magiſtrates, and beſtowed ſtates & honors vpon vnworthie, couetous, & lewd perſons: That they were cauſed to turne the day into night, and the night into day: That they were altogither conuerſant, and brought vp, in delicacies, huntings, and other paſtimes, whereby their mindes might be turned from remembring that charge which God had layde vppon them: and all this were they brought to doe, to the end that ſuch flatterers as were about them, might the better attaine to the depth of their deuiſes: And that oftentimes they were but Emperours and Kings in name, as if they had plaid their parte but vpon a ſtage, or had beene commedians. And that their counſelors were the true actors, and reped all the profit & honor. It is likewiſe written in the reſt of Heſter,
                  
                     Heſter. 16.6. that they which deceitfully abuſe the ſimplicitie and gentleneſſe of Princes with lying tales, make them ſelues partakers of innocent bloud, and wrap them ſelues in calamities, which can not be remedyed.
                  Flatterers cō
                     pared to the Syrenes. And flatterers haue beene compared to the Syrenes, who thorough their ſinging entiſed all paſſengers vppon the ſea, that heard them to drawe neere vnto them. Wee may verie well impute to ſuch diſguyſinges, the great expenſes which the Emperoures Tiberius, Nero, Caligula, Commodus, Domitian, Heliogabalus, and ſundrye others, haue fooliſhlye ſpent vnder a colour of liberalitie, and the better to maintaine their prodigalities,

put to death and impoueriſhed many:K. Antiochus.
                   which prodigalitie we very well may terme a kinde of lying. King Antiochus in hunting loſt his way, and was conſtrayned to retire to a poore Yeomans houſe of the countrey, who not knowing tolde him all the faultes that he, and his fauorites had committed: to whom at his returne he declared, that he neuer vnderſtoode the trueth vntill that night: and euer after he carryed himſelfe moſt vertuouſly. We reade of ſundrie our kinges of France who haue done the like: and of ſome Emperours, who haue diſguiſed themſelues, thereby the better to vnderſtande what the people ſpake of them.
                     Eugenes pope 
                  Platina writeth of Pope Eugenes, howe he ſent certaine rounde about the citie, to eſpie what men moſt blamed eyther in him or his,K. Lewys the groſſe. that it might be amended. King Lewys the Groſſe, which builded S. Victors diſguiſed himſelfe often times, the better to be informed of the truth. And king Lewys the 12. as Charlemagne,
                  K. Lewys 12. and Saint Lewys had doone before him, tooke great pleaſure to vnderſtande the complaintes of his ſubiects applying thereto ſuch remedie as their caſe required. And for this cauſe hee obtayned the name of father of the people, and his memorie is more famous to ſerue for an example to the poſteritie, then all the conqueſtes and victories of other kinges. Sundrie of our kinges in the beginning were greatly blamed, for that they ſuffered themſelues to bee ſo muche gouerned by the principall of their court: and ſome haue beene reſembled to golden images, that are guilded and ſhining without, but within are full of ruſt, cobwebbes and filthineſſe. For the crowne doth not take away the paſsions nor griefe of the ſpirites,Ptolome. but rather doth it diminiſh the true pleaſure. As Ptolome ſeeing certaine fiſhers ſporting themſelues vpon the ſea ſhore, wiſhed he were like one of them, adding that monarchies are full of cares, feares,
                     Charles the 4 and 5. Seleucus.
                   miſtruſtes, and diſguyſed miſeries. Which alſo Charles the 4. and 5. Emperours were woont to ſay, deſyring to leade a priuate life. Seleucus before that did the like, adding that if hee ſhoulde caſt his crowne into the high waye, there would bee none founde, that would take it vp, knowing the charge and griefes that euer did accompany it.
                     Adrian Pope, And Pope Adrian ſayde that he thought no eſtate ſo myſerable nor ſo daungerous as his owne, and that hee neuer enioyed a better or more pleaſant time,
                     Traian emperour. then when he was but a ſimple monke: and Traian the Emperour wrote vnto the Senate of Rome, that hauing nowe taſted the cares and paynes which the imperiall ſtate led with it ſelfe, he did a thouſande times repent that

euer he tooke it vpon him.Homer. 2. iliad. 
                  Homer fayneth all the gods to ſleepe except Iupiter, who was altogither exempt from ſleepe. Saint Chriſoſtome vpon the ſecond to the Corinthians,
                  An arte of great difficultie to commaunde and rule vvell. Diocleſian.
                   & 15. homely, ſayd that to gouerne and cōmand wel was the greateſt and moſt hard art of all, as his fault is more daungerous which guideth the ſterne, then his which holdeth the owers. It is written of Diocleſian that he was wont to ſay before his Empire, that there was nothing ſo hard as to commaund well. Yet many place therein their felicitie, and acquit themſelues with pleaſure of the charge which God hath laide vpon them. In my ſpeech before I do not comprehend the wicked and tyrannicall Princes,The miſerable lyfe of tyrants & vvicked princes. who as Tacitus writeth in the life of Tiberius, are perpetually tormented and torne a ſunder in their conſciences; yea and ſundrie of them haue lamented the infamie they ſhould endure which they ſaw very well men would doe vnto them after their death. And alleadge the ſaying of Plato, that if their ſoules could be diſcouered, they ſhould be ſeene full of ſtinching ſcarres, and torne in peeces with a hidden yron that euer burneth them.
                     Wiſd. 17.10. And as it is written in the booke of wiſedome, It is a feareful thing when malice is condemned by her owne teſtimonie and a conſcience that is touched doth euer forecaſt cruell thinges. It is written of Nero and certaine other, that they were of an opinion, that the earth did open before them, and ſawe the ſhadowes of ſuch as they had cauſed to die readie to torment them. Guichardin writeth of Alphonſus K. of Naples,
                  Guichard lib. 1 of Naples. that neither night nor day he could reſt in his ſpirite, thinking the very heauens & elements had conſpired againſt him: that in ſleeping the ghoſts of ſuch as he had put to death ſeemed to appeare vnto him, & in the day thought his ſubiects to riſe to do vengeance vpon him: which was the cauſe that he did not abide the cōming of the Frenchmen. Plutarke ſayth that the ſoules of Tyrantes, are compoſed of arrogancy and crueltie:
                  Plutarque. Demoſthenes. and Demoſthenes is of opinion, that they be enemies to libertie & lawes. And Artemidorus deſcribeth the viſions, and fearefull & dreadfull dreames which haue affrighted the wicked. The which ought to moue all Princes to feare God,The duety of a good prince to ſubiect thēſelues vnto the laws of nature, euen as they deſire the obedience of their owne ſubiects, procuring their good, vnitie and quiet, reuenging their iniuries, charging thē with as little as they may beſtowing their gouernments vpon vertuous perſons, giuing good wages without ſelling of offyces, as the Emperours Alexander, Seuerus, Pertinax, ſundry of our kings, & diuers other haue greatly recommended vnto vs. And Claudius the Emperour

was wont greatly to thanke ſuch as hee had prouided for offices, for that they being men worthie and capable of them would accept them. It were alſo a very great prayſe, if men would not ſo eaſily diſpence with the holy ordinaunces, and eſpecially thoſe that touch age, and forbid two of one parentage,Claudius emperour. Diſpenſing vvith holy ordinances. Comment. lib. 7 to be of one chamber and bed, as alſo it is reported in the Commentaries of Caeſar that it was a matter ſtraightly forbidden at Authun. Such ordinances likewiſe as haue beene renewed through pollicie, the garmentes, banquetes, and iuſtice, would breede great quietneſſe were they well obſerued. And if according to the diſpoſition of the lawe, for euery matter contayned in the Kinges letters,L. 5. Si contra ius. which ſhould not be founde trewe, there were a good fine ſet, according to the condition of thoſe which ſo greatly abuſe the fauors of the Prince. And were it not that I feared to offend ſuch as reape profit and commoditie by the ſeale, I would deſire that thoſe reſtitutions & remedies which the law doth giue,L. 5. de Theſau. L. x. C. might be accorded by the ordinary iudges without letters. For as the Emperours and lawyers haue ſaid what neede one trouble a Prine, or be too importunate vpon him for that which the law of it ſelfe permitteth? And al policie tendeth to a publicke profite as we haue heretofore noted. It were likewiſe an ordinaunce verie laudable, that all offyces were beſtowed, by an election made of three perſons, to the moſt capable of which the kinge ſhould giue the eſtate that is voyde without anye money.Selling offices. For the ſale of offyces is an occaſion of ſundrie miſchiefes, as Ariſtotle declareth in his Politicques.
               There are likewiſe a greate number, which following the firſt ordynaunces, are verye deſyrous to ſee thoſe ſayde offyces and eſtates, to bee once agayne reduced to their auncient number, and what euer were ſuperfluous to bee ſuppreſſed as neare as poſsible mought be,Suppreſsing of offices. for that the ouer greate number of Iudges and gouernours (as Plato ſayeth) is an occaſion of great diſorder. The Kinge in like ſorte ſhoulde eaſe himſelfe of manie importunities, and great, if he would cauſe a role to be made, of ſuch benefices, offyces, and charges, as are vacant, and within one moneth or a little after they be voyde, to prouide good ſeruauntes and woorthie members to occupie the ſame. And hee ſhould deſerue great prayſe, if he would cauſe his places vpon the frontiers, to be well furniſhed and fortifyed,Frontiers & highe vvayes and the high wayes to be amended and repayred: as the ſayd Emperour Traian did, & other Lords, and commonwelthes. And ſhould greatly cōfort his

ſubiectes,Superfluous ordinances. if he would cauſe all ſuperfluous ordinances to be reiected, and which are no more in vſe, and leaue a little volume of ſuch as are neceſſarie. And for as muche as the offices of Mareſchal chiefe, and gouernour, require a farre more great wiſedome, and experience, the faults which they ſhould commit being of ſo great importance,Offices requiring great vviſedome they ought not to be beſtowed vpon young men that are not experienced, & of whoſe vertue there is no further proofe then fauour, but vpon well tryed Captaines, and men of yeares. As alſo hee ought to take the like order, in the principall offyces of iudgement, and among the generals of reuenewes, of the iuſtice of Monyes, procurers generall, and Commiſsioners of warre. And aboue all thinges Princes ought to meaſure their actions by the ſtandard of their lawes to be gracious, maintayners of godlineſſe, iuſtice, and faith, pitifull to the oppreſſed, modeſt in proſperitie, patient and conſtant in aduerſitie, courteous vnto the good, and terrible vnto the wicked, to flatterers, tale caryers, and coyners of newe inuentions, cleane aboliſhing all occaſion, that might tende to moue ſedition, trouble, and diſſention, matters leading men to vproares,Equalitie to be obſerued. armes, and partialities cleane diſmembring the dew obedience we owe vnto our ſoueraigne. Ariſtotle comprehendeth all the publicke vices vnder this worde inequalitie, which ſeuereth the heartes of the people: therefore it is requiſite a geometricall equalitie be kept to meate with ſuch miſcontentmentes: for if the entreatie which is made between diuers perſons, be temperate and well proportioned, then peace enſueth thereon: if it be diſſolute and out of proportion, warres, commotions and diſſentions ariſe thereupon.2. Cor. 15. And albeit there be no agreement betweene light and darkeneſſe,Edicts of religion made for neceſsity. nor betweene Chriſt and Belial, as S. Paule writeth in 2. to the Corinthians, and that euerie good man ought to deſire a vnitie in religion: yet doe I greatly commende their wiſedome, who ſeeing the vrgent neceſsitie, that France hath of a long and quiet peace, (to the which the King hath nowe guided it, as a ſhippe in mayne ſea often times ſore bruſed with ſtormes and tempeſtes) are not of opinion it ſhould be againe put to the mercie and iniurie of the waues, and the rage of bloyſtering windes of partialities and diuiſions, which ſo long time haue toſſed too and fro this ſtate, nor that the edictes ſhould bee broken, hauing ſo many times beene ſworne vnto and publiſhed, after hauing taken the aduiſe of the whole bodie of the Kinges priuie counſell, and of the principall ſoueraygne courtes of the whole Realme, as a man may ſaye, beſides

an infinite number of reaſons founded, vpon that, which the Emperours Conſtantine, Licinius, Nerua, Gratian, and ſundrie other Emperours haue doone, in reſpect of the neceſsitie of the time, thereby to be the better able to eſtabliſh peace, and quietneſſe, & ſo better preſerue their owne eſtate.Chriſtians in Turkie.
                   I leaue the Turke which doth not at all enforce the conſciences of the Chriſtians: yea and ſome religious perſons, in the holy mount aunciently called Athos, and neere vnto Conſtantinople receaue yearely almes frō him. The Princes of Italie ſupport the Iewes ranke enemies to our religion. In Polognia, both the Greekiſh and Romiſh religion, hath each had their courſe time out of minde: yea and in ſundry cities as well of Germanie as Swyſerlande, there bee Churches of two religions, and ſince certaine yeares, the nobilitie make profeſsion there of the religion of the Proteſtantes. The Emperour Charles the fift, ſo puiſſant, and wiſe, after ſundrie deliberations had of this matter,The Edict of the emperour Charles the 5. at Auſbourgh.
                   agreed & gaue conſent by an order made at Ausbourge in the yeare 1530 to the peace named of religion. And in the yeare 1555. a perpetuall edicte was to that ende eſtabliſhed.Ferdinando. 
                  Ferdinando his ſucceſſour endured the change of religion in diuerſe prouinces of his kingdome of Bohemia, and certayne places of Auſtria.
                  Maximilian. And ſince Maximilian his ſonne,Philibert D. of Savoy. permitted the like to his nobles and gentlemen of Auſtria, as likewiſe did the late Duke of Sauoye to diuerſe of his ſubiectes. And the counſell of the King of Spayne ſo greatly Catholike was yet conſtrayned to ſuffer the like in ſundrie places in Flanders. And in the time of our ſauiour and before, there were in Ieruſalem ſundrie ſectes, whereof ſome cleane impugned the principall articles of our fayth.Demoſthenes. Whereupon I am not of the mind to founde any certaine rule, knowing we ought to liue according vnto lawes, not examples as Demoſthenes was wont to ſay: but conſidering the miſcheifes and diſorders of times, and that the ſweetneſſe of religion and iuſtice is impatient of crueltie, of the exceſſe and vnworthineſſe of troubles, hauing too feeble a voyce to bee vnderſtoode, amidſts the horrible clatteringes of blouddie weapons as Marius ſayde, I deſire that they maye not ſtirre vppe a miſchiefe nowe lying quiet, and that each one prayſe the kinge, for the conſtancie and equalitie which hee hath kept in his promiſes, rather attending a more milde and fit remedie for a greater vnitie,
                     Acts. 5.38. eſteeming the counſell which Gamaliel gaue to the Phariſes as trewe, that no force nor practiſe of man can deſtroye what is of God, and if it be of men it will come to nought and periſh of it ſelfe. The lawes of the

twelue tables required that the ſafety of the people, were the moſt ſoueraigne lawe, and eſteemed that patron as abhominable, that would defraude his ſubiect or freed bondman. So ought ſubiects to bee entreated without oppreſsion. Princes ought likewiſe to beware of two thinges which Ariſtotle in his Politiques ſaieth ſubuerteth Empires,Tvvo things vvhich ſubuert empyres to wit, hatred and diſdaine, rather making themſelues to be beloued and eſteemed, and abſtayning from all kinde of iniuſtice and violence, and whatſoeuer elſe deſerueth blame. As the Emperours Titus, Nerua, and ſundrie other boaſted of themſelues, that they were able to ſay, that they euer behaued themſelues towardes their ſubiectes, euen as they would haue their ſubiectes doe towardes them ſelues if they were in their place.Penſions to Straungers. And to preſerue peace amonge ſubiectes, they ought to take order that euerie one bee occupyed and followe his vocation honeſtly, and leaue to giue exceſsiue penſions to ſtraungers and vnwoorthie ſubiectes, following the maxime of Alexander Seuerus,
                  Alexander ſeuerus. that men are not to be nouriſhed which are neyther neceſſarie nor profitable for a common wealth. And Anthonie the Emperour gaue charge,Traynes of princes. his trayne by no meanes ſhould preſſe the people. Galba often ſayde that a Prince ought to prouide that they of his court ſhould offer wronge to no man,Galba. and that their gardes that offended herein ſhould bee rigorouſly puniſhed, or they which in hunting would marre eyther corne or fruites.Seneca. And as Seneca ſayeth, the good renowne of ſeruauntes encreaſeth the glorie of their mayſters. It were alſo to be deſired that the ordinaunce of taxes were obſerued, and that the men of armes, and ſouldiers were well payde, without marringe of the plaine countrey, attending other meanes of remedie, vntil they be cleane remoued.Caſsiod. lib. 4.
                   For as king Theodoric wrote, the army which is not entertayned with pay, furniture & munition can by no means keepe diſcipline: as likewiſe Alexander Seuerus the Emperour was wont to ſay.Tiberius. The Emperour Tiberius the 2. accounted for counterfaite coine that money which was leuied with the teares & cryings out of the people. And Pertinax the Emperour was highly extolled for his liberalitie,Pertinax. & for that he did aboliſh all taxes, cuſtomes, ſubſedies, & other impoſts, which he ſaid were the inuentiō of tyrany, & reſtored all to the former libertie. It were alſo a very great commodity if the matter whereof they make money, were not ſo mingled,Money. but either were pure gold, ſiluer, or braſſe. For the delaying is a moſt pernitious inuention, as it is in like ſort to haue ſo manye

officers about the mint: Aboue al things the key of the reuenewes ought to be put in ſuer handling. The laſt will & teſtament of the King Saint Lewys may not be here omitted,The teſtamēt of K S. Lewys
                   in which he commanded his ſonne & ſucceſſour, to preſerue the good lawes, to be charitable towards the poore, to take great regard, that he might haue wiſe counſellours, and of ripe age, in no wiſe to ſell his eſtates, that he ſhuld make choiſe of ſeruants, prudent and peaceable, not couetous, giuen to ſpeake ill or quarellers: that hee miniſter iuſtice alike to all, thorough which Kings raigne: that he ſhould not be too light of beliefe, nor rayſe taxes, or releife of his ſubiectes without verye vrgent neceſsitie, the which we may ſaye to be able to ſupport an infinite number of charges, and buſineſſe, the better to adminiſter iuſtice, to preſerue the publicke weale from all daungers, to ſuppreſſe the wicked, and maintaine all his countrey and ſubiectes in quietneſſe, and to bee able to paye what is dew to ſtrangers and his owne ſubiects: which cannot be brought to paſſe without great meanes and expenſes.
                     Iulian the emperour pardoneth the Alexandrians
                   It is written of Iulian the Emperour that he pardoned the people of Alexandria, who had trayled their Byſhoppe thorough the citie and killed him; becauſe that he had giuen counſell to Conſtance his predeceſſour, to rayſe certaine newe taxes vpon them.The bulle of the ſupper By the bull of the ſupper on holy thurſday, the Pope doth excommunicate all ſuch as leuie new ſubſides, or exact what is not their dewe. I will not in like ſort paſſe ouer with a dry pen, the remembrances which Baſill the Emperour of Conſtantinople left vnto Leo his ſonne,The inſtructions Baſil gaue to his ſonne Leo emperour that he ſhould be a vertuous Emperour, not becomming ſlaue to his owne affections, that he ſhould remember what ſins himſelfe committed againſt God, to the ende he might pardon ſuch as were committed againſt his perſon: that he ſhould be more careful to adorne his wordes with good manners, then his manners with words: that he ſhould giue himſelfe to learning which beutifieth the ſpirite, ſhewing himſelfe worthy to be the Image, and lifetenant of the king of heauen. For ſubiectes rule their manners according to the paterne of their Prince. That he ſhould get nothing vniuſtly for feare of looſing all, that he ſhould be courteous, gratious and graue; that he ſhould baniſh from his court all lewde counſellours, ſuch as charge the people with newe inuentions, that his life ſhould ſerue for an vnwritten lawe, that he be ſuch towardes his owne ſubiectes as hee would require of God to bee towardes him, that hee manifeſt not him ſelfe eyther to ſorrowefull or to ioyefull, that by no

meanes he ſell his offyces: for he that ſelleth them maketh ſale of his owne ſubiectes.
                     Ageſilaus contrary to many Tyrants. Me thinketh wee ought in no wiſe to forget the commendation which Xenophon gaue to Kinge Ageſilaus, comparing him as contrarye to many tyrauntes, that he euer meaſured his expenſes with his reuenewe, fearing leaſt for the furniſhing thereof, he ſhould doe ought that were vniuſt: greatly delighting to ſee his ſubiectes rich, and that they being valiant, he commanded ouer valiant people: that he eſteemed it a greater prayſe, not to be ouercome with money, pleaſures, and feare, then to take by aſſault moſt ſtrong cities: that he ſhewed himſelf much to the people, and courteouſly entreated euery one that had any ſupplycation or ſuite to make vnto him, and as ſoone as he was able gaue order for the diſpatch of whatſoeuer was propoſed vnto him with reaſon.The holy ordinance of Antony emperour. The ordinance of Anthonye the Emperour, was holy for his time, that no tribute ſhould bee exacted without the conſent of the Senate and the people, and alſo that it ſhould not be employed to any vſe but by their eſpeciall aucthoritie. For there muſt bee a Geometricall proportion kept betweene the King and the people. And when he would wreſt all vnto himſelfe, it is as the Emperours Traian & Adrian were wont to ſay,The oth the emperours tak at their coronation. that when the ſpleene is ſwolne, all the reſt of the members waxe dry. Among the othes which the Emperours make at their coronation, one is that they ſhall lay no taxe or tribute without the conſent of the eſtates of the Empire. The which the kings of Polognia, Hungary, Inglande, and Danemarc, doe in like ſort. Thence proceeded the ordinance made by Philip de Valois,
                  Procurers generall. and other of our Kinges. And if ſuch as are charged by vertue of their offyce, to ſee the buildinges of Churches to be repayred, the poore to be well vſed, to hinder the exceſsiue fellings of Tymber, to cauſe the good lawes to be put in execution, to hold the Mercurials, to controle each one, would performe their dutie euery thing would proſper better.Conduits of cities. The lawe which Titus Liuius, and Plutarke writeth was practiſed at Rome, were very profitable, to be put in vre within the citie of Paris, that all fountaynes which were drawne into particuler houſes, thorough fauour, corruption or otherwiſe, might be cleane ſtopped, and placed in publicke places, or out of the ſame houſes, that particuler perſons might not be able to withdrawe the water, in abuſing the publicke benefite as they doe.Guardes not neceſſarie for good Kings. The ſaying of King Agis Agaſicles, and Titus the Emperour is worthy to be well cōſidered, that a Prince may eaſily raigne without any guarde or weapons, when he commaundeth ouer his

ſubiectes, as a father ouer his children, vſinge them withall meekenſſe, ſweeteneſſe and clemencie. For if a Prince tende to nought elſe, then to maintayne him ſelfe, and bring his people into ſlauerie, there is no more anye name lefte of citie or people as Saint Auguſtine ſayeth. And it is not ynough that a Prince knoweth what eſtablyſheth, preſerueth,L. 4. c. 4 & l. 9 c. 21. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ciuit. Dei. or deſtroyeth ſeignuries, if he doe not withholde or reiecte awaye cleane the cauſe, and preuent troubles, or if they doe chaunce to happen preſently quench them, with ſmall dammage. It were beſides to be deſired that they had a care to the mayntenaunce of godlineſſe and religion, of hoſpitales and ſchooles,
                     K. Philip de Valois. and that they put in execution what Kinge Philip de Valois ſayde to the Archbyſhoppes, Byſhoppes, and Prelates, of his Realme, whome he had cauſed to aſſemble togeather: that if they woulde correcte what were woorthie of amendment, hee would alter nothing in the ſtate of the Church: but if they differred to doe it, he would remedie it in ſuch ſorte, as God thereby ſhould be better ſerued, the people contented, and the nobilitie (which ſo much complained thereof,) without cauſe giuen of offence. It woulde alſo breede a verye great benefite, if according to the ordinance of Charlemagne, Lewys 12. Otho the firſt of Councels, Decrees, Cannons, and the aduiſe of ſundrie good Popes, Diuines, and Doctours, they would inſtitute into benefices the moſt learned men, and of beſt life, and which mought bee founde more agreeable to Eccleſiaſticall functions and to the people, not depending of one alone which careth for nought but to put in his coffers the yearely reuenewe, which appertayneth according to the Cannons, and meaning of ſuch as were founders to other as well as to the poore, and by this reformation would iuſtice be maintayned, and a better order eſtabliſhed thorough out. For if the dewtie of a Magiſtrate bee to ſee that the people liue well and vertuouſly,Ariſt. lib. 3 c. 6
                   (according to Aristotle his opinion in his Politiques) religion is one of the greateſt vertues. As in like ſorte Moſes, Ioſua, Samuel, Dauid, Salomon, Aza, Ioſophat, Ioab, Ezechias, Ioſias, and other, greatly trauayled to refine the ſeruice of God. And Saint Ambroſe writeth that Theodoſius when he dyed,Theodoſius. had a greater care of the Church, then of his ſickeneſſe. And Socrates in the Proeme of the fifte booke of the Eccleſiaſticall hyſtorie, ſheweth the great care that the Emperours euer ſince they became Chriſtians tooke, touching Eccleſiaſticall affayres. And the Diuines

are of opinion that the name of Melchiſedech King of Salem, ſheweth what kinges ought to be, to wit, kinges of iuſtice and peace. And the worde Abimilech ſignifieth my father the kinge.Melchiſedec. Abimilec. Sundrye haue likewiſe wiſhed, for the quiet of the commonwealth, that Princes woulde ofte ſet before their eyes the cauſes, by meanes whereof an eſtate is turned topſie turuie, and chaunged, according to the rules in the holye ſcripture, and hyſtories, thorough vice, hatred which God carryeth to impietie, idolatrie, vniuſtice,The cauſes of the alteration of ſtates. tyrannie, ſorcerie and whoredome. And often times the enuie of ſuch as gouerne, their ambition, deſire of reuenge, choler, raſhneſſe, obſtinacie, deſpite, couetouſneſſe, truſt in their owne ſtrength, accompanied with hautineſſe, fooliſhe imitation and curioſitie, corrupteth their counſelles, and prouoketh them to ſtirre vp out of ſeaſon, what they ſhould let lie in quyet. And we in our owne time haue ſeene, what troubles haue enſued hereon. For which a good Prynce ought to prouide: and if hee chaunce to forgette him ſelfe, he ought to bee brought backe agayne,The Condition of princes vncertain thorough the gnawinges and bytinges of the ſharpe teeth, and ſmarting prickes of his conſcience. And hee ought well to weigh the threatninges conteyned and ſet foorth in the holy ſcripture, and that which Seneca writeth, that there is no tempeſt vpon the ſea ſo ſoddaine, nor waue that followeth one an other ſooner, then the condition of Princes is variable, for that they are ſubiecte to dreadfull faules and chaunges.
                     Pſal. 107.40 And the Pſalmist ſayth,
                     Iob. 12.18. that the Lorde powreth contempt vppon Princes, and cauſeth them to erre in deſearte places out of the waye. The which Iob ſetteth foorth more at large. And the alterations which we ſee happen in our age in ſo many countryes, might ſerue for a notable table to beholde the iudgementes of God, cleane abolyſhinge whole empires for cauſe of our ſinnes.
                     Deut. 18 11 And God declared that he caſt the people out of the lande of Paleſtina, for the ſorceries which they vſed. And threatned that he would not onely roote out ſorcerers,
                     Leuit. 20.6. but thoſe likewiſe that ſuffereth them to liue. And in Ieremie he ſayth:
                     Ier. 15.4. that he will ſcatter them in all kingdomes of the earth, becauſe of Manaſſes for that which he did in Ieruſalem. Which ought to mooue all Princes to deteſt them, and cauſe them to bee puniſhed according to the lawe of God. Sundry hiſtories doe witneſſe that vpon the image of Sennacharib in Aegypt was written, Learne by me to feare God.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XXI. That Princes ought to haue about them good counſellours, which may not ſpare to tell them the truth, and that their life ought to ſerue as a rule and inſtruction, to their ſubiectes not to graunt to any vniuſt thing, of exceſsiue gifts, an aduertiſement to ſuch as are in fauour, of warnings, and that in all actions of importance one ought to take councell, without truſting to his owne ſufficiencie.
               
                  MAlice and vice, taking their full ſwyng,Tirannical Licence through the carier, of the power, & libertie, which wicked Princes yeelde vnto them, do puſh forward euery violent paſſion, making euery litle choler occaſioned vpon ſome falſe reporte, to turne anon eyther to murther or baniſhment: & euery regard, and loue, to a rape or adultery: and couetouſnes to confyſcation. The ſight of what is precious, cauſeth a miſcheuous deſire of making warre, & is the occaſion that a million of ſwordes are naked,Flatterers of Court Micheas 2.3. which peace would keepe within the ſcabbard. The importunitie of a flatterer driueth away a good counſeller, a light beleefe or ſuſpition, cauſeth the innocent often times to looſe his life, as the Prophet Mycheas deſcribeth. Through inequalitie, iniuſtice, or ambition, an entrie is made to ſeditions & troubles. And a wicked counſell cauſeth the ruyne of a whole eſtate, & the order of iuſtice, & affaires is cleane turned vpſide down, and as Iſocrates writeth, the amities of Tyrants, through a falſe report, are often turned into moſt deadly enmities. They proceed rather with a headines, then counſell, without reſiſting their appetites, they are inſolent and impatient, imagining that with a looke they are able to remedie al hinderances, and to ſurmount the nature of thinges, not taking counſell of wiſedome and reaſon, but of their owne wil, their woordes euer differing from their workes, and preferring profit before ſayth. Caligula the Emperour,
                     Caligula his vvishe. wiſhed that all the people of Rome had but one head, that he might cut it off at a blowe. And one day hauing two Senators at dinner with him, that aſked him what made him to laugh, it is aunſwered hee, becauſe in the twinckling of an eye, I am able to hange you both. The which other Emperours both haue ſayde, and put as much in execution. And as Saluſte writeth, Tyrantes rather ſuſpect the good then the wicked, and ſtande in feare of ſuch as are vertuous, and are many.

As Horace (after other hiſtoriographers) reciteth of one Dioniſius a Tyrant,Horat. ode. 2. lib. 3. Dyoniſius. Damocles. that he cauſed a friend of his to ſit, in a place abounding with all kinde of delicacies and delightes, but ouer his heade he had a naked ſworde hanging by a threede, thereby to ſhewe him the eſtate in which all tyrantes ſtoode. The Emperour Alexander Seuerus did as it were the like,Seuerus. Ouinius. to a delicate Senator named Ouinius. And in truth, if iuſtice, reaſon, lawes, and the feare of God, did not conteyne, and keepe within boundes ſuche power and might, and that they were not accuſtomed to demand account of thēſelues, condemnations would goe before profes, and all iuſtice, pollicie,Varus. and order ſhould lie vnder feete. Varus the Emperour was wont to ſay after Marius in Saluſte, & diuers other of old time, that it was a moſt hard matter for one in great power and aucthoritie to temper himſelfe, or not to be corrupted, and to put a bridle to his deſires.1. Sam. 8.11. 
                  Herodotus ſheweth how eaſely royal gouernement is degenerated into tyrannye, (whereof Samuel aduertiſed the people of GGD ſo playnely) by the example of Deioces,
                  Deioces. who beeing greatly renowned and loued of euerye one, for his vertue and iuſtice, was chooſen as Bayleife amonge the Medes, and in the ende crowned their Kinge: and to the ende he ſhould haue greater aucthoritie, and be the better able to maintayne iuſtice, and to oppoſe himſelfe to any harme, they gaue him a guarde, and a verye ſtronge place of defence. But hee ſeeing himſelfe ſo aſſuredly eſtablyſhed, changed his manners cleane accordinge to the faſhion of tyrauntes, and thought of nothing elſe but howe hee mought be reuenged, and contemned and oppreſſed euerie one,Theodoſius. for his owne greatneſſe and pleaſure. And not without cauſe Theodoſius the Emperour exhorteth his children Arcadius, and Honorius, to put a bridle to ſuch licentiouſneſſe, as neuer regarded what was iuſte, and to moderate their firſt motions and choler, without truſting too much to fortune, which is like vnto a glaſſe, the more it is ſhining, the more is it brickle. Wherefore Plato,
                  Fortune like a glaſſe— 
                  Xenephon, Ariſtotle and Plutarke, counſelled all good Princes to prouide about them men learned, well aduiſed, modeſt, and of good vnderſtanding to conferre with, and to vnderſtande of them what their dewtie is. Iſocrates wrote vnto Nicocles that he ſhould procure friends,Iſocrates. not ſuch as ſhould be euer readie to ſhewe him paſtime, but ſuch as ſhould aſsiſt him in well gouerning of his kingdome, and that euer would tell him the truth. And he addeth that it is a greater felicitie to obeye a good King then to raygne,

                  Theopompus made aunſwere vnto him,Theopompus. that demaunded how a King with ſafety might gouerne his kingdom, in giuing libertie vnto his friends frankly to ſpeake the truth, and in taking heede that he oppreſſe not his ſubiects. Plutark ſheweth that Philoſophers ought eſpecially to conuerſe with Princes, alleaging the aunſwere of Solon,
                  Solon. to him which ſaid that one ought not to approch neere Princes except he purpoſe to do al things to pleſe thē; but cōtrariwiſe ſaith he you ought not to be about thē, except you euer tel thē the truth. As he did in viſiting K. Craeſus. And Plato in Sicilie to Dioniſius & Dion. Philoſtratus reciteth in the life of Apollonius that when Titus returning frō 
                  Iudea was inueſted in the Empire,Titus. Apollonius. he required the ſayd Apollonius, to giue him certain politicke inſtructions, the better to be able to gouern his Empire: to whō he anſwered that he would giue him a certaine diſciple of his, that ſhould teach him the manner a good Prince ought to vſe. And being demanded what qualities he had, He is (ſayth he) a man franke of ſpeech, that will not holde his peace for feare of any when it ſhould be time to ſpeake,Cinike. and you ſhall finde in him ſuch a courage and vertue, as Diogenes the Cinike had, that is to ſay a Dogge louer of mankind: and this dogge ſhal be capable of reaſon, that for your ſake will barke againſt any other, and againſt you to, if you doe ought woorthy of blame euer for all that vſing prudence and diſcretion, and hauing regarde to the time and ſeaſon when he ought to performe his duetie. Then Titus prayde him he would with ſpeede beſtowe that dogge vppon him, that was ſo compagnable and loyall, to whom he would giue leaue not only to barke when he ſhould doe ought worthie of reprehenſion, but alſo to bite him, if he ſawe him doe any thing vnworthy his aucthoritie. He likewiſe neuer vſed ſuch violence, crueltie, or tyrannie as did his brother Domitian. For in trueth when the people of Rome and other nations,People yealding their right. yeelded the ſoueraigne power and right which they had vnto Monarches, they neuer ment to put their liberty into their hands that would rather vſe violence and paſsion then reaſon and equitie, but to yeelde themſelues to the tuition of ſuch a one, as would gouerne according to lawes, reaſon, and iuſtice. And it is not poſsible that this firſt ordinance could be made without the conſent of the ſubiectes, for otherwiſe it could not be grounded vpon a lawfull Empire or kingdome, but vpon an vnlawfull and tyrannicall vſurpation, and it is neceſſarie that ſuch a conſent ſhould retaine the nature of a contract in good fayth, and a bonde counterchangable. As wee ſee it in like ſorte

practiſed at this day, in the greateſt part of kingdomes and Empires that are in Chriſtendom, that it is the only foundation which mainteyneth them, & as Plutarke writeth the poſts & pillars which vpholde an eſtate.
                     The othe princes take at their coronation.
                     The cauſe of the creation of kings.
                   Neither are Princes able without neceſsitie to diſpence with the othe they take at their coronation and with the obligation which they owe to God, and their ſubiects. And according as Ariſtotle, Herodotus, Tacitus, Demoſthenes, and Cicero haue written, the firſt ſouerainitie proceeded from the good will and well liking of ſuch, as for their commoditie quiet, and ſuertie, ſubmitted themſelues to ſuch as excelled in heroical prowes, the better to be able to maintayne their ciuill ſocietie thorough lawes. And that he, in whom was not founde, the cauſe of this originall and image of ſafetie, iuſtice, clemencie, and diuine bountie, was a perſon vnworthie of ſuch honour, cauſing an infection to the body of the whole publicke weale. And moſt notable is the ſaying of king Cyrus, that it appertayned to none to cōmand, but ſuch as excelled their ſubiects in bountie & goods of the minde. The great King of Sparta Ageſilaus,
                  Ageſilaus. aunſwered thoſe that ſo highly commended the magnificence & greatneſſe of the K. of Perſia, VVherefore is he greater then I, except he be more iuſt then I? For a king ought to cauſe him ſelfe to be loued and admired of his ſubiectes, thorough the vertuous examples of his good life. And Plutarke in the life of Pirrhus writeth that the Kinges tooke an oth that they ſhould gouerne according to their lawes, and that in ſo doing the people would obey thē.Kinges giuen of God. Dan. 2.21. Pro. 8.16. Now we muſt needes confeſſe that they are giuen of God, who (as Daniel witneſſeth) eſtabliſheth, and putteth downe Kings. And Ieremiah writeth that he will beſtowe kingdomes on whom it him beſt liketh. And God ſayth in the Prouerbes, Through me kings raygne,
                  
                     Iob. 13.18. 2. Chron. 9.8. 
                  and Princes iudge the earth; and if they do not he threatneth them in Iob, that he will looſe their celer, and guirde their loynes with a girdle. And the Queene of Saba ſayde to Salomon, that God had ſet him in his throne as Kinge, inſteede of the Lorde God, to execute iudgement and iuſtice. The which more plainely Salomon ſpeaketh in his booke of wiſedome,1. Sam. 9.2. Sa. 6 & 21. 1. Chron. 19. 2. Kings 19.11.20.35. Polit. lib. 5. ch. 21. & 3 ch. 7. Lorde thou haſt chooſen me to rule ouer thy people and to iudge thy ſonnes & daughters. And the people is called the heritage of the Lorde, and the King the gouernour of this heritage, the guide & light of Gods people. And Ariſtotle in the fift booke of his Politiques ſheweth, that kinges often times tooke certaine offycers to conteine them in their duetie, as did the Ephores about the kinges of Sparta. The which Caeſar declareth was greatly obſerued

among the Gaulois, yeelding an example of Ambiorix and Vercingentorix. The oth the greateſt part that the Chriſtian kings toke was,The oth of Chriſtian princes. I will miniſter lawe, iuſtice, & protection aright to euery one. And Zonarus wrote after Xenephon, that the kings of Perſia ſhewed them ſelues more ſubiect to lawes, thē Lords,Zonar. lib. 3. cap. 11.
                   & had more feare & ſhame to breake the lawes, then the people had to be puniſhed what they had offended. And God inſtructing Ioſhua what he ſhuld do,
                     Ioshua 1.8. aboue all things cōmanded him, that the booke of the lawe ſhould not depart out of his mouth, but that he ſhuld meditate therin day & night, that he might obſerue and doe according to all that is written therein. For then ſhould hee make his way proſperous and haue good ſucceſſe. Then it followeth in the text that the people promiſed to obey him in all. As Xenophon writing of the commonwealth of the Lacedemonians ſayth that monthly the kings did ſweare to guide thēſelues according to the lawes,Kings of Lacedemon.
                   and the Ephores toke oth in the peoples behalfe, that vpon that cō
                  dition they would maintaine thē.
                     Rom. 13.1. And S. Paul ſaith that euery power is of God, whoſe ſeruants they are for the benefit of their ſubiects,
                     Deuter. 17. conſequently they are bound to follow his wil & rule giuē by Moſes. And the meanes which are of ſucceſſion or election, depend of the diuine prouidence which cauſeth thē to proſper.2. Sam. 6. 
                  Dauid hūbled himſelfe, to what was his dutie & office, making alliance with the deputies of the people, and deſcribeth the dutie of a good king in the 72.82. & 101. Pſalmes. And whileſt he, Salomon, Ioas, Ezechias, & other liued wel, they continually proſpered, but falling from that fell into many miſeries.Pericles. 
                  Pericles was cōmended for that as often as he put on his gowne, he ſaide vnto himſelfe, remember that thou doſt cōmand ouer a free nation, ouer Athenians, and ouer Greekes. The which chriſtian Princes haue more occaſion to ſpeak and obſerue. Agapet ſayd of Iuſtinian, that he mayſtred his pleaſures,Iuſtinian being adorned with the crowne of temperaunce, and clad with the purple of iuſtice. And Ammian writeth, that a Kingdome or Dukedome is nought elſe, then the care of an others ſafetie: and that where the lawe doth not gouerne, there ruyne is at hande. As Antiochus ſayde to his ſonne Demetrius,
                  Antiochus. that their kingdome was a noble ſlauerie. And Plutarke in the life of Nicias reciteth the ſayinge of Agamemnon in Euripides.
               
               
                  VVe liue to outwarde ſhew, in greatneſſe, ſtate, and might,
                  Yet in effect we are you knowe, but peoples ſeruants right.
               
               
                  Titus Liuius writeth, that the Carthaginians puniſhed their rulers, when they followed any euill counſell, albeit it ſucceeded wel: the

which was long time obſerued in the kingdome of Perſia. For as Brutus wrote vnto Cicero, a man once placed in great dignitie hath more to do to mainetaine the grace and reputation which he hath alreadie gotten, then he which doth but beginne to get. Euen as King Philip aunſwered Arpalus,
                  K. Philip.
                   who greatly did importunate him to reuerſe a ſuite that a kinſman of his had in the law: it were better that thy Coſen, in the eſtate which he is in, be defamed through his owne outragiouſneſſe, then that I, who am a King commaunding ouer ſo great a countrey, ſhould giue cauſe to my ſubiects to ſpeake euill of me, for hauing done ſo great iniuſtice eyther in fauour of him or thee.K. Artaxerxes.
                   As alſo the great Kinge Artaxerxes, gaue a great ſumme of money to a gentleman of his chamber, in ſteede of a ſuyte he beſought at his handes which well hee mought not graunt, ſaying that for giuing that he ſhould not be the leſſe rich; but if he had yeelded to what he vniuſtly craued, hee ſhould haue beene leſſe eſteemed, and not haue performed the dutie of a good King,The life of princes a rule. which aboue all thinges ought to haue in price, iuſtice, and equitie. For as Pliny declared vnto Traian his Maſter. The life of a Prince is a cenſure, that is to ſaye, the rule, the ſquare, the frame, and forme of an honeſte life; according to which their ſubiectes frame the manner of their life, and order their families: and rather from the life of Princes, doe ſubiectes take their paterne and examples,Iſocrates. then from their lawes. This was it which moued Iſocrates to write vnto Nicocles, it ſerueth to proue that thou haſt wel gouerned, if thou ſee thy ſubiectes become more modeſt and riche vnder thy Empire. For the ſubiectes followe the example of their Princes, as certaine flowers turne according to the Sunne. And Theodoric the K. of the Goths wrote vnto the Senate of Rome,
                  In Caſsiodorus that the courſe of nature would fayle, before the people would bee other then their Prince.Claudian. And Claudian was of opinion, that the edictes and lawes were not ſo well able to amende and temper the maners and hearts of the people,
                     Hoſ. 4.9. Xenophon.
                   as did the good life of their gouerners. And in Hoſea it is written that there ſhalbe like people, like Prieſt. Xenophon in the eight of his Pedion, writeth that ſubiectes are as it were enforced to doe well, when they ſee their Princes temperate, not giuen to vniuſtice and for the moſt parte faſhion themſelues according to their moulde. For this cauſe great perſonages haue the more neede to haue good counſellours about them, whoſe vnderſtanding,
                     
                        •
                     ib. 2. Polit. ch. 12.
                   mouthes, eyes, and eares, maye ſerue them, to make them better able to acquite themſelues of their charge, as

                  Aristotle ſaith. And it were to be wiſhed,Plynye. Q. Curſius. that they were not corrupt, but wel remember what Plinie the yonger wrote vnto Traian, that a Prince ought onely to wil that which he may. Quintus Curſius writeth, that a Prince rather ought to imploy his time, and to ſpende in getting and maintaining a wiſe counſeler about him then in conqueſts.Anthony 
                  Anthonie the Emperour onely amended his manners, by the report of thoſe as he had ſent about the citie to vnderſtande what was ſaide of him.
                     Theodoricus 2 And the Emperour Theodoſius the ſecond, copyed out with his owne hande al the new teſtament, and red euery day one Chapter, and made his prayers,A landable cuſtome of S. Lewys, and other kings. and ſoung Pſalmes togither with his wife and ſiſters. And many haue commended the cuſtome of diuers of our Kinges, and eſpecially ſaint Lewes, who when they roſe out of their bed, kneeled downe, thanking God, that he had preſerued them that night, beſeeching him to pardon them their ſinnes, for his mercies ſake, and to continue them in his holie cuſtodie and fauour, to the ende that without offending of him, they might employ all the daye to his honour, and acquite themſelues of the charge which he had beſtowed on them. And they cauſed a Chapter of the Bible or ſome other good booke to be red while they apparelled them ſelues, the better to teache them to gouerne. For to rule is as much to ſaye,
                     Deuter. 17.19 as to amende what is amiſſe or awrie. And in Deutronomie it is commaunded the King to haue the booke of the lawe,
                  
                     Iob. 8.8. Pro. 1.35. & 11.14. & 24 6. Councell. 
                  and to read therin al the dayes of his life, as aboue wee haue noted was enioyned to Ioſua. And it is written in Iob that wee ſhoulde enquire of the former age and ſearch of our fathers, becauſe of our ignorance. And in the Prouerbes, Where no Councell is, the people fall: but where manye Councellors are, there is health. And that health commeth from manie Councellors, but good councel proceedeth from God. And wee ſee by ſundrie hiſtories, that ſuch Emperours as haue contemned the Senate, haue had a verie euil ende. And that ſome of our Kinges, though they were but of meane capacitie, yet ſo guyded themſelues thorough Counſell, that they atchieued great matters, And Thucidides called them bondmen, ſlaues,Thucidides. and of verie baſe mindes, that were led by lewde Councell. Edward King of Englande, ſaide of King Charles the fifth, ſurnamed the wiſe, that hee feared more the learning,K. Charles the vvyſe. and remembrances of that wiſe King, then he did the puiſſant armies of his predeceſſour. And K. Lewys the eleuenth, ſayde it was as much as to fiſh with a hook of golde, to ſende an armie beyonde the mountaines,K. Lewys 11. where the

loſſe is aſſuredly greater then can be the profit. Agamemnon ſaid in Homer,
                  Princes, who euer had eſpeciall care to retaine about their perſons ſuch as vver the vviſeſt to coū
                     ſell them the better in the managinges of the affairs of their kingdomes. that hee had rather chooſe two like vnto his old counſellor Nestor, then ſo manye Achilles or Aiax. Darius King of the Perſians and Medes, made great account of Daniel. Pericles had about him Anaxagoras, Cato, Anthenodorus, Scipio, hauing in charge, and beeing appointed to goe looke and ſounde out, what iuſtice raigned through the worlde, preſently ſent to fetch Panetius, and oftentimes ſerued his turne through the councel of Lelius. Iulius Caeſar tooke aduiſe of Ariſto: Auguſtus, of Mecenas: Pompeye, of Cratippus. Nero, al the fiue firſt yeres of his Empire, wiſely conducted him ſelfe through the counſell of Seneca. Marcus Antonius had Apollodorus: Demetrius, Crates, of whome he was wont to ſay, that hee conned ſmall thankes to his buſineſſe, and affaires, which ſo much hindered him from ſooner hauinge attained to knowledge. Pyrrhus ſayde likewiſe of Cineas his councellor, that hee more eſteemed his eloquence, then the valour of all his Captaines. Alexander the great, had in high eſtimation Anaxarques and Aristotle: to whome he confeſſed, that hee owed no leſſe vnto them then to his owne father, hauing of the one receiued life, but of the other to be able to liue well, and that the beſt munition, weapons, and maintainance of warre that he had were the diſcourſes hee had learned of Philoſophie, and the preceptes touching the aſſurance of fearing nought, and the diligence, in differring nothing that was to be done. Cyrus vſed the counſell of Xenophon, Craeſus King of Lydia ſought by great preſents to recouer Anacharſis, and that little which hee learned of Solon, ſaued his life. And Dioniſius the tyrant of Syracuſa had Aristippus and Plato: Ptolomeus Stilpo and Aristophanes: Antigonus, Bias, Attalus & Lycon: Marcus Aurelius Apollonius. Mithridates, ſo farre adored the ſaide Plato, that hee cauſed his image to be erected to do him the greater honour. And Antiochus marueilouſly mourned for the death of Zeno,
                  
                     Platoes image exected. becauſe hee ſaide hee ſpake his minde vnto him more frankely then did either Byas or Demetrius. Epaminundas was inſtructed by Lyſias:
                  
                     Theodoſius councelled by S. Ambroſe.
                   
                  Ageſilaus by Xenophon. Theodoſius the Emperour was greatly aſsiſted by the councel of Saint Ambroſe, and learned of him to bee readie to heare what any one had to declare vnto him, and to repeate ouer all the letters of the Alphabet, before he ſhoulde commaunde any thing, when hee found himſelfe mooued with choler, which before that time Auguſtus was warned of, who one day being in his throne readie to condemne

certaine perſones, the ſayd Mecenas not beeing able to come neare him for the preſſe, caſt vnto him a little ſcroll wherein was contayned theſe wordes: Ariſe Hangman, which cauſed him to aryſe and goe awaye, without further execution of his paſsion. The ſaide Theodoſius likewiſe,L. digna vo. 
                     
                        •
                     . A vviſe prince rendreth him ſelfe ſubiect to lavves. Zaleueus.
                   and Valentinian wrote in a certaine lawe that it was a ſpeache woorthie of a prince, and a royall maieſtie, to ſaye he was a ſubiect, and ſubmit himſelfe to the lawes: becauſe the aucthoritie of a Prince dependeth on the preſeruatiō of iuſtice. The which Valerius recyteth of Zaleueus the gouernour of Locres, who cauſed one of his owne eyes, and another of his ſonnes, who was founde in adulterie, to bee put out, for that the people ſo much beſought him, that hee woulde not put out both his ſonnes eyes, according to the lawe.Charondas. Manlius The like Diodorus witneſſeth to haue beene done by Charondas and Titus Liuius by Manlius, who cauſed his owne ſonne to bee beheaded, the better to maintaine the diſcipline of warre. Wee reade likewiſe, that Antigonus made aunſwere to one of his councellours,
                     K. Antigonus who ſayde it was lawfull for Kinges to doe what beſt liſted themſelues: Nay, that which you ſaye I thinke bee verie true among Kinges of barbarous nations, nouriſhed in ignoraunce, and voyde of learning, and which knowe not the difference betweene honour and diſhonour, betweene equitie and inequitie:Nothing lavvfull that is not honeſt. but to vs who haue an vnderſtandinge both political and morall, thorough the inſtinct of learning, capable of wiſedome and iuſtice, hauing euer beene thereto brought vp and inſtructed, there is nothinge honeſt and lawfull that is not ſo in his owne nature. The which in like ſort Traian learned of Plinie,
                  Plato. Tacitus lib. 3.
                   and to guide himſelfe in ſuch manner as though hee ſhoulde bee euer readie to render an account of all his actions. The which Plato ſetteth downe in the fourth of his lawes. Tacitus diſcourſing of the originall of the ciuil lawe ſayeth, that Seruius the thirde King of Romanes eſtabliſhed manie lawes, to which the Kinges were ſubiect,Diod. lib. 2. c, 2.
                   and Diodorus recyteth of the kinges of Aegypt, that without any diſpenſation they executed and followed the ordinances of the lawes. For as Cicero ſaide in his oration for Cluens, the heart, vnderſtanding,Good lavves are the ſoules of common vvealths. and counſel in a publike weale, are within the good lawes, and ordinances: and a political eſtate is not able to vſe his owne partes without lawes, no more then the bodie of man can exerciſe his due operations, without reaſon and vnderſtanding, nor the hogſhed keepe his liquor, if you take away the hoopes.
               
                  
                  
                     Traian. Faithful and true freinds moſt profitable.The ſayde Emperour Traian highly eſteemed thoſe frinds & councellors, whō he found true, faithful and loyal. And when he was deſired to tel how he made ſo good choyce. Marrie quoth he, becauſe it was euer my good fortune, to chooſe thoſe that were neither couetous nor lyers: becauſe that they in whome couetouſnes and lying haue once taken deepe roote, can neuer perfectly loue. Princes ought in like ſort to conſider the malignitie & lack of wiſedome in ſuch as they put in truſt vnder them, who either through negligence not attending their buſines,Naughtie & foolish miniſters to princes very pernitious. or for lacke of capacitie do not diſcerne of themſelues the good counſell from the wicked. And it were neceſſarie that they ſhoulde not bee permitted to receiue any penſion or benefite from any other Prince or Lord. One of the Hebrewes which tranſlated the Byble, anſwered Ptolome, that he might aſſuredly truſt him, who was not withdrawen from his amitie, neither by feare, gifts or any other gaine. Celius writeth that the Emperour Charles the fifte, when hee was at Naples, ſent for one Nyphus a verie great Philoſopher, and demaunded of him the way to gouerne well an Empire. To which he aunſwered, if you will keepe neere your perſon, ſuch councellors and men of vertue, as you O Emperour make ſhewe to thinke I am. For this cauſe Iſocrates and Tacitus haue written, that there is no inſtrument ſo good for an Empire,
                  Xenophon. 
                  nor ſo profitable, as the vertuous, and well aduiſed friends of a Prince. Xenophon in his Pedion bringeth in Cyrus, ſaying to Cambiſes, that friendes are the verie ſcepter and bulwarke of kingdomes. It were to be deſired that euerie one were as wel aduiſed, as was that vertuous King Charles the eight, who oftentimes of would tel his fauorites,
                     Mignions of courte.
                     A good admonition of Charles 8.
                   that he had choſen them for the opinion he had that they were of the moſt vertuous, and of whome hee mought aſſuredly truſt, fearing but one fault in them, that they would ſuffer themſelues to be ſpotted with couetouſnes, hauing eaſie meanes to be drawen and tempted thereto, in reſpect of the great credit they had about him. But if he mought once perceiue that for their profite, they would cauſe ought to be commaunded that were vniuſt and vnhoneſt, they ſhould loſe his fauour for euer. That they mought haue iuſt occaſion to content themſelues with the goods of this worlde, ſince God had made him rich ynough for them all, He prayed them to make profeſsion of honor, the onely meanes that brought them and coulde preſerue them in his good fauour, whereof he did admoniſh them, to the ende to take heede, that neither he nor they might fall into any miſchief, which

he willingly would eſchewe. And as Marcellinus wrote, ſpeaking of the vnſatiable couetouſnes of the officers, of the Emperours Conſtance and Iulian, that they were the nurcerie of al the vices that infected the common wealth in their time. And from this deſire of riches,Meanes to meete vvith the auarice of the Courtiers. proceedeth the riotouſnes & ſuperfluitie of expenſes in all eſtates, the which Cicero in like ſort lamēted in his time, & certainly we may wel bewaile the ſame at this preſent. And to meete herewith, it were very good to put that in practiſe which hath bin vſed after the deceaſe of ſome of our Kings,
                     Baſil emperour of Conſtantinople.
                   to reſume frō ſuch as haue receiued too exceſsiuely. The which likewiſe Baſile Emperor of Conſtantinople, ordained by edict, that they which had receiued money without reaſon, & huge gifts of the Emperor Michael his predeceſſor ſhould render them back againe. And ſo by the ordinances of the kings Charles 6, & 9. Philip 6. Iohn 2. Charles 5.6. & 8.The ordinances of the kings of France.
                   ſuch alienations were reuoked. And at an aſſembly of the three eſtates holdē at Tours, the ſaid Charles the 8, being himſelf preſent, ſundry alienations made by Lewys the 11. were repealed. And ſundry places that he had beſtowed vpon Tanored du Chastel his chiefe mignion, were taken away frō him. The like was renewed at the laſt parliament holden at Orleans. Hence came the order & decree concluded in the treaſurie chamber.Trop donne ſoit repete. Too large & exceſsiue gifts muſt be caled back. I wil not here omit how ſundry authors haue written of the kings of Perſia, that euery one had one of his chamber, ordained of purpoſe, to come euery day verie early into his chamber,The Larum of the K. of Perſia.
                   & ſay vnto him: Ariſe Mileach & prouide for the affaires which the great god hath committed to thy charge, The which we read was in like ſort vſed by Philip k. of Macedon. And ſundry kings haue bin called ſome Philadelphes, that is to ſay, louers of their brethren: others Euergetes,
                  Surnames of good Kings, that is to ſay Benefactors, Soter, ſwyor, Eupater good father, Theophiles louers of God, others, fauorable ſhephards, & fathers of the people, & by ſundry other names mētioned in the former Chapter proper to good Princes. And yet we ſee in ſundry ancient ſtāps of Auguſtus, Nerua, Traian, Lewys the 12. & others, how great account they made of the names of protectors & fathers of the people. Quintus Curſius recyteth how Alexander boſted & vanted of himſelf,Alexander, that in all his actions, he eſtemed himſelf in the theater of the whole world. The which Cicero in like ſort ſaith ought to take place in al Magiſtrates,Spartianus, Suetonius. Lampridius. to the end they may guide themſelues the more wiſely. Spartianus, Suetonus, & Lampridius write, how Tiberius, Claudus, Alexander ſeuerus & Adrian the Emperors, oftē went to the Senate, & called to their

councell, not their fauorits, but men learned, graue, wel experienced and of a good conſcience; and that there enſued leſſe danger if the counſellors were vertuous, and the Prince wicked, than if the Prince were good and they of his councell nought.Garneades. Wee may neuertheleſſe iuſtly complaine at this preſent, as Carneades ſayed of his time, howe the children of Kinges and great Lordes, learne nothing aright but to ryde well, and manage their horſes, which knowe not howe to flatter or ſpare the great more then the ſimple.The image of Oſyris.
                   In Aegypt they pictured their God oſyris, with an eye vppon a Scepter, vnderſtanding by the eye, the prouidence and knowledge of the trueth, and by the Scepter, authoritie and power. And manie haue thought the cuſtome that is obſerued in France,
                  Kings kiſſe the booke of the holy Euangeliſts. The picture of Pallas.
                   to make our Kings kiſſe the booke of the holie Euangeliſtes, is to admoniſh them to honour and followe the trueth. Men of olde time painted Pallas armed, hauing a cocke vppon her helmet, as gouerning as well ouer learning as warre. For manie haue the nobilitie not ſo accompliſhed as their calling required,Nobility ought to be learned. except they intermingled learning with armes, knowledge, wiſedome, and skill in hyſtories, and the Mathematiques mixt with valour and actiuitie.
                     Charles 5. The Emperour Charles the fifth, oftentimes was much greeued that hee neuer learned Latine,Paulus Iouius and confeſſed hee had great hinderances thereby, as alſo did Hannibal. And they which haue not beene learned, haue runne into the common errour, and haue ſuffered themſelues to bee blindfolded, to the ende they mought not further ſearch into that, which ſhoulde giue vnto them great iudgement, and ornament. And if I were not afrayde I ſhoulde be too tedious, I coulde reckon moſt notable, & verie preiudiciall faultes, which ſundrie great Captaines, gouernours, and Kinges haue committed, thorough a fonde opinion they conceiued of their owne ſufficiencie, and for lacke of demaunding counſell of them, that were about them more aduiſed and experienced.Seigneur de Lautrec. I will content my ſelfe with one example recited by ſome hyſtoriographers, of the late lorde of Lautrec viceroy for the King in the kingdome of Naples, who was ſo ſelfe willed in his opinions, that hee had rather miſſe his enterpriſe, then bee helped by the counſell of other Captaines. To whome the loſſe of the ſayde kingdome, and of all Italie was attributed. Pope Alexander the ſixth,Pope Alexander 6. Xerxes.
                   was greatlye blamed by Guichardin for the ſame fault, who writeth that hee neuer conſulted but commaunded. Xerxes King of Perſia hauing determined to inuade

                  Greece, ſayde vnto his counſell, I haue aſſembled you togither, to the ende it may not be thought that I haue vndertaken this enterpriſe on my owne braine: but I will that, without either further deliberating or diſwading you obey. Hee went awaye likewiſe faſter then he entred in, and receiued there a verie great diſhonor, and irrecouerable loſſe. There be but too manie examples of our time, whoſoeuer would cote them, that are able to teache great perſonages to diſtruſt of their owne ſenſes, wittes, aduiſe, & ſufficiencie, and to vndertake nothing without good deliberation, leaſt they repent themſelues long after, as it often happeneth. And in Titus Liuius, he which only foloweth his owne opinion,
                     Decad. 5. is rather iudged preſumptuous, then wiſe, for a man is not able continually of himſelfe, to conſider, and knowe al things, or among many contrarie reaſons to diſcerne the beſt.Prudence required to diſcerne opinions. In which wiſedome is required, that a man be not deceaued through an vnfaithful counſellor, who tendeth nought els then his owne particular intereſt. And the counſel of the wiſe carrieth greater commoditie then of the imprudent. For this cauſe Princes ought to take in good part, when they ſhalbee aduiſed by their Chancelers and ſoueraigne Courts according to their dueties,Princes ought to take in good part vvhat their counſellers ſay vnto thē. for the preſeruation of their honor, and benefite of their affaires: and not to thinke that they pretende to make doubt of their power, but to eſteem their good will, when they ſee they iudge but according to iuſtice, equitie and benefite of the common wealth, oppoſing themſelues to the importunities, falſe ſuggeſtions and diſguiſings of the courtiars. In which the ſaide Princes do repoſe themſelues, and relye vppon the conſcience, fidelitie, allegeance, and othe of their officers, according as the lawyers and Emperours haue left behinde them written in the ciuil lawe, and our Kings in their ordinances, eſpecially Philip le Bel, Charles 7. and Lewys the twelfth, and by the lawe inuiolably kept in Aegypt, as Plutarque ſayeth, and I els where haue recyted. And if Princes take in better part the counſel of their Phiſition, to ſhunne and hate intemperance, and meates offenſiue to the ſtomache, then of a flatterer who ſhorteneth their dayes: ſo ought they to eſteeme of their officers, which haue the lawes in eſtimation, and iuſt gouernement, which leadeth to a happie end, without liſtening vnto ſuch as deſire an vnbrydeled power, which turneth vpſide downe all lawes, pollicie, iuſtice, order and ſtates. For this cauſe our Kings haue likewiſe ordained, that no regarde ſhoulde bee had to their letters, if they were not ſealed with

the great ſeale; to the ende that if ought had inconſideratly eſcaped their mouth, or that their letters had beene raſhly ſigned and paſſed the ſignet, by reaſon of their great buſines and affaires, or for not hauing beene fully infourmed how matters ſtoode, it mought the more eaſily be moderated and remedied. They willed likewiſe all their letters to bee examined by the ſoueraigne Courts and ordinarie Iudges of their realme.
                     Eccle. 37.15 
                  Eccleſiaſticus alſo admoniſheth vs To praye vnto the moſt high, that he will direct our waye in trueth, and that reaſon goe before euerie enterpriſe, and councell before euerie action. Hence proceedeth the ordinarie clauſes, had by the counſell, aduiſe, and ripe deliberation of our councell. There are likewiſe ſome that haue wel vnderſtood the ſaying of the wiſemā: Where there is no viſion,
                  
                     Pro. 29.18. 
                  the people decay to bee meant of a good gouernement, ruled by good councel. And the foundations of good counſels and actions, ought to be laide vppon pietie, iuſtice, and honeſtie, and to be executed with diligence, and prudence, otherwiſe, they are altogither vnprofitable. Theſe two diſcourſes concerne in eſpeciall the greatnes,Of the comfort of the ſubiects enſueth amitie. ſafetie, & profit of Princes: becauſe that of the comfort of their ſubiects enſueth amitie, and of this amitie, proceedeth a readie will to expoſe their perſons and goods for the affaires of their ſoueraigne.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXII. That one ought not to iudge too readily of another.
               
                  Backbiters not to be liſtened vnto. Symonides.
                  
                  IT was not ſayde without cauſe in the olde time, that he which beleeued a backebyter, committed no leſſe offence, then hee did.
               And Symonides complained of a friend of his, that had ſpoken yll of him, of his eares, and lightnes of beleefe, which ought not to haue place in any before they be throughly informed of the trueth. For by how much by ſpeache a man approcheth nearer to the ſeate of vnderſtanding & reaſon which is in the braine, by ſo much doth it the more hurt & marre him which beleeueth, if a man take not verie diligent heed, and the hearer partaketh halfe with the ſpeaker. It is alſo verie ſtrange, to ſee what care wee haue to keepe the gates of our houſes ſhut, and yet howe wee leaue our eares open to raylers: and euen as Homer
                  Homer. praiſed them which ſtopped their eares ſayling on the ſea neare vnto the Syrenes,
                  Syrenes. for feare of being heald, entiſed by their melodie & ſinging, and ſo fal into the daungers that enſued

thereon, ſo ſhould not we giue audience to tale carriers, and detractors of mens good name, and if they chance to prate in our preſence, we ſhould examine the whole, and take thinges in the beſte part without giuing too light credence therto.Thucidides. 
                  Thucidides the hiſtoriographer, in his preface greatly blamed ſuch, as would report of credite ſundry thinges of olde time, founding their beliefe vppon an vncertaine brute, without taking paines to enquire further. The which Caeſar in like ſort writeth of the Gaulois,
                  Comment. li. 7 Ariſtotle. which cauſed a lie often times to be put in ſtead of the truth, And Aristotle hauing giuen this precept to Alexander to be founde true, addeth that he ſhoulde not beleeue too lightly. And it was euer eſteemed an act of a wiſe man, to retaine his iudgement without diſcouering it eſpecially in matters vncertaine, and to conſider all the circumſtances and conſequence thereof. And we ought to be as it were gardiens of the renowne and good of our neighbour, fearing leaſt being men we ſhoulde fall into that euill, which is reported of an other. And we ought to put in vre the counſell of Eccleſiaſticus. Blame no man before thou haue enquired the matter,
                  
                     Eccleſ. 11.7. 
                  vnderſtande firſt and then reforme: Giue no ſentence before thou haſt heard the cauſe. The which principallye we ought to practiſe in the wonderfull and vnſearchable workes of God, and rather to thinke our ſelues ſhort in our owne vnderſtanding, then to ſuſpect that God fayled in his prouidence, and in the gouernment of the vniuerſall world, and by no meanes to controle the worke whereof we haue no ſkill at all.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 23. Of reprehenſions, and force of the truth, with a diſcription of detraction.
               
                  MAny haue ſayde, that it is a great corſey to a man of courage,Libertie of ſpeache. to be barred libertye of free ſpeach. And the Emperours Auguſtus and Tiberius, and Pope Pius the ſeconde haue ſaide that in a citie that is not bonde tongues ought to be free.S. Ambroſe. And S. Ambroſe writeth to Theodoſius the Emperour, that nothing better beſeemed a Prince, then to loue libertye of ſpeach, nor nothing worſt for a Prieſt, then not to dare to ſpeake what hee feeleth. And as Socrates writeth free ſpeach, and diſcourſe is the principall remedye of the afflicted and

greeued minde.Pyndarus. And Pyndarus made aunſwere to a king of Sparta, that there was nothing more eaſie for a man to doe, then to reprehend an other, nor harder then to ſuffer him ſelfe to be reprehended. The cuſtome of the Lacedemonians was very commendable, to puniſhe him that ſaw one offende without reprehendinge him for it, and him likewiſe that was angry when he was tolde of his fault. For a man is bound to them that tell him of his faultes, and admoniſhe him of the right way that he ſhould hold. And a man ought not to ſuffer his friende to vndoe him ſelfe though he would as Phocion ſayth. Salomon deſcribeth in his Prouerbes the profite that it yeeldeth,
                     Pro. 10.17 & 12.1 & 13.1 & 15.5. & 31 and how neceſſary a thing it is to the amendement of ones life: and one ought not tarrye till the faulte be committed, but to preuent it by admonition. The which cauſed certaine of our kinges of France, and ſome other common wealthes haue endured the ſame, that in publike playes men ſhould reprehend ſuch notable faultes as were committed.The cuſtome of Alexandria
                   And in Alexandria certain were appointed, to go ſome time in a coch through out the citye blaming ſuch perſons as they ſaw do any fault, to the end they might be more afrayde to doe ill, and that ſhame might be of more force then the law. And if at anie time anye miſlike to haue the truth tolde them as Comicus hath written it proceedeth of the corruption of men, of their haughtineſſe and ignoraunce. As Ptolomeus put Aristomenes his tutor in priſon,Trueth engē
                     dreth hatred becauſe that in the preſence of an Ambaſſadour, he waked him out of his ſleepe, that he mought be more attentiue to what was ſayde vnto him. Pope Boniface the ſeuenth, beeing returned home againe to Rome, from whence he was driuen away for his diſſolutenes, cauſed the eyes of Cardinal Iohn, who had told him of his faultes to be put out. Fulgoſus writeth of Pope Innocent, that, hauing beene reprehended by ſome of the citizens of Rome, becauſe he prouided not ſufficiently againſt Schiſmes, he ſent them backe to his nephew for anſwere: which was that he made them all be caſte out of windowes, albeit the ſayde Innocent before he came to that dignitie, often times vſed towardes his predeceſſours, Vrbain and Bennet, l
                     •
                  ke reprehenſion. In the time of Honorius the ſeconde they put Arnulphe to death becauſe he ſo liberally rebuked vice. Sundry Emperours haue done the like. We haue ſundry examples in the ſcriptures,1. King. 16. of Baaſha for killing the Prophet Iehu becauſe he tolde him the truth. Likewiſe of Achab, Aſa, Ioas, and Ozias, 1. King. 22.2. Paral. 18.16.24, & 26. of Sedichias, of Ioachim, and of the princes of Iuda. Ierem. 23.32. & 38. But as the wiſe man ſaith in the Prouerbes,
                  
in the end, he ſhall be conned more thanke, which rebuketh, then he that deceaueth by flattery. Notwithſtanding euery man according as his vocation, the times, the perſons, and places,Obſeruation in reprehenſion. will permit him, ought to declare the truth to ſuch as he ſeeth neede, with an intention to profit & inſtruct thē, without any choler, diſdain immodeſty or other pasſiō, mingling with the bitternes of reprehenſion, the ſweetnes of ſome praiſes. A man ought likewiſe to conſider, that the egernes and ſharpnes of biting wordes, eſpecially ſpoken to one that is in aduerſity, profiteth nothing, being a kinde of incontinencie, of a tong mingled with malignitye and a will to iniury, carrying a very declaration of enmitye, which is the cauſe that they which vſe it hurt them ſelues. As did Antiphon about Dyoniſius the tyraunt, where a diſpute beeing helde betweene them what braſſe was beſt, he aunſwered that, whereof the Athenians made the ſtatuas of Armodius and Ariſtogiton: for this ſoure aunſwer cauſed him to be put to death. And as Plutarque ſayde in the life of Phocion euen as the honye which is ſweete of his owne nature, engendreth greefe, and payne beeing applyed to partes infected, ſo doe true admonitions the more prouoke ſuch as are in miſery, if they bee not well ſweetned and mingled with pitye, and conſolation. Clytus an auncient Captaine of Alexanders, maye ſerue for an example, who was ſlayne for vſinge too arrogant an admonition.Reprehenſions yl beſeeming at the bord. In lyke ſort one ought not at the boarde to vſe ſuch reprehenſions as make men knitte the browes, forgetting the occaſion and place of pleaſure: and there is required a dexteritie as it is written of Socrates, who beeinge deſired at a feaſte to ſpeake,Socrates and diſcourſe of his arte, it is not now time ſayde he to diſcourſe of what I knowe, and in that for which the tyme now ſerueth,Damaratus I am no whit skilfull in. And when Damaratus was arryued in Macedonia, during the time that king Philip was fallen out with his Wyfe and Sonne, the kinge hauinge ſaluted and embraced him, demaunded of him if the Greekes agreed well one with an other: Demaratus who was verye familiar with him aunſweared,K. Philip.
                   it becommeth you very well (O kinge) to enquire of the concorde of the Athenians and Peloponeſians, & in the meane time ſuffer your owne houſe to be ſo full of diſcord and diuiſion. A captiue which the ſayde Philip cauſed to be ſolde to him that woulde giue moſte, bad him in his eare, to let downe the fore part of his robe, becauſe hee ſhewed what was not comelye to bee diſcouered: the whiche was the cauſe of his deliuerie. An other beeing taken

for a ſpie ſayde vnto him, that he came to eſpie his follye, in that without neceſſity he put both his realme, and life in haſard. Some haue compared reprehenſions, to the remedies of the ſplene, which ought to be ſouer and ſharpe: ſo truth told in fit oportunitie is profitable,The force of trueth. and is of ſuch force, as Eſchines ſaide that ſhee ſurpaſſed all the cogitations of man. And Menander wrote, that ſhee commeth into light although ſhee be not ſought for, and defendeth her ſelfe eaſely againſt all the deceates, craftineſſe, and wilines of men.1. Eſd. 4.38 And in the diſputation that was held before Darius, truth was found the greateſt and moſt ſtrong for euer: S. Auguſtin in the citie of God,Auguſtinus de ciuit dei, l. 2. c. 19
                   
                  lib. 2. c. 19, calleth her an eternall victorye, and in the queſtion, 108, ex vtr. he ſayth that It is better to be ouercome of the truth, then to be willing to ſurmount her in vaine. To which purpoſe may very well ſerue, the ſummarie deſcription of the table which Apelles painted,
                     Apelles table after he was eſchaped out of a falſe accuſation, and an extreame daunger. He had pictured a Iudge, with the eares of an Aſſe, hauing on the one ſide two Ladies, Ignoraunce and Suſpition: before him ſtood falſe accuſation with a countenaunce full of rage, and furie, holding in the left hande a burning torche, and with the right pulled a young man by the heare, lifting vp his eyes and handes to heauen, neare vnto whome was a man painted looking pale, earthly, and a ſquint, which was enuie: two damſels followed falſe Accuſation named Treaſon, and Deceat, behind whome ſtoode a Ladye all wailing and mourning which was Repentaunce, which faſtened her eye ſight vppon a verye fayre Lady intituled Truth, declaring by this picture to all Princes and Iudges, that they ought not too lightly to beleeue. As Alexander cloſing one of his eares to an accuſer, ſayde he kept the other for him which was accuſed. And it was commaunded Moyſes, ſtraightlye to forbid the children of Iſraell, lying, falſe accuſation, and malitious detraction,
                  Plato. and cauſe them to keepe iuſtice, equalitie, and truth. I will not heare omit, the aduertiſement giuen by wiſe Plato, commended ſo much by Plutarque, that when one founde anye committing anye fault, he ought to diſcende into him ſelfe, and ſay priuatelye vnto him ſelfe. Am not I ſuch a one? To the ende wee may auoyde the like errours. When in like ſort we woulde iuſtifie our ſelues for anye reprehenſion we mought praye him that did it, to reſerue that freedome of ſpeach, againſte he committed a fault him ſelfe. And it was not ſayde amiſſe of them of olde time, that the beginning to liue well, and repulſe ignoraunce, was

to be reprehended, mocked, and blamed. Sainct Baſyl for this cauſe named reprehenſion, the healing of the ſoule: and in the Prouerbes 25.
                     Pro. 25.12. & 29.1. it is called an ornament of fine gold. And in the 29. it is written, a man that hardeneth his neck when he is rebuked, ſhall ſuddainly be deſtroyed,
                  Pſal. 
                  & can not be cured. And Dauid Pſal. 41. ſayd that it was like the precious baulme. We read euen of the Emperours, Philip, Theodoſius, and Valentinian, that they did great penitence after they were admoniſhed, as alſo did Dauid and other kinges being reprehended by the Prophetes.Auguſtine. Speuſippus. And Sainct Augustine in his booke of recantations acknowledged how he had erred. But as Plato ſayd, that Speuſippus corrected other by the example of his owne life, ſo men ought to eſteeme thoſe reprehenſions that are made, without a word ſpeaking, thorough a ſingle life, irreprehenſible, and vertuous.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 24. That anger hindereth the truth, of the euilles which it bringes with it, and of the meanes to reſiſt it.
               
                  PHiſitions eſteeme the ſickneſſe very daungerous, when the face is diſfigured.Choler darkneth iudgement and peruerteth reaſō
                   The which we maye ſaye of choler, which altereth the countenaunce, ſpeach, and all the ſences of man. It hath beene termed a fury darkning iudgement. And as in the darke a man is not able to diſcerne his kinſman or friende from his enemye, ſo amidſt the ſmoke, and myſtes of choler, truth can not be diſcerned from falſehood.Alexander. 
                  Alexander ouertaken with choler, cauſed Parmenio, Chaliſtenes, Philotas and other to be put to death, and with his owne hande ſlew Clytus one of his chiefeſt fauorites. And after that his choler was apeaſed would haue killed him ſelfe. For this cauſe Anthenodorus,
                  Auguſtus concelled by Anthenodorus and Theodoſius by S. Ambroſe. counſelled the Emperour Auguſtus, the which Sainct Ambroſe did ſince to Theodoſius, that when they felt them ſelues enter into choler, they ſhould take heed of ſpeaking or doing anye thinge, vntill they had repeated the twenty foure letters of the Alphabet. The which gaue the occaſion of making that holy law, Si vindicari: and of the chapter Cum apud, to temper and ſlacke the heady commandementes of Princes. And the ſayd Auguſtus, for hauing iniured a gentleman, whoſe daughter he had brought to his pleaſure, and was caſt in the teeth with what he had done, and ſawe that him ſelfe had broken

the law Iulia,
                  
                     Eph. 4 26. which condemneth the adulterers, he was ſo mad with him ſelf that for a time he abſtayned from eating Sainct Paule counſelleth vs That the Sonne go not down vpon our wrath.
                  The maner of the Pythagoriens.
                   The maner of the Pythagoriens was much commended, that when they had once vttered their choler, they would take one an other by the hande, and embraſe one an other before it was euening. And Plato beeinge demaunded how he knew a wiſe man,Plato. anſwered, when beeing rebuked he would not be angry,
                  Seneca. 
                  and being praiſed he would not be too proude. Seneca wryteth, that ſuch as taught to play, at fence, and to exerciſe the bodye, commanded their ſchollers in no wiſe to be cholerick, becauſe that cleane marred the arte: and he which is not able to bear a little iniurie,A remedy againſt choler. ſhall in the end haue one miſchiefe, heaped on an other. And againſt this it is thought an excellent remedy not to be delicate, nor too light of beliefe, nor to thinke, one may contemne & iniury one as he liſteth, nor to haue a will thereto, and to vſe delayes and protraction of tyme.The fagots of the licturs As Plutarque wryteth, that the carryinge of bundels of ſtickes bound togeather, vpon pollaxes, was to ſhew that the wrath of a Magiſtrate, ought not to bee prompt and loſe, for that while leaſurelye, thoſe bundels ſo bounde togeather were loſed, it brought ſome delaye & ſpace to choler, which buyeth her pleaſure with perill of lyfe, as ſundry Poets haue written. And there is nothing that men dare not aduenture and cōmit, when they are inflamed with anger, except they retaine thē ſelues vnder the obedience of reaſon:Socrates. For as Socrates ſayd, it is leſſe daunger to drinck intemperately of puddle or troubled water, then to glut ones appetite with reuenge, when mans diſcourſe and reaſon is occupied with furye, and beſides him ſelfe, before that he be ſetled and purified. And Archytas ſayde to one that had offended him, I woulde puniſhe you for this geare if I were not in choler.Architas. And to brydle ſuch choler it is not euerye mans skill, except hee haue beene vſed to it of a long time: conſideringe that nothing can be comelye nor honeſt, if it be ſpoken ſharply, and in choler. The Pythagoriens in lyke ſort by the allegoricall commaundement, that they ſhould not leaue the bottome of the pot or caudern, imprinted in the aſhes, would teach according to Plutarques opinion, that no marke or apparent ſhewe of choler ſhoulde remaine, the which as S. Chriſoſtome ſaith, is a fire, a hangman, a moſt difformed drunkennes, and a mad dog that knoweth noman. Therfore it was that they of old time, by the difformed monſter of Chymera, which ſpit fire, deſcribed choler, and as they which are poſſeſſed with vncleane ſpirites ſome at the mouth

and ſwell, ſo the ſpirit, and ſpeach of cholerike perſons fometh, and often times dangerous diſcourſes ſcape thē. Which was the cauſe that Alexander, Menander, Seneca, & others haue written, how choler proceedeth of baſenes of minde, as alſo we ſee it more incident to weomē then to men, & to the ſick more then to the whole. And the fault is ſo meaſured, as he to whom the offence is committed is perſwaded. But by how much more the fault is greater, ſo much is his humanity the more to be cōmended, when he pardoneth without being moued, & the offender by ſo much the more bounde, in that he ſeeth his ſubmisſiō accepted for reuenge & ſatisfaction. The deſtruction of 15. thouſand ſoules, was attributed to the choler of Theodoſius, which afterward he greatly repented him ſelfe of. It was likewiſe the death of Aurelian, and of the cruelty of the Emperour Valentinian, as Macellinus wrot: the which ſo raigned in him,
                     Many miſcheifes haue enſued choler.
                     The death of Valentinian.
                     
                   that if one had ſpokē but one word that had miſliked him, he wold chāge his coulor & voyce & he committed much vniuſtice, in hinderinge true iudgement, in the end it was the cauſe of his death, and his intrals were ſo terribly burned, that there was not found ſo much as a drop of bloud. Others were of opiniō that he broke a vaine in crying. Yet Saluſt thinketh, that that which in priuate perſons is termed choler, in great ones is called fury & cruelty. Plutarque likewiſe attributed the ruine of Sertorius, to that he was ſo cholericke,Sertorius. which made him ſo vnaccōpanable, & vnmeet to liue among the ſociety of mē. As alſo did Valerius, the death of Caeſar,
                  Caeſar. & Sueton greatly blamed for the ſame Tiberius & Nero. In like ſort, to thoſe, which had armes ſo inſolently of themſelues, that they would cōmand the very lawes to ceaſe, the adminiſtratiō of iuſtice was euer denied. And for the maintenaunce of both, iuſtice was reſerued to the Iudges, and to ſuch as force was committed, it was ſtraightly commanded them to obey iuſtice, and that ſhe aide force with good counſell of which if it bee once deſtitute, greater harme enſueth then good. And amonge all eſtates, it is required, that they aſſemble a counſell, to aduiſe what may be profitable. But as the goodneſſe of ſhippes is beſt perceiued in a ſtorme, ſo doth a good vnderſtanding moſte diſcouer it ſelfe, when hauing iuſt cauſe to be angrye, the minde is for all that quiet and the iudgement ſetled. And it is the property of a magnanimous hart to deſpiſe iniuries,Hovv a good vnderſtanding is diſcouered. which we read was euer don by great perſonages. And Dauid made no account of the words of Semey, nor the kings Antigonus, Philip, and Pericles, of thoſe whom they heard reuile them. Salomon ſayth in his Prouerbes, that A man

inclyned to wrath, ſhall quickly be deſtroyed. And compareth a cholericke man, to a City ouerthrowne: and Solon maketh him like to one that neither cared how he loſte friendes, nor how he procured enemies. And in the firſt of Eccleſiaſticus it is written, that raſhneſſe in anger breedeth deſtruction,
                  
                     Eccl. 1.27. Rashenes in wrath whence it proceedeth. the which proceedeth not, but of the inflammation of the bloud about the heart, of too great a heate and ſodainnes, the which by no meanes yeeldeth the leaſure, to vnderſtande the circumſtaunces which reaſon teacheth which a man that hath receaued an iniurye ought to keepe and obſerue, as aboue I haue touched, and it is onelye longe ſufferinge that in the ende byteth.To pardon is a teſtimony of a valiaunt minde. Col. 3.12. And to pardon, is a ſigne of a heroicall and noble heart: and as Homer wryteth, the more excellent a man is, the leſſe is his anger burninge, and euerye gentle hart is eaſelye contented. Sainct Paule wryteth to the Colloſsians, As the elect of God holye and beloued, put on tender mercy, kindeneſſe, humbleneſse of minde, meekeneſse, long ſuffering, forbearing one an other, and forgiuing one an other, if anye man haue a quarrell to an other, euen as Chriſt forgaue you, euen ſo doe yee. And aboue al theſe thinges put on loue, which is the bonde of perfection. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which yee are called, in one body, and be yee amiable. They ought to be accounted wiſe, who knowing how apt of their owne inclination they be to choler,VViſedome is ſeene in tē
                     perating of choler. vſe notwithſtandinge ſuch remedies as they thinke fit to retyre themſelues, either in bearing patiently, forgetting, pardoninge, moderating of them ſelues without beeinge too much mooued, or breaking that which is eaſie to be daſhed in peeces of a ſeruaunt, as did Calias, and Cotis, or in burning their enemies letters before they ſee them, as Pompei did thoſe of Sertorius, and Caeſar thoſe of Pompei. The holye ſcripture doth often times exhort vs to forbeare one an other.To forebeare one another. Dion.
                   And whereas Saint Paule writeth that we ſhoulde portion a like to one an others charges, hee vnderſtandeth infirmities. Dion after hee had reſtored his countrie againe to libertye, was counſelled to put to death one of the greateſt enemies that he had now fallen into his handes, but he ſayd that he had long agoe learned to ſurmount wrath, enuy and all euill will, whereof the proofe conſiſted in behauing ones ſelfe temperatelye and courteouſlye towardes his enemies, and that he rather choſe to ſurmount in bountye and courteſie, then in power: reuenge proceeding from a baſe minde. We ought then to ſhun all ſuſpicion of contempt and audacity, rather caſting the fault vppon the ignoraunce, miſtaking, or lacke of thoſe which haue offended vs, to the ende we may eſcape

that vengeaunce which is ſo often forbidden of the Lorde, and which proceedeth from the ſame ſpring, as doth the iniury, and offence. Notwithſtanding, that anger is not to be blamed, which is vſed ſometimes to make men amende when they haue done a fault. For as Ariſtotle writeth in the fourth of his Morales,
                  Anger allowed. euen as diſordinate anger is a fault, ſo is ſometime the want of moderate choler, or rather hatred of vice. And it ſeemeth that they, which are not angrye, when it is required at their handes, to feare offendours, are very euill aduiſed and expoſe them ſelues to manye iniuries. For this cauſe Plato called anger the ſinew of the ſoule, for that it ſerued to encreaſe valour, being moderate, and temperate.Anger the ſinevve of the ſoule. Lactan. de ira Dei cap. 17.
                   And Ariſtotle writeth that it is an armour to vertue, but ſuch a one as rather mooueth vs, then is ought mooued it ſelfe. Lactantius in his booke intituled of the wrath of God, c. 17. writeth, that it is neceſſary, that thoſe thinges which are nought, ſhould diſpleaſe ſuch as are vertuous perſons, and that hee which is diſpleaſed at euill, ſhould be mooued when he ſeeth it wrought, ſo wee doe decline to vengeaunce, not becauſe men haue offended vs, but to the end diſcipline may be kept, maners corrected, and licentiouſnes repreſſed. This kinde of choler is lawfull, which as it is neceſſarye to man for the amendment of lewdneſſe, ſo is it found in God of whome man taketh example: for as much as we ought to chaſtiſe our ſubiectes, ſo ought God to repreſſe the vices of each one. And to bring this to paſſe it is neceſſarye that he be angry, and that it is naturall and good to be mooued and ſtirred to wrath. Therefore,
                     
                        Iactant his error.
                     Definition of anger.
                   anger ought to be defined, a motion of the ſpirite, lifted vp for the represſion of ſinne. For the definition which Cicero, maketh of the deſire of reuenge, is not much different from this, but that anger which we call choler, or fury, ought not to fall within man, being a thing vicious & vnprofitable. Notwithſtanding I am of opinion that the diuines will not be of Lactantius his mind, in that he attributeth any pasſion to God: for he worketh nothing either with greef or paine. The old prouerb holdeth that an Ant will be angry, and yet we are not able to diſcerne when ſhe is moued, much leſſe in God whoſe workes are vnſearcheable, and paſſe the capacitye of our vnderſtanding. Albeit the holy ſcripture doth often apply it ſelfe to our faſhion of ſpeach, who trouble our ſelues with pasſions, in taking pitie, or in puniſhing, or in ſeeing ſome diſorder. And S Paule writeth that of our own nature we are the children of wrath,
                     Eph. 2.3. Rom. 6.23. Pſal. 103.10. from whence we are deliuered by Chriſt Ieſus our mediatour. Dauid ſayde Pſa.
                  
103.
                     Pſal 86 15. Pſal. 143.9. Exod. 34 6. Nomb. 14.18 Nehe. 5.17. Ier. 15.13. Io
                           •
                        l. 2.13. Ionas.. 4.2.. Nahum. 1.3. Deut. 9.14 & 32.39. Exod. 17.2. Pſal 78.41. Numb. 12.9. & 14.9. Exod. 22 22. 
                  that God hath not dealt with vs, after our ſinnes, nor rewarded vs after our iniquities. And Pſal. 86. he calleth him a pitifull God, and mercifull, ſlow to anger, and great in kindnes and truth And Pſal. 145. That the Lord is good to all, and his mercies are ouer all his workes. The which is likewiſe repeated in Exodus 34 Numbers 14. Nehemiah 9. Ieremiah 15 Ioel 2. Ionas 4 Nahum 1. A man ought diligently to take heede how he committeth thoſe ſinnes which prouoke the wrath of God, eſpecially to be no idolatour, Deu. 9. & 32. nor to tempt God Exod. 17. & Pſal. 78. nor to murmure againſt his prouidence, Nom. 12. & 14. nor to be rebellious Deu. 9. nor to ſhead the bloud of the innocent, Math. 25. nor to moleſt the widowes, and fatherleſſe. Exod. 22. The holy ſcripture ſpeaketh of the old and new man, and of the circumciſion of the heart. So meant the Philoſophers when they ſayde we were made of two partes, and that he which made the worſe, ſubiect vnto the better, was counted continent: and contrariwiſe, he which made the brutiſh and vnreaſonable part of his mind, to preceed and commaunde the more noble, was accounted incontinent and worſe then it. For this cauſe is it required, that thorough the bit of reaſon we put backe and tame that felonious courage of ours, to ſubmit it vnto the moſte milde yoke of the holye lawes of God,Valerius. which ſo much recommendeth vnto vs, peace, patience, and mercy. Valerius and others haue written, that iniuries are ſurmounted thorough courteſie and bountye, not by the reuenge of a new hatred.Cicero. And Cicero in his Oration for Murena and Demoſthenes particularly, in that he made before Alexander the great, to hinder the ſiege of Athenes, do amply ſhew, that it is an act neareſt approching vnto diuinitye,Demoſthenes. to vanquiſhe ones owne courage, repreſſe his wrath, moderate victory, amplifie the dignity of ones enemy, commande ouer ones ſelfe, and not too much to truſt in anger a mortall enemy to counſell. For as our ſauiour Chriſt ſayde the violent that is to ſay ſuch as can commaunde ouer them ſelues enter heauen. The auncient cuſtome obſerued among the Princes and gentlemen of Fraunce, written by Agathius deſerueth here to bee recited: that when anye one had a quarrell or was at variaunce with an other, a great number of gentlemen woulde preſently preſent them ſelues in armes,The auncient on ſome of the french and conſtraine thoſe that had a minde to fight, to ende their controuerſie, by lawfull and amiable meanes: which occaſioned the ſubiectes, a great deale more willinglye to applye them ſelues to iuſtice, which they ſawe ſo much eſteemed amonge their Lordes and Princes. And it was one of the chiefe articles, in the

leage of the Grecians and all allies,4. povvers in the ſoule. to vndertake nothing by armes but by iuſtice. The Philoſophers ſet downe foure powers to rule in the mind, reaſon, will, anger, and concupiſcence: in which they lodged foure vertues, to euery one, one, Prudence, iuſtice, fortitude, & temperance. So as they made choler to ſerue to fortitude, ſo it be not infirme, or out of ſquare.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 25. Of the errour of ſome Authours which haue praiſed promiſe breakers and the cruel, of puniſhmentes of ſuch, what our gettinges and dealing with the great ought to be, aduertiſements to the readers, and of pardoninges.
               
                  I Euer found it a very ſtrange matter in diuers authors who lacked no iudgement at all,It doth not become princes to vſe deceate. in that they produced thoſe for example, who during the whole courſe of their conqueſtes violated their faith with ſundrye Princes, and eſteemed it verye neceſſarye for a great Prince that he ſhold learne to deceaue. I do not in like ſort approue the opinion of Lyſander, that where a Lions skin will not ſuffice, it muſt be patched vp with a foxes:Lizander. confesſing in deed that the truth is better then falſehoode, but that the dignitye and price of each of them ought to be meaſured, and turned to commodity and profit, ſaying further that children muſt be deceaued with trifles,Dyoniſius. Policrates. & men with othes. The which likewiſe the tyrants Dioniſius and Policrates were wont to ſay, authoriſing impietye lying and deceat. Which maxime hath been followed of ſundry Princes, as king Pirrhus confeſſed him ſelfe to the Athenians in recompence for their good cheere, counſelling them euer to diſtruſt all tyrauntes, becauſe they did euer obſerue or breake their faith, accordinge as they ſerued their turnes in their commodities, profites, or ambition. As in Thucidides an Athenian embaſſador ſayd,K. Pirrhus. An Alleman prouerbe. that a tyraunt is a friende and enemy according to the time and ſeaſon. There is likewiſe an Aleman prouerbe, that it is for noble men to promiſe, and clownes to obſerue. And in Sophocles, Vliſſes taught Neoptolemus the ſonne of Achilles, to deceiue by lying: and whereas the ſaide childe demaunded how it was posſible to lye without bluſhing he aunſweared that ſuch was the vſe in the trafficque of men, and that one neuer is to bee aſhamed where anye profitte maye bee reaped.Caligula. The which that wicked Emperour Caligula in lyke ſort ſayde, prayſinge

impudencie.Thraſimachus Moreouer I approoue no whit at all the ſayinge of Thraſimachus the Calcedonian, that the pleaſure and profit of Princes is the rule and definition of all lawes:Anaxarchus. nor that which Anaxarchus ſayde vnto Alexander when hee ſawe him ſo much vexed, for the death of his friend Clytus, whome hee had ſlayne, that Themis and Iuſtice were ſet of each ſide a kinge to confirme his faultes: nor that which that vilanous ſtep-mother ſayde vnto Caracalla, that whatſoeuer hee liſted was lawfull for him. But we will mayntayne that God,God and the lawes gouern kingdomes. and the lawes are ſet ouer kingdomes, to puniſhe ſuch as violate the Maieſtie of the lawes, and that right blyndeth the profite and pleaſure of Princes, and that nothinge is lawfull, ſaue what the lawes permit. And it is certayne, that the higher any perſonne is exalted, the more ought he to ſhew him ſelfe vertuous and true,In all actions vvhat is to be conſidered. as aboue we haue noted. And in all actions a man muſt conſider, the motife, roote, and counſell, with ſundry other circumſtaunces, and therein diſcouer, if there haue beene anye cloaking, infidelity, trompery, perill or deceat, that the bare matter maye be perceaued, and confront what ill ſoeuer is founde vnder an apparaunce of good, knowing that an euill beginning, can not but leade an euill ende. And if we ſhoulde take awaye this firſte excellencye of ſuddaine conqueſtes,Povver obtayned by miſcheafe of ſmal durance we ſhall finde a tragicall iſſue, and a chaunge in extreame calamities. As Quintus Curſius wrote, that power gotten by miſchiefe endureth but a while. The which likewiſe the Prophetes beſides experience doe in ſundye places witneſſe. And the Duke of Valentinois Sonne of Pope Alexander,
                  D. of Valentinois.
                   and others which Michiauel ſet before vs to imitate, haue had moſte miſerable endes,
                     Machiauel a pernitious auctor. after hauing beene made a laughing ſtocke vnto their enemyes. And the ſayde Authour hath not without iuſte cauſe had his qualityes paynted out by Paulus Iouius, as one ignoraunt both of G
                     •
                  D, and learning, and ſo cenſured by the counſell of Trente. And as accompanyed with truth and vertue euerye kinde of lyfe is ſweete and eaſie, ſo doth there euer enſue lyinge, ſorrowe, payne, loſſe, repentaunce, and care, and it is vnposſible to haue anye ioye or contentment, if quietneſſe of the minde, conſtancy, pietie, iuſtice, and full aſſuraunce haue not layde the foundation. And a good conſcience carryeth a calme with it ſelfe, which can not be found in falſehood againſt promiſe, & truſt, the which as euery other kind of wickednes, is the occaſion, and bruer of her own tormēt, being a maruailous worker of a miſerable life, with great ſhame ſuffering many frightes, furies and perturbations

of the minde, full of vnquietneſſe and ſorrowes,
                     Ier. 2. as Ieremie the Prophet witneſſeth. And not without cauſe did Iſocrates entreating of peace, compare ſuch men to Wolues and beaſtes, who while they thinke to rauen vpon ſome pray caſt them ſelues headlong into the ſnare, or toyle. And we may ſaie with Dauid that iniquitye is ſeated in a ſlippery and daungerous place.
                     Pſal. 27.15. 
                  I haue ſeene the wicked ſtrong and ſpreading it ſelfe like a greene Bay tree, yet I paſsed away and loe he was gonne. For ſince that God is true, iuſt, conſtant and like vnto him ſelfe, his iudgementes are euer founde a like againſt all the enemies of the truth, as it is ſayde in Ieremie,
                  
                     Ier. 34.5. and in Ezechiel ſpeaking of Sedechias. Thinke you it is poſſible, for him that breaketh his promiſe, longe to endure and raigne? And ſince that Iſaiah tearmeth righteouſnes the mother of peace, we muſt no whit maruaile if lying, and treaſon be puniſhed by warre, plague,Iſaiah. Habacue. Haggaeus. famine, ſedition, and diſorders in a realme: or if that which is attained by leaſing, and lewde meanes, be called by the Prophets a fire brane wherewith one burneth his owne houſe, a heape of earth which one cauſeth to fall vpon him ſelfe, and a pit to ſtifle and bury ones ſelfe in, and as ſiluer put into a rented ſacke, Euripides in like ſort eſteemeth whatſoeuer is vniuſtlye added to a houſe, as a plague and infected ayre, and euerye man maye perceiue ſuche gotten goods melt away as ſnowe. This is it which Salomon meaneth in the ende of his firſt chapter of Prouerbs,
                  
                     Pro. 1.32. 
                  that the proſperitie of fooles deſtroyeth them. I will not here forget, what S. Chriſoſtome writeth of vppon the fift of the firſt to the Corinthians, that a little gayne fraudulently gotten,Chriſoſtome. is often times the occaſion of the loſſe of great wealth though well come by. And in vaine do men locke their cheſtes with cheynes, ſpringes & padlockes, when they haue encloſed therein deceat, a moſt violent theife, which deſperſeth what euer it findeth within the coffer.
                     Dan. 11.45. We read in hiſtories and in Daniel, the miſerable ende of manye, and among other of Nabuchodonoſor, and of Alexander the great,
                     Pro. 11.4. & 20.17. & 21 7. who left nothing to their heyres but their wickednes. We read likewiſe in the Prouerbes, that the riches of the wicked auaile not in the day of wrath, and that the breade of deceat is ſweet to a man, but afterwarde his mouth ſhal be filled with grauell. And that the roberie of the wicked ſhal deſtroy them: For iuſtice beeinge remoued euery ſtate falleth to ruine, and an inheritaunce haſtely purchaſed ſhall not be bleſſed. And God ſayth by Ieremie,
                  
                     Ierem 17.11 that as the Partrich gathereth the young which ſhe hath not brought foorth, ſo he that getteth riches and not by right ſhal leaue them in the middeſt of his dayes, and at his ende ſhalbe a foole. And he pronounceth a curſſe on his head, that buildeth

his houſe by vnrighteouſneſſe.An admonition to the nobility to keepe their promiſes faithfully. And in Tobie, and ſome of the Pſalmes, a little is more worth with right, then much heaped vp in iniquitye. And it hath not without cauſe beene ſaide in auncient time, that whatſoeuer vice buildeth, it deſtroyeth. Which beeing well conſidered it ought to ſtirre vp all maner of perſons, who wil not degenerate from the auncient nobilitie which hath taken foot and ſure foundation vpon vertue, to be true and kepe their promiſes, what ſoeuer ſhould chaunce to happen, and not to ſeeke ought but by honeſt meanes. For if you will exempt iuſtice and truth out of a gouernment, it is then no more then a very robbing, as Sainct Auguſtin affirmeth.To negotiate with princes. And for as much as the inconſtancy of Princes and almoſt of al other kind of men is ſufficiently apparant, and ſundry inconueniences haue enſewed, where too much truſt hath bin yeelded, the wiſer ſort and beſt aduiſed haue ſtoode vppon their garde, haue not been too light of beliefe and haue ſo prouided that men ſhall not eaſelie breake their faith with them or ſurpriſe them. I thinke likewiſe that they haue heald a verye abſurde opinion,Crueltie that commende crueltie in gouernours. For he which delighteth in taxing can neuer be beloued or eſteemed of. I coulde anſwere them as king Alphonſus did that ſuch men deſerued to be gouerned by Lions,
                     Pro. 20.28. Beares, Dragons, and ſuch like beaſtes. For as Salomon writeth the Kinges throne ſhal be eſtabliſhed with mercie, the which togeather with ſubiectes loue and iuſtice is the very chaine that holdeth togeather and maintaineth an eſtate, and not force, feare, or great gardes as Dion declareth in Plutarque. God beeing willing to make him knowne to Moyſes,
                  
                     Exod. 34.5. calleth him ſelfe the Lord, the Lord, ſtrong, mercifull, and gratious, ſlow to anger and aboundaunt in goodnes and truth. And the Grecians called the king of their Gods Melchins, that is to ſay ſweete as hony. And the Athenians called him Memactis, that is to ſay ſuccourable. And the holy ſcripture and ſundrye Philoſophers calleth him a Father, a ſhepheard, a refuge, and protectour of his people. For to murther and torment is the office of a Diuell, of furie, of a hangman & not of a king or honeſt man. And ſubiects ought otherwiſe to be accounted of then as ſlaues, as Bartole in his treatiſe de regimine ciuitatis, declareth it vpon the ſeuenth of Deutronomy, where kinges are exhorted not to lift their harts vp aboue their brethren, amonge which God had made choyce of them. For the puiſſance of a father, as Martian the Lawyer wrote l. ſ. de paracid. conſiſteth in pietie and mercy, no whit at all in rigor. It is written in the ſecond of the kings how the cruell Senacherib, after the angell had put to death 155000.

of his men, was himſelfe ſlaine by his owne children. And in the ſame booke he writeth of ſundry kings and queenes, abandoned of God, pilled, and murthered for their cruelty. Like ende had Ptolome ſurnamed the lightning, & Ptolome Lamious, that is to ſay the babler. Cambiſes killed him ſelfe with his owne ſwoorde,Princes murdered for their cruelty. 
                  Xerxes was ſlaine by his vncle Seleucus: Nicanor killed by Ptolome Kerapnos Antiochus Ierax ſurnamed the ſacre, becauſe he liued vppon pillage was in like ſort ſlaine: as alſo was Seleucus ſurnamed the lightning becauſe of his violence. Antiochus the great, pilling of the temple was ſlaine of his people, as were Epiphanes, and Eupator, & the hiſtories are full of an infinite number of others which had like ende for their crueltye and couetouſnes. A man may ſee in an apology of Saint Ciprian againſt Demetrian, the names of thoſe which perſecuted the church,The enemies of the church punished. and how they haue beene puniſhed, holding it for a maxime that there was neuer no crueltye vſed againſt the Chriſtian church that was not in ſhorte tyme after reuenged. Ariſtotle exhorted Alexander to doe good to euery one, and not to be cruell,Theodoſius. rather to be praiſed for his clemency then conqueſtes. It is written of Theodoſius, that when he deliuered his ſwoord to his Conſtable, he willed him to vſe it only againſt malefactours, and if he commaunded any thing cruell or vniuſt, then hee ſhould draw it againſte him ſelfe. As alſo the kinges of Aegipt would ſweare their Iudges, that they ſhoulde not obeye them in ought they demaunded of cruell, vniuſt, or againſt the lawes. The like did Antiochus alſo write to the Cities vnder his obedience, that they ſhould obey and keepe ſuch his commaundementes, as oppreſſed none.
               
                  Antonius Pius held opinion of Scipio Africane, that he rather choſe to preſerue one of his ſubiects, then ſlay one thouſand of his enemies. Which I greatly wiſh all kinges would obſerue-Marecellinus termeth the vice of crueltye, the boche of the ſoule, proceedinge from the feeblenes and baſenes of the hart. And the ſayd Antoninus ſayd, that nothing rendreth an Emperor more famous among al natiōs then clemency, & vpon this and graciouſnes, is the aſſurance of the publike weale founded as Valerius Publicola repeateth in Titus Liuius and Plutarque. And Antigonus was wont to ſay that Clemency worketh more then violence. One of the interpreters of the Bible councelled Ptolome to vſe patience and longe ſufferinge, imitatinge the ſweetneſſe of God to the ende hee mought reigne well. And Marrinus the Emperour wrote to the Senate, what good is there in Nobilitye, if a Princes hart be not repleniſhed with bountye

and ſweetneſſe toward his ſubiectes? Plutarque mentioneth of the great captaine Pericles,
                  Pericles. that when his friendes came to viſite him in his ſickeneſſe, and had put him in minde of the great exploites he had made, of his victories, eloquence, wiſedome, and other ſingular vertues wherewith he was endewed, hee then made them aunſwere, you cleane forget the principall, and which is to me the moſt proper,
                     Phocion. A braue anſvvere of K. Francis 1. that hetherto I neuer in my life cauſed any man to weare a mourning garment. Which was in like ſort reported of Phocion, in reſpect of his great clemency. With this agreeth that article of the aunſwere made by the late great kinge Francis of famous memory, to the ſupplication, of thoſe of Rochel, & of the Iſles adioyning, which greatlye deſerueth not to bee forgotten. Let others do, and rigorouſly exerciſe their power, I will be alwayes as much as in me ſhall lye, prone to pitie, and mercy, and will neuer vſe my ſubiectes, as the Emperour did them of Gaunt, for a leſſe offence then you haue committed, which cauſeth him at this inſtant to haue blody handes and I thanke God mine are as yet without any ſtayne of my peoples bloud, alſo he hath togeather with the effuſion of his ſubiectes bloud, and the loſſe of ſo manye heades and ſoules, loſt likewiſe their good willes and hartes for euer. And after the king had thoroughly forgiuen them, he cauſed the priſoners to be deliuered, the keies and armes of the city to be rendred, all his garriſons to be voyded, and their ancient liberty and priuileges to be againe fully reſtored vnto them. If I were not afraid I ſhoulde be too tedious, I coulde ſhew a number of miſerable endes that chanced to other Emperors and kinges for their crueltie. Tales the chiefe of the ſeuen wiſe men of Grece,
                  Tales. being demanded what in all his life ſeemed moſt ſtrange vnto him, anſwered an olde Tyraunt. Which agreeth with the ſaying of Eccleſiaſticus, that all tyranny is of ſmall indurance.
                  
                     Eccleſ. 10.10 And in the reſt of the hiſtory of Heſter, Artaxerxes ſaid that he purpoſed with equity alway and gentlenes to gouerne his ſubiectes,
                  
                     Eſther. 13.2. Pittacus
                   
                  thereby to bring his kingdome vnto tranquillity, that might ſafelye liue in peace. And Pittacus ſaid that a Prince by nothing becometh more glorious, then when he maketh his ſubiects to fear not him, but for him: the which was alwaies in time paſte reported of the french men. And not only the tyrants them ſelues haue beene hated and defeated, but what ſoeuer they haue beſids taken pleaſure in: as after that they of Ariginta were deliuered from Phalaris that great tirant, they by and by publiſhed an Edict, that from that day forwarde it ſhall bee lawfull for no man to weare any garment of

blewe, becauſe his garde were euer wont to weare caſſockes of the ſame colour. And after the death of Domitian, they defaced his name in all places. And the moneth of October was no more called by his name, as hee had ordayned it, nor April by Neroes, nor May by Claudus, nor September by Tiberius, cleane defacing their tyrannicall and vnfortunate names.Philip. 
                  Philip aunſwered ſuch as aduiſed him to plant garriſons in the cities of Greece, which hee had conquered, that hee rather choſe to be called for a long time curteous, then for a ſhort time Lorde. And as the wiſe man writeth in his Prouerbes: In the multitude of the people is the honour of a King,
                  
                     Pou. 14.28. 
                  and for the want of people commeth the deſtruction of the Prince. Sundrie haue ſayde, that as hee which diminiſheth his troupe, can neuer be termed a good heardman or ſhepheard, ſo hee which cauſeth his ſubiectes to be vniuſtly murthered, can neuer bee accounted a good Prince. The Emperour Rodolph, was wont to ſaye,Rodolphe. that hee greatly repented, that euer hee had beene a ſeuere Prince, but neuer in that hee had beene gratious or bountiful.Martian. 
                  Martian and ſundrie other Emperours haue beene of opinion, that a Prince ought neuer to enter into warres, if conueniently he mought auoyde it,Diſcretion required in reading and retaine peace. For this cauſe, wee ought not to read Machiauel, and ſuch like authors, cleane voide of conſcience, foreſight, & religion, but with great iudgement and diſcretion, without truſting too much vnto them; and to confront their writinges, and whatſoeuer elſe they haue taken of tyrants qualities, with Cannon rules and honeſtie, trying all things, and keeping that which is good:
                  1. Theſ. 5.21 according vnto the councell of S. Paul, in his firſt Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians: and of S. Ierom in his Epiſtle to Minerius, by following the example of exchangers,Aug. l. de doct chriſt. c. 3.
                   which trie their good money from the counterfait. The which Saint Auguſtine in his ſeconde booke de Doctrina Christiana Chap. 3. applyeth vnto the Philoſophers bookes, to the ende they mought ſerue to good vſe, takinge them backe againe of them, as of vnlawfull poſſeſſors It is alſo verie requiſite, as I before mentioned, wee ſhould obſerue, how ſundrie hyſtoriographers, and in eſpeciall the Italians, do neuer meaſure their actions by the intention and conſcience, or accordinge vnto the infallible rule of the worde of God, but by the euents, and their owne ableneſſe, cunnings and ſubtleties, euer in applyinge their vaine diſcourſes, to their ende which they pretende, without any conſideration whether it bee vertuous and lawfull or no. And in this reſpect haue they giuen the name of Prudence vnto

ſome, which haue beene moſte wicked, and miſerablye haue ended their liues: and to ſtrangers which haue been endued with a good conſcience, magnanimitie, and haue dyed happely, do they yelde moſt reprochfull names. And wee muſt confront their reproches with other aucthors more worthie of truſt, and with the times, circumſtances and behauiours of thoſe whome they write of. I do not for all that any whit allowe the vniuſtice which is committed in not puniſhing ſuch as are lewde. For as the King S. Louis was wont to ſaye:A fault not to punishe malefactors. K S. Louis.
                   A Prince which may puniſh a fault, and will not, is as much culpable thereof, as if hee had committed it him ſelfe.
               And that it is a worke of pitie and not of crueltie to doe iuſtice: and that he which iuſtifieth the wicked, is not in leſſe abhomination, before God, then he which condemneth the iuſt, as Salomon ſayde: Homer writeth that the ſcepter, and the lawes were giuen by God to Agamemnon, to the ende hee ſhoulde miniſter right to eache one, and that Iupiter had Themis, that is to ſaye right and iuſtice ſet by his ſide.
                     Exod. 21.34. And it is commaunded, that the murtherer ſhoulde bee pulled awaye from the verie alter, that hee may dye, and bee puniſhed without remiſsion. The which is marueilousſtraitly obſerued in Suitzerlande. And God is alwayes like vnto him ſelfe executinge righteouſnes and iudgement vppon the earth, and hating all iniquitie and vice. Sigiſmond the Emperour hauing pardoned one of a murther, which afterward committed another, ſaide, that it was he that had committed the ſeconde, and that Princes ought not to diſpenſe or pardon, without verie vrgent cauſe, any which hath deſerued puniſhment. And if he cannot quite the ciuil intereſt of his ſubiect, how can he quite the paine which God hath ordained by his lawe? And often times too great meekenes cauſeth the magiſtrates and lawes to runne in contempt. And both the one and the other is to be founde fault with,
                     
                        •
                     . Sam. 15.12 1. King 20 42 & 21 16. if it be not tempered. Saul was reprehended of God becauſe hee ſlewe not Amelec. And the Prophet ſayd to Achab, that he ſhould die becauſe hee had pardoned Benadad the King of Siria, who had deſerued death, as alſo becauſe he cauſed Naboth to be murthered. The holie ſcripture doth alſo teache vs, that the wrath of God is appeaſed by the puniſhment of the wicked, and that his vengeance extendeth ouer all people for their iniquitie, and contrariewiſe his bleſsing doeth ſpreade it ſelfe vppon whome ſoeuer hee chaſteneth. The wicked ſhalbe afraide and kept backe, but the righteous ſhal bee preſerued from the contagion of them that worke iniquitie. For this

cauſe the booke of the lawe founde againe in the time of Ioſias, is called the booke of the alliance of the Lorde, the which hee commaunded the Prieſtes to deliuer to the King.2. King. 22.10 
                  Samuel followinge this rule put it into the handes of Saul, and according vnto the tenure thereof, Ioſias yeelded himſelfe the feodarie, and vaſſal of the Lorde. Likewiſe the lawe which was giuen in the Arke, was called the couenant of the Lorde. And Salomon ſaide vnto God: Lord, thou haſt choſen mee to raigne ouer thy people,2. Chron. 6.11 and to iudge ouer thy ſonnes and daughters. For this cauſe our Kings were euer willing, that none ſhould regarde the pardones they yeelded, if they were grounded vppon ſo yll a foundation. As alſo Micheas the Prophet deteſteth, and curſeth in the name of God all ſuch as obey the wicked ordinances of Kinges, who for this cauſe haue had eſpeciall care and commaundement to adminiſter iuſtice, eſteeming themſelues rather armed with the ſworde to chaſtiſe the wicked, then to repulſe their enimies, and are the miniſters of God for the peoples benefite, as the Apoſtle ſayeth.
                     Rom 13 4 And to this ende they eſtabliſh good and learned Iudges in all places that are voyde of paſsions, if they followe the lawes; otherwiſe they ſhoulde bringe into the flocke the Wolfe, which they ought to chaſe away, and render themſelues culpable of the death of thoſe innocentes that ſuch pardoned men ſhoulde kill, and ſo grace ſhould neuer be without crueltie.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXVI. The definition of Lying.
               
                  THE Philoſophers were neuer wont to content themſelues in declaring the propertie of vertues, except they oppoſed vnto them their contrarie vice, to the ende, that the lothſomnes thereof being wel regarded, the other mought be found more agreable.Definition of a lye So haue we of purpoſe diſcourſed of the trueth, before we com to ſhew the vice of lying, the which we may define by a contrary ſignificatiō vnto the truth whē one ſpeaketh of things vncertain, contrarie to that which one knoweth, making thē ſeeme other then they are. S. Augustin writeth to Cōſentius, that it is a falſe ſignificatiō of ſpech, with a wil to deceiue.

And when one ſpeaketh more or leſſe then is in deede, it is a member of iniuſtice, turning topſie turuie all humane ſocietie, and the amitie due vnto our neighbour: for ſince that ſpeach is giuen vnto vs, to make manifeſt what we thinke, and to inſtruct his vnderſtanding of whome wee ſpeake: It is a foule fault to abuſe it, and to behaue our ſelues in other ſort towardes our neighbour, then we willingly woulde he ſhoulde towardes vs: for as much as hee which deſireth and expecteth from vs the trueth is deceiued and led into an errour: and hauing afterwardes in time diſcouered the lye,Lyars loſe al credit. he will no more beleeue vs, and wee ſhal loſe the meanes to be able to inſtruct for euer. For lyars only gaine this, that albeit they ſay and ſpeake the trueth, yet ſhal they neuer be beleeued. And in the holy ſcripture idolatrie, hipocriſie, ſuperſtition, falſe weights, falſe meaſures, and al coſinages are called lying, to the end that by ſo disformed a name, we ſhould the rather eſchewe them. The lyar is deteſted of God, and called double of heart and toung, becauſe he ſpeaketh one thing and doeth an other. And for verie good reſpect ſundrie of the auncient doctors haue written, that the trueth being depraued, there are ingendred an infinite number of abſurdities,Socrates. hereſies, ſciſmes, and contentions. And Socrates was wont to ſaye, that it proceeded from a good will, to enforce it ſelfe to remoue the fooliſh opinions of men, and that it was not poſsible for him to approue a lye, nor to diſſemble the trueth. And Homer writeth of the great and valiant Captaine Achilles, that he did more hate and abhorre lying,
                  Achilles. 
                  then hell, or death. And it is written in the olde and newe teſtament, that God doeth abhorre all lying, and that the true, are gratious in his ſight: yea, that a theefe is better than a man that is accuſtomed to lye, And lying is contrarie to nature, ayded by reaſon, and ſeruaunt or handmayd to the trueth. It is writen in Leuiticus:
                  
                     Eccleſ. 20.24 Leuit. 16.11. 
                  Yee ſhall not ſteale, neither deale falſly, neither lye one to another.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXVII. The effectes of Lying.
               
                  Al vvickednes proceadeth of lying
                  
                     PHilo in his firſt booke of the contemplatiue life, ſetteth downe, all kind of wickednes to proceede from lying, as all good doth from the trueth. And if wee wel conſider the cauſes, of the ſeditions, troubles, hereſies and quarels, which alter whole eſtates, publike

quiet and mans conuerſation, we ſhall finde all to proceede from the infected fountaine of lying. And that Achab and the moſt part of the Kings of Iſrael, the Emperours Nero, Commodus, Maximinus, Iulius, Valencius, and ſundrie other as well of olde time as of ours, haue thereby beene ruyned.2. King. 5.27. Acts 5.5. Eſther 7.10. 1. King 13.4. 
                  Gehazi the ſeruant of Eliſha was ſtroken with a leproſie. Ananias & Saphira fell downe dead. Haman was hanged on the tree he had prepared for Mardocheus. The hande of Ieroboam was dryed vp. Craeſus King of Lidia draue awaye Solon, reiecting the trueth he had tolde him,Craeſus. which for all that afterwardes ſaued his life, and Dioniſius the tyrant of Sicil, not being able to make his profite of that which Plato had declared vnto him,Dioniſius. nor to waſh away the ſtayne of tyrannie, was conſtrained in his baniſhment to confeſſe, that that which he had hearde of Plato, made him the better able to carrie ſo great a change.
                     Gen. 39.20. Thorough a lye Ioſeph was caſt in priſon, and S. Chriſoſtome ſent into baniſhment, and an infinite number of other holy and great perſonages haue beene maruelouſly afflicted, and manie realmes and common wealthes haue euen had the verie beginning of their ruine from thence.Chryſoſtome The ſaide Chriſoſtome, in the 28. Homelie vppon Iohn, ſayeth, that nothing is ſo vnfirme or vnconſtant as lying, for what ayde or piller ſo euer it can come by, it weakeneth ſo as it cauſeth it to fall of it ſelfe.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 28. The puniſhments of Lying.
               
                  IT is written in the Prouerbs:
                     Pro. 19.5. W
                           ••
                        
                      1.11. Eccleſ 20.25. 
                  He that ſpeaketh lyes, ſhal not eſcape: and in the booke of wiſedome: The mouth that ſpeaketh lies, ſlayeth the ſoule: and in Eccleſiaſticus: The condition of liars are vnhoneſt,
                  Aegiptians. 
                  and their ſhame is euer with them. The Aegyptians ordained death it ſelfe for a puniſhment to periured perſons, and to ſuch as declared not the verie trueth, in their declaration which of neceſsitie eche one was to make yearely, both touching his name, and the meanes he had to nouriſh his familie. The Scithians and Garamanthes followed the ſame lawe,Scithians & Garamantes, Perſians & Indians. and there was he condemned that had prognoſticated any falſe thinges to come. The Perſians and Indians depriued him of all honour and farther ſpeache which lyed. The Gimnoſophiſtes, Chaldeans, barred

them al companies & dignities, & condemned to remaine in perpetual darknes without ſpeaking.Neſtorius. And Nicephorus reciteth how the verie wormes did eat the toung of the coſener Nestorius in his life time.
                     Popiel K. of Pologne.
                   
                  Monſtrelet writeth of Popiel k. of Pologne, who had euer this word in his mouth: If it be not true, I would the Rattes might eat mee: that he was ſo aſſailed by rattes in a banquet, that neither his gards nor fire nor water could preſerue him from them. Other do aſſure vs that an Archbiſhop of Magence died of the like death.Artexerxes. Solon. Ioſua. 9.21.
                   K. Artexerxes made one of his ſouldiers toungs to be nailed with iij nailes that had made a lie. The lawes of Solon impoſed great pains vpon ſuch,Traian. Cebalus. & for that cauſe did the Gabaonites loſe their libertie. The emperour Traian ſurnamed the good Prince, took away frō the ſonne of Cebalus the kingdom of Dace, which we terme at this day Trāſiluania, & Valachia, only becauſe he caught him in a lye, & told him that Rome the mother of truth could not permit a lyar to poſſeſſe a kingdom. Cirus in like ſort told the k. of Armenia, that is was moſt manifeſt,Cyrus. a lye was not capable of pardō, as Xenophon writeth in his 3. booke of his Pedia.
                  Alexander. After that one had red vnto Alexander the great a hiſtorie out of Ariſtobulus, wherin he had intermingled certaine counterfait praiſes, he flong the booke into the riuer, ſaying the ſaid writer deſerued to haue bin flung in himſelf: becauſe men ought to ſtudie to ſerch out the truth, without which nothing can be wel don, & that it was a ſhame & great damage, when a lye ſhold put good wordes out of credit. And he found fault with another, when he compared him to Hercules. If he had in this ſort remained al the reſt of his life, & that proſperitie & flatterie had not rendred himſelf more inſolent, he had bin worthy of much greater honor. I could here verie wel alledge how in Almanie the lye hath bin alwayes extremely hated & ſhunned as it were a plague, & baſtardes could neuer obtain the priſe of any ocupatiō whatſoeuer, nor take degree in any art or ſcience,
                     Deut. 23.2. as alſo in the olde teſtament they were excluded both out of the church & ſanctuarie For they are euer in doubt which of the ſundrie mignions that their mother entertained was their father. For this cauſe Philo Alexandrin, compareth thoſe with Idolaters, who through ignorance of their creator and his bountie cal vpon many, & declareth that a multitude, as much to ſay as a pluralitie of gods is very athiſme, & the grounde of lying, baniſhing for euer from thence life euerlaſting.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXIX. That the periured and blaſphemers are detestable lyers, and the paines for them.
               
                  
                  
                     CIcero was of opinion that there was no difference betweene the lyar and the periured perſon, and that God had ordained to eche like puniſhment, and that he which was accuſtomed to lye, did eaſily periure himſelfe. The which opinion ſundry doctors of the church haue in like ſort helde. Others notwithſtanding haue thought that they haue offended more deepely, which abuſe the name of God to confirme their lying, the which ſort of people deſerued death by the lawes of Plato & Aegypt, as committers of ſacriledge. And the Prophet Ezechiel calleth it the prophaning of the name of God, & the ſpoyling him of his trueth.
                     Eccleſ. 23.11 Chriſoſtome.
                   He ſaieth alſo that he which deſpiſeth his othe, ſhall neuer eſcape. And it is written in Eccleſiasticus, that A man that vſeth much ſwearing ſhalbe filled with wickednes, and the plague ſhall neuer goe from his houſe. Saint Chriſostom made ſundrie homilies & ſermons to the end we ſhould hate & leaue all othes; & that there mought neuer be among men folowing the cō
                  mandement of our ſauiour, but yea, yea, & nay, nay, without blaſpheming the name of God by ſwearing. And he greatly marueiled to ſee vs ſo ready to obey the lawes & ordinances of Princes albeit they be very hard & vnreaſonable, & that of Gods commandemēt ſo expreſſely giuen vnto vs not to ſweare at al,Plato 2. de legibus. we make ſo litle account, wherof alſo Plato greatly complaineth, and that men couer themſelues with a lewd cuſtom which euery man ought to enforce himſelfe vtterly to aboliſh. The ſaide doctor in like ſort writeth, that it is vnpoſsible that he which much ſweareth, ſhould not forſweare himſelfe. As wee reade of the othe raſhly made by King Saul,
                  1. Sam. 14.39 whereby he was conſtrained either to put to death his innocent ſonne, or to remaine periured: And God reuenged vpon his race, and people, the great ſlaughter that he made of the Gabaonites contrarie to the othe ſworne vnto them by his predeceſſours. And the other tribes of Iſrael hauing ſworne that they would not giue their daughters in marriage to that of Beniamin, becauſe they woulde not breake their othe, choſe rather to councell them to rauiſh their ſaide daughters.
               And Titus Liuius ſheweth that the Petelins in Calabria,
                  Titus Liuisu. & the Sagontines in Spaine, choſe rather to dye a moſt miſerable death, then to breake the faith they had plighted. It is written in Zechariah:
                  
                     zecha. 5.2.4. 
                  I ſawe a flying booke, the length thereof is 20, Cubites, and the bredth 10.

the curſe whereof ſhall enter into the houſe of him that falſely ſweareth, and it ſhall remaine in the middeſt of his houſe and ſhall conſume it with the timber thereof, and ſtones thereof. Now that all is full of blaſphemies, othes, and periuries, wee greatly ought to feare a moſt ſharpe chaſtiſement of the wrath of God, for ſo ordinarie a contempt of his holy name and followe the counſell of Eccleſiasticus:
                  Ageſilaus. 
                  Keepe thy mouth from being accustomed to ſweare: for that carryeth great at ruyne withall. K. Ageſilaus hauing vnderſtoode that Tiſaphernes K. of Perſia had broken the promiſe which he had ſworne vnto him aunſwered that therein he had done him a verie great pleaſure: becauſe that by his periurie he had rendred himſelfe odious and enimie both to the Gods and men.Si duo de iu. l. vlt. de cr
                        •
                     ſtel. & ad leg. lul. rep. Gel. li, 7. c, 18
                   And truely all policies and matches are cleane turned topſie turuie, if the promiſe be not obſerued. Titus Liuius in the beginning of his hiſtorie, greatly commendeth the common wealth of Rome becauſe it was gouerned by faith and ſimple oth, not by feare of lawes, or chaſtiſements. It was alſo the principall charge of the Cenſors of Rome, as Cicero writeth to puniſh the periured, againſt whome there is great threates in the holie ſcripture: and in Leuiticus, not onely the periured man is condemned, but they which are conſenting thereto and knowe him, & do not reueale him, to the end that the holye name of God be not prophaned, contrarie to the firſt table of commandements, which forbiddeth vs to take it in vaine. The which hath beene the cauſe that ſome diuines haue eſteemed it a greater and more haynous ſinne, then murther forbidden by the ſecond table, the rather for that if proofes be wanting againſt the murtherer, men haue recourſe to his othe. Salomon in his prayer that hee made at the dedication of the temple, demaunded the puniſhment of ſuch as ſhould periure themſelues. The Aegyptians and Scithians put them to death, the Indians cut off the toppes of their feete and handes, for an example to ſhewe the offence they had committed againſt God and their neighbour. Saint Lewys the King cauſed their lips to be feared with a hote yron:Punishment of periured perſons in Zuiſerland they faſten their tong with two nayles, and in ſome Cantons they make them dye like felons, or pul out their tongue. And againſt them there are ſundrie ordinances made by the Kings of France, which we ought to obſerue,
                     Pro. 10.31. eſpecially againſt blaſphemers the which God in Leuiticus woulde ſhould be ſtoned vnto death. It is written in the Prouerbs: The toung of the frowarde ſhalbe cut off. And Iuſtinian the Emperour ordained by ſundrie lawes, that ſuch ſhould be executed. And not

without cauſe haue the diuines accounted blaſphemie much more worthie of puniſhment then any other fault & wickedneſſe, which as Samuel ſayth are chiefely committed againſt men, whereas blaſphemies are directly againſt the honour of God and in deſpite of him. And by ſome decrees of the Court, they haue beene condemned to a moſt greeuous fine and to haue their tongue perced thorough with a hot yron, and after to be hanged and ſtrangled.
                     Lib. 2. cap. 17 It is worthy to be conſidered what Iohn Viet a Phiſition in his hiſtorie of the deceites of diuels and ſundry other writers haue teſtified of ſome that haue beene viſibly carryed away by diuels, in calling vpon them or giuing themſelues vno them. Pope Iohn the 12.
                     Iohn 12. was depoſed and afterwardes put to death,Iuſtinian. for hauing broken his othe made to Otho touching Berangare. Iuſtinian the ſonne of Conſtantine the fourth, for hauing violated his faith giuen to the Bulgares, and periured himſelfe in aſſailing of the Sarazins, was depoſed from his imperiall crowne and baniſhed. I omit an infinite number of other, who haue receiued like puniſhmentes for their periuries.Pericles. 
                  Pericles being required by a certaine friende of his to ſooth a certain matter for his ſake, aunſwered: I am thy friende as farre as the aultar, that is to ſay ſo farre as not to offende God. To which that which is written of Hercules may be very well referred,Hercules. that he was ſo religious and vertuous that hee neuer ſwore in all his life but once; and it was one of the firſt thinges that children were forbid as Fauorinus teſtified: and the better to retayne and keepe them from this vice, there is a very auntient ordinance at Rome that expreſſely forbiddeth them to ſweare. And the Prophetiſſe of Delphos made aunſwere vnto the Lacedemonians, that euery thing ſhould proſper better and better if they forbad all othes. Alſo it was in no caſe permitted to the Prieſtes of Iupiter to ſweare, for that often times an othe endeth in curſing and periurie. And Stobeus writeth that for this cauſe the Phrigians did neuer ſweare. They which periure themſelues as an auncient father ſayth very well, ſhewe ſuffycient teſtimony howe they deſpiſe God, and feare men. And if one thoroughly examined all eſtates, and whereto euery offycer is bound,Oth of magiſtrats and officers. to God, to the king and to iuſtice by his othe, hee ſhould finde a maruelous number of periured. Cicero in his oration which hee made for Balbus ſayth, that what oth ſoeuer he that is alreadie periured can take, yet muſt one not beleeue him, and in the end ſhall carrie his own paine. For what ſhal remaine to God, if he be ſpoyled of his truth, making him a witneſſe and approuer of faſhood?

Therefore Ioſua when he would haue had Achā
                   to confeſſe the truth vnto him ſayde,
                     Ioſua 7.19. 
                  My ſonne I beſeech thee giue glorie vnto the Lord God of Iſrael, declaring that God is greatly diſhonored if one periure him ſelfe, & by the like coniuration that the Phariſes were wont to vſe in the Goſpell, it appeareth that they commonly accuſtomed this kind of ſpeech. If we will then liue with quietnes of minde, without deſtroying our ſelues, we muſt eſchewe all lying & periurie, folow our vocation, & obſerue whatſoeuer we haue promiſed to God & men.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXX. That lying, in doctrine is moſt pernitious, and that one ought carefully to ſearch for the truth.
               
                  Man treated for the ſeruice of god.
                  EVery man confeſſeth, yea the very Pagan Philoſophers, that men were created for the ſeruice of God, and that aboue all thinges they ſhould make accoūt of religion, which giueth the only meanes to vnite and reconcile man to God, for his ſaluation. Cicero and Lactantius in ſundry places declare, beſides that we find written in the old & new teſtament that onely by ſeruing of god men differ from brute beaſts, and the good frō wicked: and that the aucthoritie of Philoſophie conſiſteth in the ſearching out of the principall end & ſoueraine good of man. And ſince that godlineſſe is the ſcope of the reſt, it is requiſite that it be fixed; & vnmoueable, & yet ther is nothing wherin mē erre ſo much as in that which ought to be moſt knowen. The cauſe of the error proceedeth,Godlines the ſcope of other vertues as in ſundry places S. Auguſtin writeth by the teſtimonie of the ſcriptures, for that the moſt part meaſure, the ſaid ſeruice rather according vnto their own blind braine, then by the rule giuē in the word of god, & according to our corrupt reaſon, through the hereditary fal of our prime parēts, who were not able to cōprehend (as the Apoſtle ſaith) the diuine & heauēly things. Frō thence hath proceeded the multitude of Gods, when they haue thought that one was not able to ſuffice & prouide for all, & ſo were ſundry kind of ſeruices in ſhew inuēted which might pleſe the cōmō people & the creature taken in place of the creator, nothing in ſteed of infinit.Baſil. S. Baſil in a proeme writing of the iudgements of God, greatly lamenteth that the church was ſo ſeuered in diuiſions. And ſearching into the cauſe therof, he remēbred, that paſſage in the booke of Iudges, where it is written, that Euery man did that which was good in

his owne eies. Since then that no error is ſo dangerous,
                     Iudg. 17.6. as that which is cōmitted in religion, for as much as our ſaluation, quietnes,Error in religion moſt daungerous. and happines dependeth therō, it is very requiſite that we apply therto what ſenſe or vnderſtāding ſoeuer is within vs, & according to the opiniō of S. Auguſtin, if it be a leude part to turne the waifaring mā out of his right waye, then are ſuch as teach falſe doctrine much more to bee deteſted: becauſe thorough ſuch a miſchiefe, they leade men to deſtruction, turning them from the eternall felicitie, and infecte the moſt pure doctrine which is our ſpirituall foode, and ſo ſeparate men from the catholicke church, without which is no ſaluation. S. Auguſtin in his 4. booke of the Citie of God, reproueth Varro & Pontifex Sceuola, who were of opinion that it was very expedient men ſhould be deceiued in religiō, becauſe that there is no felicitie or reſt, but in the certaintie thereof, and in an infallible truth. And Chriſippus ſaid, that without diuinitie, & the doctrine of god none could take any principle at al in the diſcipline of maners. And Polibius ſheweth that there was nothing which ſo much aduā
                  ced the Romanes as their religion, albeit it was not pure. S. Paul writeth to the Corinthians, that he had prepared them for one huſbande,
                  2. Cor. 11.2. 
                  to preſent them as a pure virgine to Chriſt. And the Prophets cal lying adultery. And S. Chriſoſtome vpō the argument of the Epiſtle to the Romanes ſheweth, that al miſcheif proceedeth frō the ignorance of the ſcriptures, as our Sauiour Chriſt imputed vnto the Iewes, that they were deceiued not knowing the ſcriptures nor the power of God. Matth. 22.
                     Mat. 22.29. Marc. 12.24 
                  Mark. 12. And if it haue been ſaide of the auntient fathers, that the word is a medicine to the greeued ſpirite, a man may well ſay it is alſo poiſon being falſly taught. The which moued the prophets & Apoſtles ſo carefully to warne men to beware of falſe prophets, ſeducers & wolues, which ſpeake not by the mouth of God, neither are ſent by him, becauſe there is no cōpariſon to be made, between the ſtraw and the corne, nor betweene an infected riuer and a good ſpring. Againe we are exhorted, to ſtand in the wayes & behold and to aske for the olde way which is the good way, and walke therein,
                     Ier. 15.4. to the end we ſhould not wander from that life thorough deſearts, but find reſt for our ſouls. And we read in the Acts of the Apoſtles, that at the end of the ſermons, euerie man ſearched the ſcriptures to ſee whether thoſe thinges they had harde were ſo. For God by Iſaiah ſendeth vs backe to the lawe and to the teſtimonie, becauſe if they ſpeake not according to this woorde, it is for that there is no light in them, as who would ſaye that they were abuſed and

remayned in darkeneſſe. And S. Peter caught nothing when hee fiſhed by night, vntill he caſt out his net into the ſea at the cōmandement of our Sauiour,
                     Iohn. 21.3. as ſome anciēt fathers haue gathered hereon. What euer we do without the worde of God profiteth vs nothing, and it ſhall be ſayde vnto vs as in the firſt of Iſaiah, who hath required theſe thinges at your handes? And if they ſay that the holy ſcripture is harde and not eaſely to be vnderſtood, God proteſteth in Iſaiah that he hath not ſpoken in ſecrete,
                  
                     Iſaiah. 45.19 
                  neither in a place of darkeneſse, and his doctrine is not obſcure nor doubtfull, but readie to inſtruct vs to perfection, to lighten vs, and guide vs to ſaluation. And in an other place he ſayth that the word of God, is as the wordes of a booke that is ſealed vp,
                     Eſaiah 49.11 2. Cor. 4.3. to the vnbeleeuers. And Saint Paule wrote to the Corinthians that if his Goſpel were hid, it was hid to the infideles that were loſt. For this great Prince making his alliance with his ſubiectes and creatures to ſaue them, deliuered all in cleare and ſimple termes. And Saint Auguſtine writeth that whatſoeuer appertayneth to ſaluation is manifeſtly ſet downe in the ſcripture, and whatſoeuer is obſcure in one place is manifeſted in another: and in the 15. Chapter of the ſame booke he giueth vs a notable rule howe to diſcerne figuratiue ſpeeches: as if we be commaunded to doe well, ſtraight wee are forbid the euill, and ſo is it no figure, for in that one ſhall finde the very ſcope of the ſcripture, to wit the glory of God and charitie; but contrariwiſe if taken according vnto the letter, if it ſeeme to commaund ill, and forbid the good, then may we eaſely iudge it to be a figure: whereof he giueth vs ſundrie examples. And Saint Paul in his ſeconde to Timothe,
                  2. Tim. 3.16. ſheweth that the whole Scripture, is giuen by inſpiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to inſtruct, in righteouſneſſe, that the man of God, may be abſolute being made perfect vnto all good workes.
                  The holie ghoſt the ſpirit of prudence. The holy ghoſt is likewiſe called the ſpirite of prudence and diſcretion, enterteyned by meditating of the ſcriptures, contrary vnto the Philoſophers bookes where leaues are onely gathered, and not the trewe fruite. And after that the Prophet Baruch had ſet downe what a number of miſcheifes grewe by the careleſneſſe of hearing of the worde of God, and that we ſhould drawe from the fountaine of wiſedome, he exhorteth vs to Learne where is wiſedome, where is ſtrength, where is vnderſtanding, that we might knowe alſo from whence commeth long continuance and life, and where the light of the eyes, and peace is. The holy Scripture is alſo called the worde of reconciliation, of life, of peace, and of ſaluation, and there is not almoſt one line thorough out the hole Bible, which doth not pull vs by

the eare and ſleeue to awake vs out of the ſleepe of this world, and to pull vs out of the clammie vanities, wherein wee hange, that it may bring vs to the glory and preſence of God, which is our ſaluation. The which mooued S. Auguſtine, Chriſoſtome, Ierome, Theophilact, and other doctors, to exhort the laytie, the ſimple people, artificers and all kinde of perſons, dayly to exerciſe themſelues in the reading and meditating of the holye ſcriptures, adding that they which haue founde a golde, or ſiluer mine, trauayle to digge the earth, and endure moſt peſtiferous ouerheating of themſelues, ſo as they may gather ſome fewe drammes of golde and ſiluer, and ought we that haue ſo riche & precious a treaſor in the holy ſcriptures, to neglect and not ſearch it out being called therto by God? Yea wee ſee what toyle men take in harueſt ſeaſon, and yet howe ſlacke and ſluggiſh we are to reape our celeſtiall wheate. And the ſayde holy ſcriptures are better vnderſtoode of a modeſt idiote, then of an arrogant Philoſopher. And as Saint Baſile wrote the lambe wadeth thorough the ſtreames of the ſcriptures, when the Elephant ſwimmeth. And in 119. Pſalme, it is ſaide that this word of God ſerueth for a rule, and correction to youth, and lightneth and giueth grace to the humble. And the moſt auncient trueth, ſayth Tertullian is the moſt certaine. It is alſo called a teſtament and alliance, becauſe we finde therein the legacye of eternall life, and an immortall ſucceſsion, in communicating of all the riches,The ſcripture called a teſtament and alliaunce. merites and perfections, of our Lorde, and ſauiour Chriſt Ieſus, thorough the fayth which we haue in his promiſes. It is giuen vnto vs, for a buckler defence, and ſafegarde againſt all aſſaultes, for a preſent medicine, comfort, inſtruction, & counſell in all affaires, and for a guide to leade vs through the ſtraights of this world. It is alſo called the ſquare, balaunce, iudge of all nations, the Canon,The Scripture called a ſquare and ballaunce. and rule to liue well by, and the very touchſtone which diſcerneth truth from falſhoode. And S. Baſile wrote that it reſembled a great ſhop full of all kinde of medicinable drugges, where each man might finde a fitte ſalue for his ſore. And it is to be feared, which God threatned in Ezechiel that he wil take away the force of bread from the vnthankefull. And in Amos, that hee will ſende a famine not of bread, but of hearing of his word. And in the Apocalips, that he will take away the candleſticke, as much to ſay, as that his word ſhall be no more purely preached. And we ought well to weigh the ſaying of Solomon in his Prouerbes, that where there is no viſion vnderſtanding hereby the preaching of the worde, there the people decaye,
                  
For this cauſe S. Peter exhorteth vs ſo to ſpeake,2. Pet. 1.19. as it be agreeable to the word of God, which he termeth to be a light that ſhineth in a darke place. And S. Paul requireth of vs that our charitie may abound in all knowledge and vnderſtanding to the ende we might followe what were beſt,
                     Rom. 15.4. be entyre, and able to teach one an other, for as much as VVhatſoeuer thinges are written afore time are written for our learning, that we thorough patience and comforte of the ſcriptures, might haue hope. This was the reaſon why the Councell of Cartharge forbadde anie thing to be reade in the Church but the verye ſcripture.L. cunctos pop. And the Emperour in the Code, ſheweth the difference betweene the Catholickes and Heretickes, by the Apoſtolicall and Euangelicall doctrine. And Conſtantine after that he had aſſembled the Councell of Nyce, gaue in charge to three hundred & eightene Byſhops which were there preſent, to followe this rule, that they ſhould euer diſſolue al queſtions, by the books of the Prophets, Euangeliſtes, and Apoſtles. The which Saint Auguſtine euer mainteyned,
                     Cont. creſc. L. 2 c 22. & de ba: cont. don. l. 5. c. 17. & cont max: l. 3. c. 13 Markes to diſcerne true religion iudging all from thence. And the auntience fathers haue giuen three principall marks, by which the true religion may be diſcerned, that it ſerueth the true God, that it ſerueth him according vnto his worde, and that it reconcileth that man vnto him which followeth it. The ſhadowes are paſſed, and the vayle of the temple cleane taken away to the ende that all men might enter in. Our Sauiour alſo in the praier that he made to god his father, whē he was readie to enter into the combat for our redemption, and to faſten our bondes to his croſſe, prayed that he would ſanctifie his in the truth: that is to ſay, that his Church might be adorned with the true light. The which I haue the rather amplified, becauſe that Pontanus, & Quintus Curſius wrote that Alexander the great much cō
                  mended ſuperſtition, accoūting that aboue al other things it was that which guided & gayned the multitude.Superſtition. And it were a very eaſie matter to ſhew how much it preuailed for a time, and what multitudes of people haue bin eaſily drawne to embrace a ſtrange & vntrue religiō. But to the end that we may both diſcerne & ſhun the enimies to this truth, & folow the right way of eternal life, we muſt haue recourſe to the fountaines of this doctrin, & meditate therin & on that which may concerne the glory of God, & loue towardes our neighbour;The goſpell is the ſuſtenance of our ſoules. & oftē to pray vnto him which is the true wiſdom, & take councell of the diuines, & paſtors of the Church. For as the young plants, haue need of watering & our bodies of food, ſo muſt we for the ſuſtenance of our ſoules, oftē cal the goſpel to memory,

as it is cōmanded in Deutronomie,
                  
                     Deut. 6.6. 
                  Theſe words which I cōmand thee this day ſhalbe in thy hart, & thou ſhalt rehearſe thē cōtinually vnto thy childrē, & thou ſhalt talke of thē when thou tarrieſt in thy houſe, & as thou walkeſt by the way, & when thou lieſt down & when thou riſeſt vp.
                  1. Tim. 4.13. And S. Paul exhorteth Timothe, to giue attēdance to reading. For by that god ſpeaketh vnto vs, reformeth our life, inſpireth into vs, & maketh ſauory eternall life, & ſtrengthneth vs againſt the dangers of this world. The ſaying of Epictetus, deſerueth to be here gretly cōmended.Epictetus. If we haue any vnderſtanding at al (ſayth he) what ſhuld we do but praiſe god daily, & ſing vnto him Pſalmes, & actions of thankeſgiuing? in digging & plowing of the earth, in trauail, & in reſt. And what? o great God, mighty are thou in hauing beſtowed vpō vs, theſe thy inſtruments wherewith we plough the earth, & more mighty which haſt giuen vnto vs hands, but moſt mighty in that thou haſt giuen vnto vs the increaſe, without thinking thereon, & to take breath in ſleeping: for by no means can we attribute theſe things to our own induſtry: if I were a nightingale, I would do as the nightingales do, but ſince that I am a reaſonable creature, I wil praiſe God, without ceaſing, & ſo I beſeech al you to do the like.Simplicius. 
                  Simplicius who trāſlated him, addeth, that he which is negligēt & ſlack in the ſeruice & honor of god, cānot be careful of any other cauſe. For this cauſe ſundry haue wel ſaid, that religion did link & vnite vs togither to ſerue one God almighty, the ſauiour of vs, & that it was the guide of all other vertues, & that ſuch as do not exerciſe thēſelues therein, are like thē which go to the battaile without a weapō.VVhat religion requireth. Sundry likewiſe affirme, that in our late nauigations they haue diſcouered ſundry ſortes of people ſtragled in woodes, without either lawes or magiſtrats, but none without ſom ſeruice or ſhadow of religiō the which as of antient time we haue bin taught, requireth of vs in ſubſtance, that we render an entire obedience to God, that we conſecrate to his glory our thoughts, words & works, & refer our ſelues & what euer is in vs, to his honour, and the ſuccor of our neighbour, otherwiſe it is but hypocriſie, & ſacriledg. The which maketh vs to run to the merciful god, which hath made ſatisfactiō for vs,The bible tranſlated into frenche by the commandement of S. Louis.
                   & is our paier & creditor, to which ſcope all ceremonies tend. We read in the hiſtories of ſūdry emperors & kings, that they haue bin meruelouſly giuē to the reading of the bible. And k. S. Louis, willed that his ſubiects ſhuld reade it, hauing to that end made it to be trāſlated into french. The which our hiſtoriographers do alſo writ of k. Charles the 5. ſurnamed the wiſe, and our moſt gracious, and valiant K. Henry
                  
raygning at this preſent, hath confirmed the ſame by his eſpeciall priueledge and commandement. And if there be any which abuſe the ſame, it is by their owne fault, in that they ſucke poiſon out of the ſame flower whence the Bee taketh honie. Notwithſtanding as men ought not to caſt perles and precious ſtones to ſwine, nor holy thinges to dogges, and often times the ignorant and vnconſtant do turne the ſcriptures to their owne ruyne, as our Sauiour and S. Peter witneſſe,Some kinde of bookes not fit euery man should reade. ſo is it very requiſite that in the reading thereof, men carry a ſounde iudgement, and certaine bookes to be forbidden to be reade of euery one, and not to giue ſtronge meate vnto ſuch as haue neede of milke, and in this poynt is it very conuenient to followe the decree of the Councell of Trent in thoſe places where it is receiued,
                     Heb. 5.12. Gregorie Nazianzene. and the inſtruction of their Curate and Paſtor Gregorie Nazianzene in his apologie maketh mention of the cuſtome of the Hebrewes, who neuer accuſtomed all ages to euery kinde of doctrine, nor reuealed their ſecretes, but to ſuche as were of a ſounde iudgement.Ierome. Ambroſe. Auguſtine. The which S. Ierome marketh well in the beginning of Ezechiel, and S. Ambroſe vpon the 35. Pſalme, and S. Auguſtine li. de ſpir. & lit. alleage for example the Cantickes, which ſome for their owne pleaſure haue very diſorderly applyed. I leaue to the iudgement of euery man, whether we haue nowe leſſe occaſion, then had the Prophetes to complaine of ſome paſtors, which they termed by the name of theeues,Zozom lib. 6. cap. 5.
                   wolues, dumbe dogges, ſeducers, idoles, couetous, voluptuous, hypocrits, and by ſundry other moſt deteſtable names. The dreame, or viſion of S. Anthonie, where hee imagined he ſawe certaine ſwyne, and moyles, defiling the aultar, is verified in this time. Our dutie is to beſeeche at Gods handes that it well pleaſe him, to ſende vs ſuch as be good, that they may ſearch nought elſe then his glorie, and nouriſh their flocke with good & holſome food. For from thence as Plinie doth witneſſe commeth the good wooll, that is to ſay,
                     L. 1. de conſenſu euan. c. 18.
                   good life. S. Auguſtine commended the ſaying of Socrates, that both God, and man will be ſerued as he commaundeth. The which he applyeth to the ſeruice of the trewe God, who commaundeth, that nothing be eyther added or diminiſhed vnto his worde. And ſayth, that for this cauſe the Romanes allowed the ſeruice of all gods, hauing for that ende builded a Temple to all gods called Pantheon, and yet would neuer receaue the trewe, to wit the God of the Hebrewes. Becauſe if they had ſerued him otherwiſe then he commaunded, they had not ſerued him at all, but their owne fictions, & if they had done as he had ordeined, then had they cleane

reiected and ſet aſide all other Gods.1. Sam. & 11 13. For the principall ſeruice of God conſiſteth in obedience, as Samuel ſayde vnto Saul. The Prophets called it a ſpirituall chaſtitie, not to ſwarue therefrom, nor to thinke that whatſoeuer wee finde good in our owne eyes pleaſeth him. And as Nahas the Ammonite, woulde by no meanes receiue them of Iabes a citie in Iudea, which he had beſeaged, to his mercie, vntill he had put out their right eye. And when the Philiſtins, had ſubdued the children of Iſraell, they diſarmed them euen to their kniues. So did that Apoſtata Emperour Iulian, Diocleſian, and other, who ſtudied in what they coulde, to make the Chriſtians continue in ignoraunce, and blindneſſe, neuer enquiring of the will of GOD or order of the primatiue Churche,Euſeb. lib. 
                        •…
                      
                     33.
                   and vnder a great payne, made them to be diſarmed of that worde, which the ſcripture calleth the knife of the ſpirite. Ioſephus. lib. 2.Ioſephus. 
                  contra Apionem, ſetteth downe the cuſtome which the Iewes obſerued euerie weeke in reading of the holie ſcripture, ſo as eache man vnderſtoode it and knewe it by heart. The which Socrates lib. 5. cap. 22. ſheweth was alſo obſerued in Alexandria, and it maye bee ſeene by that which is written of our Sauiour, Luke. 4. Actes. 5. 1. Tim. 4 When in the time of Ioſias, 2. Kinges 21, the booke of the lawe, after it had long lyne hydde was founde againe, he made great eſtimation thereof, and ſayde vnto the Prieſtes:2. King. 22.13 
                  Goe yee and enquire of the Lorde for me, and for the people, and for all Iudah concerning the wordes of this booke that is founde: for great is the wrath of the Lorde, that is kindled agaynst vs, becauſe our fathers haue not obeyed the wordes of this booke, to doe according to all that, which is written therein for vs. We muſt likewiſe imagine, that ſuch as haue taken vppon them to teach the way to that happineſſe which all men couet to attayne vnto, haue beene but counterfayte, except they haue layde the foundation out of the holy and Canonicall ſcriptures: and the lyes wherein their fathers liued, ledde them into erroure, according as Amos wrote. We ought therefore often to praye vnto God with Dauid, Salomon, and Saint Paule, that he will giue vs wiſedome and vnderſtandinge, and open our eyes that we may followe that which may be moſt agreeable vnto him, without deceiuing of our ſelues.S. Ierome. Saint Ierome in his Epiſtle to Laeta, ſayeth excellently well, that reading ought to followe prayer and prayer reading. A man might verye well impute the cauſe that ſo manie prouinces haue beene made ſubiecte vnto the tyrannie of the Turke, ſo many diſorders, corruptions, warres, ſeditions,

maladies,The effects vvhich enſue the contempt of gods vvord. murthers, and other calamities haue happened, to the contempt of this worde, according to which a man will not reforme, his life, nor his ſtrange opinions, nor ſupporte one an other, knowing that this worde teacheth nought elſe then peace, concord and amitie: and that we may be wiſe as ſerpentes which to ſaue their heade laye open their bodie, and with their tayle ſtop their eare againſt the enchanter. So let vs ſpare nothing for the mayntenance, of this doctrine ſo long a goe left vnto vs, without diſſoluteneſſe, ſectes, or diſcentions, for there is nothing ſo well eſtabliſhed which diſcorde can not ranſacke, and as Saint Auguſtine,
                  Auguſtine. ſayth very well, the knowledge of the trewe doctrine, humilitie,Q. Capitolius and patience, entertayneth concorde. And Quintius Capitolius in Titus Liuius ſayth, that partialitie poyſoneth and infecteth commonwealthes, making ſuch as would gayne ſaye not to conſider what is moſt expedient, as we finde by experience in France, and haue too many examples both at home, and abroade. The Emperour Maximilian the ſeconde, had often in his mouth, that it was a greenous ſinne and errour, to raygne ouer mens conſciences, as the lawes carryed it. I can here affirme that if men did knowe the truth, and the happineſſe which followeth the knowledge of trewe religion, the voluptuous man would there ſearche his pleaſures, the couetous his wealth, the ambitious his glorye, the onely meane which can fill their heart, and ſatisfie their deſire, and it ſerueth vs for a guyde to leade vs vnto God, whereas the falſe doeth cleane withholde vs from him.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXI. That thoſe which deferre their amendment, doe wrappe them ſelues in a daungerous lie.
               
                  WE haue alreadie ſhewed, that if they which name themſelues Chriſtians would but follow their profeſsion, vice ſhould not raigne ſo plentifully. For who ſo would beleeue the promiſes of God, and ſetle therein a full aſſurance, and conſider what a great bleſsing is prepared for ſuch as feare him, and what euerlaſting puniſhment is ordeyned for the wicked; he would ſet all his care in ſeeking howe to pleaſe and obeye him,

which hath honoured him with ſo manifolde bleſsinges.The diſorderly lyfe of a Chriſtian proceedeth from infidelitye. And this is the verye trewe cauſe, that we ſo much lament their follye and miſerie, which doe euer deferre the amendment of their diſordered life proceeding onely from their infidelitie, and want of beleeuing, of the threatninges of the iudgementes of God, who will render to euery man according to his workes, to whoſe ſelfe we muſt render account, of all our ydle woordes, thoughtes, and affections.The hovver of death vncertaine. Moreouer euery one knoweth that the houre of death is vncertaine, and we indifferently ſee the young dye as well as the olde, and that nothing is more common than ſuddaine death,Demonax. the which cauſed the great Philoſopher Demonax, to warne the Emperour Adrian and ſuch as liued at their eaſe, in no wiſe to forget howe in verye ſhort time they ſhould be no more.K. Philip.
                   And an other did often times put Kinge Philip in minde, that he ſhould remember he was a man. And the Emperour Maximilian the firſte,Maximilian. did alwaies cauſe to be caried about with him among his robes, whatſoeuer was neceſſarie for his buriall, as one that was alwayes booted, and readie to depart. We muſt not excuſe our ſelues with the patience, bountie, and mercie of God,VVe muſt not abuſe the pacience of God. except we be determined to amende, and thereby be drawen to repentance, ſo much commaunded in the holy ſcriptures: but ſtill be afrayde of his iudgementes, and call to minde that which is ſo often written,1. Cor. 6.9. that neither the vnrighteous, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor theeues, nor couetous, nor dronkardes, nor raylers, nor extortioners, nor murtherers, nor gluttons,
                  
                     Gal. 5.20. 
                  nor ſuch as are full of wrath, Enuie, contentions, ſeditions, or hereſies, ſhall inherite the kingdome of God. And euery one ſhal reape what himſelf hath ſowen. And Saint Paule addeth that they which are of Chriſte haue crucified the fleſhe togeather with the affections and concupiſcence thereof. Therefore Eccleſiaſticus exhorteth vs, to make no tarrying to turne vnto the Lorde,
                  
                     Eccleſ. 5.7. 
                  and not to put off from day to day, for ſuddenly ſhall the wrath of the Lorde breake foorth, and in our ſecuritie, we ſhall be deſtroyed and periſh in time of vengeance. And the wiſedome of God in the beginning of the preuerbes of Salomon, doth amplye exhort vs to receaue in dewe time his correction, & not to reiect his councell, and that the fooliſh are ſlayne thorough their eaſe, but he which will obey, ſhall dwel ſurely, and reſt without feare of euill. Let vs conſider that the moſt iuſt GOD doth recompence the good, and puniſh the wicked, and payeth not euerie night, nor euerye Saterdaye, but as Valerius ſayeth, counterpeaſeth the ſlackeneſſe of his deferred

puniſhment by the greeuouſnes thereof when it commeth. And the afflictions of this preſent time,
                  
                     Rom. 8.16. (ſent vnto the good to containe them in their dewtie) are not worthie of the glorie which ſhalbe ſhewed vnto vs as S. Paul ſayth. And all the delights and pleaſures of this life, are turned into ſowerneſſe, and it is the act of a Chriſtian, to looke that at the houre of his death, he runne to none but to God and himſelfe, nor take care of ought elſe. For we ſhall haue enough to doe, without taking ſuch carke and care, for the affayres of this world, and to premeditate thereof giueth great aduantage. Our ſauiour in Saint Luke ſayde vnto him which ſtill delighteth himſelfe in heaping vppe of riches: O foole this night will they fetch away thy ſoule, from thee:
                  
                     Luk. 12.20. Amendement of 
                        •••
                     e and repentance. 
                  then whoſe ſhall thoſe thinges bee, which thou haſt prouided? The prophetes and Apoſtles, very often admonyſhed vs to amende while there is time, to the ende we ſhould not tarrie vntill the gates of repentance, were faſt locked vp, and barred. The which our Sauiour would alſo teach vs by the parable of the fooliſhe virgins,
                     Mat. 25.10. who were ſuddenly ſurpriſed, and ſhutte out of the hall where the bridegrome made his feaſte, to the ende that after the confeſsion of our ſinnes, we might runne to the promiſes and mercie of God,
                     Iſaiah 55.6. and diſpoſe our ſelues to a newe and holy life. Iſaiah warneth vs to ſeeke the Lorde while he may be founde, and to call vpon him while he is neere: and it is to be feared if we ouer ſlippe the oportunitie, leaſt hee will leaue vs. And if ſuche as ſearch the riches and vanities of the worlde, forget nothinge, which may further them, I praye you with what feruentneſſe ought we to ſearch God and our ſaluation?
                     Iſaiah 66.2. Let vs take heede, leaſt that reprooche in Iſayah be not caſt in our teeth, I haue ſpredde out my handes all the day vnto a rebellious people.
                  
                     Ierem. 5.3. And Ieremiah writeth: Thou haſt ſtriken them, but they haue not ſorrowed, thou haſt conſumed them, but they haue refuſed to receiue correction: they haue made their faces harder than a ſtone,
                  
                     Heb. 3.7. 
                  and haue refuſed to returne: For this cauſe Saint Paule to the Hebrewes, putteth them in minde of that in the 95. Pſalme, To day if you will heare my voyce, harden not your heartes. The accuſtoming of our ſelues to ſinne, and the examples of other greatly harme vs. For when men ſee the elder ſort to fayle, then doth youth take example thereby, and being ill brought vs followeth the ſame trayne, all the reſt of their life. But by little and little this cuſtome muſt be changed, & nothing is ſo hard as Seneca ſaith, but the vnderſtāding of man ſurmounteth it, and is able to attayne what euer it ſeeketh. Let vs call to minde what God ſayth in Iſayah, Your refuge in

falſhoode ſhall be made voyde, your couenaunt with death ſhall be diſanulled, and your agreement with hell ſhall not ſtande: when a ſcourge ſhall runne ouer and paſſe thorough, then ſhall yee be trodde downe by it. Nowe therefore be no mockers, Hearken ye and heare my voyce, Hearken ye and heare my ſpeeche. And he ſayeth in Ieremie,
                  
                     Ieremy. 13 16 
                  Giue glorie to the Lorde your God, before he bringe darkeneſse, and or euer your feete ſtumble in the darke mountaynes, and whyles you looke for light, hee turne it into the ſhadowe of death, and make it as darkeneſſe. Can the Blacke More change his skinne? or the Leoparde his ſpottes?Nothing hard to a good vvill. Then may ye alſo doe good, that are accuſtomed to doe euill. We muſt then vndertake the good way, guyded thereunto thorough the aſsiſtaunce of God, and what diffycultie ſoeuer we finde, yet to ſtriue to come to our pretended ende, and wee ſhall finde the pathes of iuſtice pleaſant and eaſie. We reade in hyſtories that ſundrie Pagans, haue ouercome their euill and naturall inclination; and what ought a Chriſtian to doe? If riches, honours, and pleaſures ſlacke vs, let vs call to minde the ſundrie threatninges in the holy ſcriptures, agaynſt the riche, the proude, and ambitious, and haue all our owne greatneſſe in ſuſpition, and enioy all thinges, as not poſſeſsing them, and let it be the leaſt parte of our care,2. Cor. 5.20. the affayres of this worlde. We muſt remember howe Saint Paule prayeth vs to be reconciled to God, to watch and be ſober, and to liue well, whyle we haue the light, and while it is called to daye, not being able to aſſure our ſelues thereof in time to come. And that wee may the better be brought thereto, we muſt ſhunne all lewde companies, and euill liuers, and acquaint our ſelues with perſons which haue the feare of God, as Saint Paule warneth vs,Euill company to be shunned. yea in no caſe to medle with men of euill life. Let vs not then be Chriſtians in name onely, as we haue before declared: and let vs be patient in aduerſitie, modeſt in proſperitie, in our dewtie temperate, in our life iuſt, charitable towardes our neighbours, towardes the poore ſweete and tractable, in our conuerſation louing peace, integritie, and truth, beſeeching to this ende by earneſt prayers the ayde of God thorough his holy ſpirite, and imagining that wee are alwayes in the preſence of God, his holy ſaintes and Angels. And ſince that we are the heires of God, and coheyres with Chriſt Ieſus, the temple of the holy Ghoſt, and fellowe Bourgeſes with the ſaintes and ſeruantes of God, let vs be aſhamed to defile that temple and holy companie, thorough the lewdeneſſe of our life. And call to minde ouer and beſides that we finde ſo much marked in

the holy ſcriptures,The heathen of ſinguler vertues. the excellent vertues of the heathen as the innocencie and abſtinence of Ariſtides, the integritie of Phocion, the holineſſe of Socrates, the charitie of Cymon, the tēperance of Camillus, the thriftineſſe of Curius, the vprightneſſe, grauitie, iuſtice, and fayth of the Catoes, yea the ſobrietie of the very Turkes, and an infinite number of examples ſo much recōmended vnto vs, the which may make vs bluſh; as our Sauiour ſaid vnto the Iewes, that they of Sodome, Tyre and Sidon, ſhalbe better entreated then they except they repented, and amended their liues. I knowe that therein lyeth great difficultie, but a man muſt ſurmount all for the good that enſueth theron: and as Curſius writeth, Phiſitions cure the greeuouſeſt diſeaſes by bitter and ſharpe remedies. And Cicero wrote vnto Octauian, that men neuer applye ſalues to greeuous woundes, but ſuch as doe as much ſmart as profite. And there is no good without paine, Cicero likewiſe in ſome places, and Plato in his Phedon, in Gorgias, and in Axiochus, deſcribe the ſtrange kinde of puniſhmentes that are prepared for the wicked in the gayle of vengeance, which he calleth Tartarus, a place of darkeneſſe and torments; and that the good are heaped vp with all happines & proſperitie, and ſent to paradiſe, or a garden which he ſetteth foorth to be the moſt pleaſant that may be, and termed to be the place of iudgment and the field of truth. And in the tenth of his commonwealth he writeth, that neither the paines, nor rewardes in this world, are ought, either in number or greatnes, in reſpect of what ech of thē are in an other life. Whereof we are better certified, in the holy ſcriptures, to the end we ſhould be reconciled vnto God, without differring, or longer wallowing in the filth of ſinne, for which we ought moſt earneſt to beſeech of him pardon, diſpoſing our ſelues wholy to obey him, ſince that he is our father, & rendring vnto him all homage & fealtie, for whatſoeuer we hold of him in cheife, calling vpō him in all our buſines. And ſince that he hath pomiſed to heare, and prouide for all, let vs not abuſe his bountie, but in dewe time reconcile our ſelues vnto him,
                     Luke 12.35. as Saint Paul exhorteth vs. I will not here forget the exhortation which our Sauiour maketh in Saint Luke Cap. 12. howe wee ſhould haue our loynes guirde about, and our lightes burning, to be readie at the inſtant to performe what hee commaundeth vs; our fayth being alwayes accompagned with this readie obedience, as we ſee by experience in Abraham the father of the faythfull, and in ſundrie other, whoſe names are celebrated in the 11. to the Hebrewes, howe they left all reſpect of commoditie, as ſoone as they

were called. This is that which we beſeech at Gods handes in the Lords prayer, that his will may be done in earth as it is in heauen, as much to ſay, as that he giue vs grace to be ſo prompt and ready to do his will, as are the Angels that are in heauen, who no ſooner receiue any cōmandement from god, but at the inſtant put it in execution. For ſince that God is our ſoueraygne Lord, which cōmandeth nothing that is not reaſonable, & for their profit whom he will imploy in his ſeruice, we ought not to cōſult or deſcant, if we ſhuld obey what he cōmaundeth, nor be more ſlacke or ſlowe to accompliſh his will, then are his creatures without ſoule, which as it is written in ſundry of the Pſalmes and Prophetes, leaue no one iot to doe in whatſoeuer their creator commaundeth them. Our Sauiour Chriſt in Saint Luke, ſayde vnto him that was ſo readie to followe him, marie vppon condition that he mought firſt goe vnto his owne houſe, and take his leaue of ſuch his friendes as were there, No man which putteth his hande to the plough, and looketh backe,
                  
                     Luke 9.62. 
                  is apt for the kingdome of God. And we muſt not as we haue ſayde let ſlippe the oportunitie to doe well, or receiue that good, which God preſenteth vnto vs when it is offred, but to ſerue him readily, for feare leaſt if it be once loſt it be no more poſsible to recouer it, being as olde writers report bawlde behinde and not able to haue any faſt holde layde thereon. This is that, which our Sauiour ſayde ſpeaking vnto the Iewes: Yet a little whyle is the light with you,
                  
                     Iohn. 12.35. 
                  walke while you haue light, leaſt the darkeneſſe come vppon you, for he that walketh in the darke knoweth not whether he goeth. Which afterwardes they had by experience good proofe of. For by reaſon that they did not receiue this light which was then offered vnto them, they were thereby depriued therof, & became moſt miſerable, not knowing the time of their viſitatiō, hauing reiected thoſe benefits which God was willing to haue beſtowed on them.
                     Mat 22.4. We reade in S. Matth. cap. 22. that ſuch as were inuited to the marriage of the kings ſonne, excuſed themſelues, ſome alleadging their marchandiſe, other their domeſticall affaires, & other hinderances to be the cauſe. The king being extremely angry with them, for that they ſo little regarded the fauour & honour which he had offred thē, pronounced thē vnworthy of his liberality, & neuer after to be receiued into his houſe. And in the 24. chap. of that goſpel mention is made of the euil ſeruant, which ſaide in his heart, My Maſter doeth differ his comming,
                  
                     Mat. 24.8. 
                  let vs drinke, eate, and be merrie, and in the meane time that hee was ſo careleſſe, came his maiſter, and put him in the ranke of hipocrites

where there was weeping, and gnaſhing of teeth: the which teacheth vs by no meanes to be ſlothfull, as we haue in Ieremiah the example of the piſmire, which prepareth her meate in ſommer, knowing that in winter ſhe nether ſhall haue time nor leaſure: and likewiſe of the ſwallowe,
                     Pro. 5.6 Ierem 8..7 turtle, and ſtorke who obſerue the time of their comming, that they may not be preuented with colde, which is ſo contrarie vnto their nature. Our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, in like ſorte reprooueth the Scribes and Phariſes:
                     Mat. 16.6. for if men returne not vnto him and leaue their euill waye, they haue occaſion to feare his iuſtice. For in the 13. of the Prophet Hoſea, he proteſteth, that the fault laye not in him that we are not ſaued, and that none is the cauſe of our ruyne and deſtruction but our owne ſelues. And we muſt not reſemble them of whom it is ſayde in the 24. of Saint Math. that they neuer beleeued they ſhould be ſurpriſed or ouertaken. For as S. Paul ſayth in the firſt to the Theſſalonians, the daye of the Lorde ſhall come as a theefe in the night, a fit houre to conuey ones ſelfe ſecretely into the houſe, he doth meane to robbe: and as the lightning, which no ſooner is perceiued, then it vaniſheth away. We haue before greatly eſteemed, and commended Fabius Maximus, for that by delay, and temporiſing, he cleane brake the furie of Hannibal;
                  Fabius Maximus. but ſuch wiſedome preuaileth not with God, in reſpect of whom nothing is more holſome, then a readines to execute what he cōmaundeth, which is not without very great reaſon, and for the eſpeciall good of ſuch as obeye him. In the firſt of Zephaniah God ſaith: I will viſite the men that are froſen in their dregges, as much to ſay that they choſe rather to lie wallowing in their fylth, then to haſten the preuenting of the iudgement of God.
                     zepha 1.12. 
                  Let vs then cast away, euery thing that preſſeth downe, and the ſinne which hangeth ſo faſt on,
                  
                     Heb. 12.1 
                        •
                     
                   
                  and let vs runne with patience the race which is ſet before vs, and let vs ſo runne as we may carrie the price. And let vs craue at Gods hande, with the Pſalmiſt, that he will breake in ſunder the corde which ſo faſt tyeth vs, and deliuer vs from all vayne deſires, ſlothfulneſſe, and delayes which are ſo daungerous. Here I will craue of the reader, if it pleaſe him to holde me excuſed, in hauing beene ſo tedious in this diſcourſe of ſo great weight and importance.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXII. That ignorance is a lye, and the gappe of great inconuenience.
               
                  
                  
                     Plato in his ſecond and ſeuenth booke of his common wealth writeth, that ignorance is a ſpiritual lying, which we ought to ſhunne.Ignorance. And in Timeus he termeth it the ſickneſſe of the mind, and the occaſion of euil. And in the tenth of his lawes; He addeth that the ſoule receiuing and comprehending the diuine vnderſtanding, conducteth all thinges rightly, and happily: but if ſhee be once ioyned with ignorance, ſhee worketh cleane contrarie, and the vnderſtanding is vnto the ſoule, as the ſight is vnto the bodie. And in his diſcourſe of the ſoueraigne good, he ſaith that ignorance is a moſte daungerous matter to fall into great perſonages, which ought to ſerue as a light and example vnto the people. And Pythagoras his counſell was, that aboue all things wee ſhould haue a care to keepe the bodie from diſeaſes, the ſoule from ignorance,
                     Eccleſ. 4.25. and the citie from ſedition. And Eccleſiaſticus biddeth vs to be aſhamed of the lies of our owne ignorance.
                  Ciril. And Iſaiah ſetteth it downe for the fountaine of al euils. And as S. Ciril wrote, there is no miſchiefe, which ignorance doeth not vndertake.
                     Auguſtine. Falshood & doubt the daughters of ignorance. S. Auguſtine in his thirde booke of the citie of God, was of the ſame opinion, and placed it amidſt the temporal paines of this life. And from this lewd mother of ignorance, haue two daughters iſſued, to wit, falſhood, and doubt. This is the reaſon why Salomon ſayeth in Eccleſiaſtes:
                  
                     Eccl. 2.14. 
                  that the wiſe mans eyes are in his head, but the foole walketh in darkneſſe. For ignorance maketh one fearefull, baſe minded, vnconſtant, like vnto beaſtes, and ſuch as are dead, and as Cleanthes was wont to ſaye, ſuffereth it ſelfe to be deceiued, and to deceiue: beſides, it knoweth not how to vſe that well which it poſſeſſeth. It is raſh, taketh the falſe for the true, the vncertaine for the certaine, vice for vertue, and as Menander ſaide, it beleeueth not what it ſeeth, For this cauſe k. Philip,
                  K. Philip.
                   when he gaue his ſonne Alexander to Ariſtotle to be inſtructed by him, exhorted him in any wiſe to applye himſelfe vnto Philoſophie, to the ende he ſhould doe nothing whereof he mought repent. Sundrie other haue likewiſe beene of opinion, that knowledge was the true ſubſtance of felicitie, and the efficient cauſe of wiſedome profitable to all mankinde. Salomon writeth that men are adorned and preſerued by wiſdome: And from thence receiue infinite benefits: and for the moſt part all great Captaines of auncient time were giuen to learning.Theodoſius. The Emperour Theodoſius the ſecond

with his owne hande copied out all the newe teſtament and the Pſalmes.Veſpaſian. As Titus Veſpaſian, did the whole hyſtorie of Ioſephus: and other al Homer.
                  Epaminundas It is written of Epaminondas, who obtained ſo manie and great victories, that he was inſtructed by the Phyloſopher Licides, and that through learning hee became much more valiant, iuſt, and modeſt. The like hath beene reported of Iulius Caeſar, of Auguſtus of the Scipioes, Fabius, & Catoes: and that life without learning,The life of man vvithout learning a very death is but a verie death, and as a man buryed while hee is yet liuinge. For as a Philoſopher ſayed, the vnderſtandinge ſeeth, heareth, and liueth: all the reſt is blinde and deafe, wanting reaſon. And high dignities, eſtates, and riches, doeth greatly blemiſh ſuch as poſſeſſe them, vnleſſe trueth bee ioyned therewithall, which cauſeth all to bee well vſed. The Poets deſcribed one Tiphon an enimie to knowledge, as a man puffed vp, prowde, and ſcattering all thinges by his ignorance, for there is great difference betweene the iudgement, contentment, ſight and feelinge of a learned man,Zeuzis. and of one that is ignorant. As vppon a time that great painter ZeuZis, not beeing able to ſatisfie himſelfe, in beholding the excellent workemanſhip of a Picture, aunſwered an ignorant man; You woulde not demaunde of mee, why I ſo much admyre it, if you had my eyes: which was the occaſion that Plato ſaide,
                     Hoſ. 4.6. Col. 1. Eph. 4. 1. Cor. 14. & 15. Ier. 8.4, that for to loue well vertue, wiſedome, and the trueth, Philoſophicall eyes were required. And it is written in Hoſea: that for lacke of knowledge the people were deſtroyed. And Saint Paul exhorteth vs carefully to auoyde ignorance, and diligently to ſearch the knowledge of the will of God. And the Prophet Ieremiah complaineth: Shall they fall and not ariſe; ſhall he turne away and not turne againe? Wherefore is this people of Ieruſalem turned backe by a perpetuall rebellion they gaue themſelues to deceite, and would not returne? Pope Pius the ſeconde,Pope Pius 2. ſaide that his bookes were his treaſor. And a Philoſopher beeing demaunded, if the King of Perſia were not moſt fortunate, made aunſwere, I knowe not what vertue and learning he hath.Alexander. And Alexander ſaide that thoſe diſcourſes which hee had learned in Philoſophie, made him much more valiant, aduiſed and aſſured, as wel in warres as all other enterpriſes. And not without cauſe Menander called ignorance a voluntarie misfortune; and Seneca eſteemed the vnwiſe man,Alphonce. to be vnthankful, of ſmall aſſurance, and angrie with his owne ſelfe. One tolde Alphonſus that a King of Spaine ſaide, that a Prince ought not to bee endued with learning: then hee cryed out that it was the voyce of a beafe, and not

of a man. And termed ignorant Kinges, crowned Aſſes, ſaying, that by bookes men learned armes, and ſhoulde thereby knowe more, then their experience woulde teache them in a thouſande yeares.Sigiſmond. And the Emperour Sigiſmonde perſwaded a Countie Palatine, that was alreadie well ſtricken in yeares to learne Latin. Petrarque rehearſeth of one Robert King of Sicile,
                  Petrarque. that he was wont to ſaye: hee had rather bee depriued of his Realme, then of his learning. And wee read in ſundrie hyſtories, that it hath beene inflicted to manie as a puniſhment that they ſhoulde not bee admitted to learning. And it was not without cauſe ſaide of them in olde time, that nothing was more pernitious, then an ignorant man in aucthoritie, as I coulde ſhewe by many examples: and the deliberations of the ignorant, can not bee but verie ambiguous, ſlowe, and without effecte.Leonce. Sundrie haue blamed Leonce the Emperour, for that hee coulde neither write nor reade, and Pope Paul the ſeconde, for that hee hated ſuch as were learned.
                     Paul 2 Pope Celestine the fifte, depoſed himſelfe by reaſon of his ignorance.
                     Celeſtine 5. And the Emperour Iulian, to the ende hee mought moleſt the Chriſtians, forbad them the reading of all good bookes. But the good Emperours and Kinges haue founded Colleges,Colleges founded by good Kings. and Traian founde fiue thouſande children at ſchoole, thereby to driue awaye and baniſh the vice of ignorance. And for the moſte parte al Princes haue ayded themſelues by learning or at the leaſt made ſhewe of eſteeming it. Ariſtotle ſayde, that it were better to begge and be needie, then vnlearned: becauſe the one hath neede of humanitie, the other of money, which may more eaſily bee recouered. Hee ſayde likewiſe, (as Plato and Demanes) that there was as much difference betweene a learned man and an ignorant, as betweene a liue and a dead, a whole and a ſicke, a blinde and one of cleere ſight, or as betweene the Gods and men. This made Menander to write,The ſcope of Learning. that learning encreaſed and doubled the ſight. Yet men ought not to eſteeme one that hath red much, except he waxe the better thereby, no more then as a bath which ſerueth to nothing except it bee cleanſed. And if wee bee accuſtomed in a Barbers chaire to beholde our ſelues in a glaſſe, much more ought wee by a leſſon, ſermon, or lecture, to examine our ſelues, and ſee how our ſpirite is purged of ſinne, and howe much we thereby grow better. And we muſt togither with a good nature ioyn the contemplation of learning, the better to informe vs of our dutie, & afterwards to put in vſe & practiſe that good which we haue learned, for as Plato wrote,

The end of Philoſophie,From contē
                     plation muſt proceede practiſe. and of our ſtudies is that by the ſearche which we haue made of naturall things, wee may bee lead to the knowledge of God, and vſe that light which is beſtowed vpon vs, to conduct our life to pietie, all good workes and vertue. Euen Demoſthenes wrote to a friend of his, that he was glad hee followed Philoſophie, which deteſted all vnhoneſt gaine and deceite, and whoſe finall ſcope was vertue and iuſtice. The which with much more certaintie wee may auerre of the holy ſcripture, wherein we ought to exerciſe our ſelues for feare of falling into that threatening which God pronounced by his Prophet, becauſe thou haſt reiected knowledge, therefore I wil caſt thee off. S. Augustin handling that place of S. Paul to the Romanes, where he ſpeaketh of the ignorance of the Iewes, writeth, that in them which would not vnderſtand or knowe, ignorance was a ſinne: but in them which were not able, nor had the meanes how to knowe or vnderſtand, it was the paine of ſinne. So the not knowing of God or of our ſelues, before wee were inſtructed by the worde of God, was the payne of ſinne vnto condemnation, but after we haue hearde the word, ignorance is of it ſelfe a moſt grieuous ſinne. For as S. Bernard writeth, they which are ignorant, and either for negligence or ſlothfulnes doe not learne, or for ſhame enquire not out the trueth, are voide of all excuſe. And if the Aegyptians counted it a moſte intollerable calamitie, to endure but for three dayes the darkneſſe which God ſent vnto them by Moſes:
                  
                     Exod. 10.22 how much more ought wee to be afraide, when we remaine all our life long in the night of ignorance? I could to this ende alledge ſundrie examples of inconueniences that haue enſued through ignorance of the natural cauſes of the Eclipſe of the Moone, and Sunne, of the impreſsions which are faſhioned in the aire, and of a ſuperſtitious feare of the Celeſtial ſignes, and how by the ignorance of the Mathematikes, of Coſmographie,
                  Inconueniences enſuing by ignorance 
                  Chorographie, and Geographie, they haue not beene able to knowe their way, nor to iudge of the heighth of a wall to be ſcalled, nor of the paſſages, riuers, mariſhes, and proper places to pitch a campe, or retire themſelues into, and howe much ſundrie hiſtoriographers haue failed herein, but that I may not bee too tedious, I wil referre the reader to the Greeke, Latine, and Frenche hiſtories. For this cauſe wee ought to enforce our ſelues to learne, and to profit in the knowledge of the trueth, that that in Ieremiah may not be reproched vnto vs:
                     Ier, 5 21 
                  You haue eyes & ſee not, and haue eares and heare not.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XXXIII. That one ought not raſhly to borrowe money, nor aunſwere for another man for feare of lying.
               
                  IT is greatly to be preſumed that the principal cauſe, which moued them of olde time to councel a man not to be ſuretie for an other, nor to borrowe money without verie vrgent neceſsitie, or good pawne for the repaiment, was for feare one ſhould be founde a lyar, which is a vice accompanied with impudencie, and vniuſtice.The Perſians.
                   The Perſians in like ſort, as Herodotus witneſſeth blamed greatly two ſinnes, the one of owing, the other of lying.Alexander. The which alſo moued Alexander the great after the victorie which he obtained againſt Darius,
                  Sophie. to pay and aquite his ſouldiers debtes: and Sophie the wife of Iuſtin, to anſwere ſundrie debts of the ſubiects of the Empire, out of her owne coffers; and Solon at Athens, to eſtabliſh an aboliſhing of al debtes,Solon. which he termed by a word which ſignified a diminutiō of charge;
                     Nehem. 5.11. and ſundrie other to doe the like in Lacedemon, and Nehemiah to reſtore againe the burthens & exactions. And in Deuteronomie euerie ſeuenth yeare called the yeare of freedome,
                     Deut. 15 2. debts could no more be demaunded, to the ende this vice of lying might bee met with, which accompanieth the diſabilitie of reſtoring.Phocion. The which likewiſe was the cauſe of the aunſwere which Phocion made vnto them which demaunded of him to contribute where euerie man had verie franckly giuen: Nay, I ſhould be much aſhamed to giue vnto you, and not to reſtore vnto him, pointing vnto a creditor of his owne. And Seneca writeth, that often times he which lendeth money vnto his friend, loſeth both money and friend. Aulus Gellius. l. 7. c. 18.Seneca. 
                  & l. 16. c. 7. telleth of one which tearmed an othe a playſter of them which borrowed.Aulus Gellius And to the ende the Boetiens and ſundry other mought be kept from borowing, they tyed a coller of yron about ſuch as payde not at their day,Banquerouts faſtened to a coller. and they ſtoode long time open to the reproche of ſuch as paſſed by. The father of Euripides was in like ſort handled. And Sueton writeth that Claudus was ſo ſerued before he was choſen Emperour. And Heſiodus parents to auoid that ſhame were conſtrained to quitte their countrey. That is worthie of marking which Pauſanias writeth that the Athenians before they

gaue charge to any Captaine,Tit. de legat. either by ſea or by lande, acquited their debts, otherwiſe no account was made of him. And according to the diſpoſition of the law, one that is endebted ought not to take vppon him the office of an Embaſſador. I haue ſeene this ſame lawe of the collar obſerued in certain Cantons of Zuizerland, to make men thereby the better to keepe their promiſe. In Saxe they made them priſoners which did not acquite themſelues. The lawe of the twelue tables was farre more ſeuere:The lavve of 12 tables rigorous. for if one did not pay what he borowed, they would giue vnto him a ſhort peremptorie day, in which time, if he did not acquite himſelfe, they ſolde him, or he was giuen to his creditour to ſerue him as his ſlaue: & if hee had many creditors, they mought diſmember him, & take euery one a peece. Such a lawe notwithſtanding, was not long ſince in vſe,L. 20. cap. 1. as Titus Liuius and Aulus Gellius haue written, and was repealed at the requeſt of the tribunes of the people & afterwarde by Diocleſian.
                  Indians. Among the Indians likewiſe, if the debtor did not diſcharge himſelfe in his prefixed time, they mought take from him either a hand or an eye, and if he dyed indebted, they would not ſuffer him to be buried, vntil his children or friendes had anſwered it. Wee read in the ſeconde booke of the Kinges, the miracle which Eliſeus did,1. Kings 4.1. to pay the debte of a widowe, from whom her creditor woulde haue taken away her two children, to haue ſerued him for want of payment.
                     Pro. 22.7. And it is written in the Prouerbs, that the borower is ſeruant to the man that lendeth: and ſo is it in the lawe 3. C. de Nouatio. Titus Liuius, and Plutarque, in the liues of Coriolanus and Sertorius deſcribeth the ſedition which fell out at Rome,
                  Sedition at Rome for debts. which was abandoned of manie, becauſe the creditoures lead as ſlaues their debtors,Abiſsius. and detained them in moſt cruell bondage. Aluare which wrote the hiſtorie of the Abiſsius, ſetteth downe that debtors were deliuered as bondmen to their creditours: and ſome others haue written that in the realme of Calicut,
                  Calicut. vpon complaint made to the Bramains againſt the debtor, they gaue the creditour an inſtrument wherewith hee mought make a circle in the earth, and therein encloſe his debtor, commaunding him in the Kings name not to depart from thence vntil he were ſatisfied, and ſo was he conſtrained either to pay, or dye there for hunger. At Athens there was a Iudge which had no other charge then to ſee debtes payde: the Tribunes likewiſe at Rome, had the like charge againſt the greater ſort. And by the ciuil lawe, if a man called one his debtor which in deede was not, he mought lawfully haue an

action of the caſe againſt him; ſo odious was that name. As touching the inconueniences of ſuretiſhip. Salomon ſetteth them down in the Prouerbes — He ſhalbe ſure vexed that is ſuretie for a ſtranger,
                  
                     Pro. 6.1. & 11 15. & 22.26. 
                  and he that hateth ſuertiſhip is ſure. Be not among them that are ſuretie for debtes, if thou hast nothing to paye, why cauſeſt thou that hee ſhoulde take thy bed from vnder thee? And in Eccleſiaſticus: Suretiſhip hath deſtroied manie a riche man, and remoued them as the waues of the ſea.
                  
                     Eccliſ. 29.29. For the condition of the ſuertie is ſometime worſe then his that borroweth, becauſe not making account to pay it, he is proſecuted, and put in execution, and often times conſtrained to helpe himſelfe by verie ſiniſter means, to his great diſaduantage. The which agreeth with the olde Prouerbe: Be ſuertie, and thy paine is at hande. And according to the opinion of Bias, he which loſeth the credit of his worde, loſeth more then he which loſeth his debte. I doe not for all that meane by this that charitie ſhoulde therefore waxe colde, nor that there ſhoulde be any let why both in worde and deede, wee ſhould aſsiſt and helpe the neceſsitie of our neighbour, according vnto ſuch meanes as God hath beſtowed vpon vs.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXIIII. Of lying ingratitude.
               
                  THE vnthankfull man hath euer beene accounted a more daungerous lyer,The vnthankfull man a more daungerous lyar then the debtor. then the debtor: for as much as he is onely bounde by a naturall obligation to acknowledge the benefite which hee hath receiued, and notwithſtanding impudently diſſembleth the ſame, thinking it a ſufficient excuſe, for that he can not be by lawe conſtrained therunto as the debtor, & ſhunneth him whom he ought to ſeeke, breaking that conuerſation, & humanitie, which preſerueth the ſocietie of men. He deſpiſeth God, his kinne, and friends. And through this impudencie, he is euen driuen to al vilanie, and miſchiefe, and maketh him ſelfe a ſlaue, and ought to be grieuouſly chaſtiſed as Xenophon writeth. And Plutarque interpreteth Pithagoras ſymbole of not receiuing of ſwalowes,
                     Pythagoras Simbole. that a man ought to ſhunne vngratefull perſons. The which hath been an occaſion that many haue refuſed great preſents, fearing that they ſhoulde not haue meanes to requite the ſame, and thereby to auoid the ſuſpition of ingratitude

which hath alwayes beene condemned for a moſt manifeſt iniurie and vniuſtice: and vnder the worde vngratefull haue all vices with a curſe beene comprehended. The Romanes likewiſe, in the middle of their citie, cauſed a temple to be builded, and dedicated it to the Graces,
                  The temple of Graces. Heſiodus.
                   thereby to admoniſh euery man to loue peace, & deteſt ingratitude, and to render to euery one, according to Heſiodus rule, (a man famous among the Philoſophers) with encreaſe, and greater meaſure, whateuer we haue receiued, imitating therein (as Cicero ſayeth) the fertile landes well laboured, and ſowne, which bringeth forth more then foure folde increaſe. For this cauſe Xenophon among the praiſes which he gaue vnto Ageſilaus, reputeth it a parte of iniuſtice not onely, not to acknowledge a good turne, but alſo if more be not rendred then hath ben receiued. And if we bee naturally inclined to do good to them of whome we conceiue good hope, howe much more are wee bounde to thoſe at whoſe hands we haue alreadie receiued a good turne. For it is in our power to giue, or not to giue, but as Seneca writeth, it is by no means lawfull for a good man not to render againe the like pleaſure which he hath alreadie receiued, and ſheweth that he is moſt miſerable which forgetteth it;The vngratefull of vvorſe condition then ſerpents and that the vngratefull man is of worſe condition then the ſerpents, which haue venome to annoy an other, but not themſelues, whereas he is in perpetual torment, making that which he hath receiued ſeeme leſſe then in deede it is, iudging it in himſelfe a moſt diſhoneſt part not to acknowledge it, and yet againſt his owne conſcience giueth place to his couetouſnes, and often times wiſheth them dead to whome hee is moſte bound. The hiſtories are full of plagues, and miſeries ſent by god to the vnthankfull, and of praiſes that haue beene giuen vnto thoſe, which haue acknowledged euen towardes verie beaſts, that good which they haue receiued, & of the great expenſe, & trauaile taken by manie, to take away the verie ſuſpition of ingratitude, to which for breuitie ſake I wil referre you. I wil not for all that forget here the example of K. Pirrhus, who greatly lamented the deth of a friend of his,K. Pirrhus.
                   becauſe thereby hee had loſt the meanes to requite thoſe benefites which he had receiued of him, and greatly blamed himſelfe, in hauing before ſo long time differred it. And it was not without cauſe ſaid by Publius Mimus,
                  Pub. Mimus. that who ſo receiueth a benefite ſelleth his owne libertie, as who would ſaye, that he made himſelfe ſubiect to render the like. And that we may bee the rather ſtirred vp to preſerue this humane ſocietie, and thankfulneſſe,Thankes rendred vnto god for his benefits.
                  
we muſt account what we receiue of greater value then in deede it is, and what wee giue to bee of leſſe, and not ſuffer our ſelues, to be ouercome by benefites. Through the whole courſe of the holy Scripture we reade, how the Saints and Patriarches, haue beene diligent and carefull, in praiſing of God, & rendring thanks vnto him for the benefits and fauours receiued at his handes, and greatly lamenting the vnthankfull, ſhewing the miſeries that lighted vppon them; Euen God complaineth in Iſaiah,
                  
                     Iſaiah. 14. and the reſt of the Prophets, that he nouriſhed and brought vp children, but they rebelled against him: and that beaſtes had more iudgement to acknowledge their benefactors then men.
                     Hoſ
                           •
                        a. 2.8. And reproched them in Hoſea: that they did not knowe that he gaue them corne and wine. And complained in Deuteronomie: that the people being waxed groſe,
                  
                     Deut. 32.25 
                  and laden with fatneſſe, forſooke God that made them,
                  
                     Michah. 6.
                        •
                     
                   
                  and regarded not the ſtrong God of their ſaluation. In Micah, hee calleth more amply to minde his benefites beſtowed on the Iewes, & asketh what he hath done, to ſee himſelfe ſo yll acquited? and yet declareth, that the Lorde requireth of them ſuerlie to do iuſtly, and to loue mercie, and to humble themſelues, to walke with their God: and ſundrie other like paſſages are there in the Bible. And Salomon writeth,
                     Pro. 17.13. that He that rewardeth euil for good, euil ſhall not depart from his houſe.
                  Senec. l. 2. de beneſ. c. 6
                   The lawes of Athens, Perſia, and Macedonia, were in time paſt highly commended, for giuing iudgement againſt the vngratefull: yea,The vngratefull by lawes condemned to dye. ſo farre as they condemned him to the death; as it was in like ſort in the law of Periander. As touching Lycurgus, hee woulde ordaine nothinge therein, eſteming it a moſt monſtrous thing,K. Philip.
                   that a benefit ſhould not bee acknowledged. It is written of K. Philip, that he put one of his ſouldiors out of pay, and proclaimed him a villaine, and vncapable of al honor, becauſe he was found vnthankful, and cauſed to be printed in his forehead this worde Vngratefull, And for this cauſe it was written of Socrates,
                  Socrates. that hee woulde receiue nothinge from any man how great a perſonage ſo euer hee were, except in ſhort time he had bin able to haue requited him with the like. And ſundrie Philoſophers & great Captaines haue ſent backe great preſents, when they were offred vnto them: yea, & forbad their Embaſſadors in no wiſe to receiue any,Liberties & franc
                        •
                     iſes vpon vnthākf
                        •
                     lnes to be reuoked. (as wee wil hereafter declare) fearing leaſt they ſhould therby remain more bound, & vnthankful. And by the oracle of Apollo, an vngrateful perſon ought to be reiected & blamed throughout the world. And it was lawful to reuoke liberties & franchiſes for ingratitude, into the which we our

ſelues fall, as Cicero in his oration of the conſular prouinces declareth, except we acknowledge what was in our libertie to receiue, or were offered vnto vs: and be thankfull as well for the benefites which we receiue at Gods hande, as for thoſe which he adorneth our neighbours withal, declaring thereby his good will which hee beareth towards men, which are as one bodie of many members. And if that which Publius Mimius was wont to ſay be true, that what ſoeuer is giuen to a good man bindeth euery man, then haue wee great occaſion to be thankful vnto God, for that good which hee beſtoweth of our neighbours. Furthermore wee ought to eſteeme aduerſities,Aduerſity a bleſsing and teſtimony of the good will of god tovvards vs. as great bleſsings, and teſtimonies of the good will of God towards vs, thereby to humble vs, & retaine vs in that diſcipline & due obedience, which wee owe vnto him, as wee haue marked heretofore. And we ought to take as great pleaſure, in calling to remembrance, what benefites wee haue receiued in time paſt, as in thoſe which are in preſent offered vnto vs, thereby to pricke vs forward to acknowledge them, by faith, hope, charitie, patience, good works & giuing of thanks & to aſpire vnto riches more certaine: otherwiſe wee ſhall cleane turne from vs, the courſe of thoſe benefits & giftes of God, which through men, as a meane hee beſtoweth vpon vs, & render our ſelues moſt vnworthie of all. Cicero in his oration for Plancus, calleth thankefulnes the mother of all other vertues,
                  Thankfulnes the mother of other vertues. and ſaith, that there is nothing ſo inhumane or brutiſh, as to ſuffer our ſelues to be found vnworthie, & verie beaſtes to ſurmount vs, in acknowleging of benefits beſtowed. As in ſundrie hiſtories a man may ſee it euident that verie Lions, Beares, ſerpents, dogges, & other like beaſts, haue acknowledged the helpe which hath beene done them, ſufficiently to confounde ſuch as remaine vngratefull.2. Tim. 3.2. Pro. 17.13. Pliuie.
                   And S. Paul among the vices, and wickednes, that ſhall happen in the latter time comprehendeth vnthankfulnes; and Salomon in his Prouerbs writeth, that euil ſhall not depart from the houſe of the vnthankeful▪ Plinie wrote not without cauſe that an yll, and ouer deare bargaine, is always vnthankful becauſe it condemneth his maſter of folie, & lightnes. We ought not then ſo much to caſt our eye vpon thoſe which ſeeme vnto vs to liue more at their eaſe then our ſelues, as vpon an infinite number of other that are leſſe, and which haue not ſo much health, friends, & cōmodities; whereof we haue cauſe to thanke God, & ſhun this ſo great a vice. Princes ought in like ſort aboue al things to deteſt it, & to vſe liberalitie,Liberallitie of princes. to the ende they may prouoke & drawe euerie man to embraſe

the good & happines of their eſtate, & holde men ſtill diligent in their ſeruice, in the duetie of good men.De bello Ing. Sylla. And as Saluſt rehearſeth Bocchus the king of the Getules, had reaſon to tell Sylla that it was a leſſe ſhame for a king to be ouercome by armes then by courteſie. And before hee wrote of the ſame Sylla, that hee neuer willingly woulde receiue a pleaſure at the handes of any, except he mought verie ſpeedily requite them, and neuer asked his owne of any, ſtudying aboue all thinges to make multitudes of nations faſt bound vnto him.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXV. That lying hath made Poets and Painters to be blamed, and of the garniſhing of houſes.
               
                  
                     PLato wrote,Poets banished Platoes common vveale. that Poetrie conſiſted in the cunning inuention of fables, which are a falſe narration, reſembling a true, and that therein they did often manifeſt ſundrie follies of the gods; for this cauſe he baniſhed and excluded them out of his common wealth, as men that mingled poyſon with honie. Beſides thorough their lying and wanton diſcourſes they corrupt the manners of youth, and diminiſh that reuerence which men ought to carrie towards their ſuperiors, and the lawes of God, whom they faine to be repleniſhed with paſsions & vice. And the principall ornament of their verſes are tales made at pleaſure, & fooliſh & diſorderly ſubiectes, cleane diſguiſing the trueth & hyſtorie to the end they might the more delight: and for this cauſe haue they bin thruſt out of ſundry cities. Among other,
                     Archilochus chaſed out of Sparta.
                   after that Archilocus came into Sparta, he was preſently thruſt out, as ſoon as they had vnderſtood, how he had writtē in his poemes, that it was better to loſe a mans weopens then his life, & forbad euer after al ſuch deceitful poeſies. Hence grew the common prouerb, that al Poets are lyers. And it was written of Socrates,
                  
                     Socrates not brought vp to Poetrye. that hee was yl brought vp to poeſie becauſe he loued the truth. And a man mought ſay, that this moued Caligula to cōdemne Virgils & Homers books, becauſe of their prophane fables, which S-Paul exhorted Timothie to caſt away. Plutarque telleth of a Lacedemonian,
                  Tirteus who when he was demanded what he thought of the Poet Tirteus,
                  Hieron. anſwered that he was very good to infect yong mens wits. And Hieron of Siracuſa condemned Epicarinus the Poet in a great fine, becauſe in his

wiues preſence he had repeated certaine laſciuious verſes. And Viues writeth,Ouid. that Ouid was moſt iuſtly ſent into baniſhment, as an inſtrument of wantonneſſe. He which firſt inuented the Iambique verſifying, to byte, and quippe, was the firſt that felt the ſmart.
               
                  Archilochus.And Archilocus the Poet fell into confuſion, through his own detractions, as Horace and ſundry other haue written, and Aulus Gellius reporteth that Orpheus, Homer, and Heſiodus gaue names & honours to the gods.Pithagoras. And Pithagoras ſaide, that their ſoules hong in hel vpon a tree,Iuuenall ſtill pulled of euery ſide by ſerpents, for their ſo damnable inuention. And Domitian baniſhed Iuuenal: and Pope Paul 2.Euſebius and Adrian 6. held them as enimies to religion. Euſebius in his 8. booke & firſt Chapter de Preparatione Euangelica, ſetteth down an example of a Poet, who for hauing lewdly applyed a peece of Scripture to a fable, ſuddenly loſt his naturall ſight, and after that he had done penance, it was reſtored to him againe. And as touching Painters, they haue beene greatly miſliked of, for repreſenting ſuch fictions,Painters Simonides & Poetical deceits. For as Simonides ſaide: Painting is a dumme Poeſie, and a Poeſie is a ſpeaking painting: & the actions which the Painters ſet out with viſible colours and figures, the Poets recken with wordes as though they had in deede beene perfourmed. And the ende of eche is, but to yeeld pleaſure by lying, not eſteeming the ſequele and cuſtome, or impreſsion, which hereby giue to the violating of the lawes and corruption of good manners. For this cauſe the Prophets called the ſtatuas, images, and wanton pictures, the teachers of vanitie, of lyes, deceite, & abhomination. And Lactantius writeth, that a counterfait tooke the name of counterfaiting,
                     Habac Iſaiah 3. and all deceit (as wee before declared) ſpringeth from falſhood and lying. This was it which mooued S. Iohn,
                  
                     Deut. 27.15. in the ende of his firſt Epiſtle to warne men to keepe themſelues from images: for an image doeth at their fanſie counterfait the bodie of a man dead, but is not able to yeelde the leaſt gaſpe of breath. And idolatrie, is properly, ſuch ſeruice as is done vnto Idoles. Wee reade howe God eſpecially forbad it in the firſt table, and how long the Romanes and Perſians liued without any vſe thereof: and howe the Lacedemonians coulde neuer abyde that an image ſhould ſtand in their Senate.Auguſtine. There hath beene in ſundrye councels mention made thereof & S. Athanaſius more at large diſcourſed thereof in a ſermon he made againſt Idols: and S. Augustin in his booke de fide & Simbolo, and vppon 150. Pſalm, & in his eighth book of the citie of God, & Damaſcene in his 4. book & 8. C.

The occaſion of ſo free paſſage giuen to Poets is, for that their fables ſlyde awaye eaſily, and cunningly turne them ſelues, to tickel at pleaſure, whereas the trueth plainly ſetteth downe the matter as it is in deede, albeit the euent thereof bee not verie pleaſant.Plato. 
                  Plato in like ſort compared, the diſputes in Poetrie, to the banquets of the ignorant, who vſe Muſike in ſteede of good diſcourſe, and in his thirde booke of his commonwealth, he forbiddeth Poets or painters to ſet downe or repreſent any thinge diſhoneſt or wanton, for feare of corrupting of good manners.Ariſtotle. And Ariſtotle in his Politiques, the third booke, and 17. Chapter woulde haue all vyle wordes to be baniſhed. And Saint Paul to the Epheſians,
                  
                     Eph. 5.3. that any vncleanneſſe, fooliſh ieſting,Tertullian. or talking ſhoulde bee once named among them. And Tertullian an auncient doctor of the Church, called Poets, and certaine Philosophers, the Patriarches of heretiques. This which I haue ſpoken of muſt not be vnderſtood, of Poeſies, wherein much trueth and inſtruction is contained, nor of pictures which repreſent the actes of holye and vertuous perſonages, nor of fables taken out of hyſtories, whereof, there maye growe ſome edifying: but onely of that which is laſciuious, and grounded vpon naughtie argument, rendring youth effeminate, and men more giuen to wantonneſſe, pleaſures, paſsion, & vayne opinions, then to vertue, cleane turning away the honour that is due vnto God, or to good edifying; for according vnto the commaundement of God, Cherubyns were made. The admonition which Epictetus gaue to ſuch as were too curious in pictures,Epictetus. ought by no meanes to be here forgotten: Trim not thy houſe (ſaith hee) with tables and pictures, but paint it and guild it with Temperance: the one vainely feedeth the eyes, the other is an eternall ornament which cannot be defaced. The ſame doeth Plutarque teache in the life of Dion,
                  Plutarque. that more care is to bee taken for the hanging and adorning of the palace of the ſoule, then of the outwarde. And the ſame Philoſopher did not muche out of the waye warne vs, that wee ſhoulde take heede that the skirt of our garments ſhoulde not carrie a ſtinche of life.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXVI. Of backebyters, mockers, and euill ſpeakers, and why the Comedians, ſtage players and Iugglers haue beene reiected.
               
                  
                  WE haue heretofore ſhewed that our mouth ought to ſerue our neighbour, as wel to preſerue him in honor as in profit: and for that our Lord God commaundeth,
                     Leuit. 19.11. 
                  that wee ſhould neither deale falſly, nor lye one to another. He forbiddeth vs, either to depraue or deceiue any: for deprauing & backbiting is an enimie vnto the trueth, to the weale, & honour of our neighbor,
                     Exod. 20.16. & forbidden by God in the commandement of not bearing falſe witnes: & hath euer bin accounted as manſlaughter, & ſtealing away of the renowne, which we ought to eſteeme, according to the ſaying of the wiſe man aboue great riches.
                     Pro. 6.1. 
                  Plato in his common wealth greatly praiſed the lawes of Lidia, which puniſhed backbiters,
                     Lib. 3. as murtherers, neither doe wee want ſundrie examples which ſhew what miſchiefe hath enſued through backbyting. Wee haue one in Hester c. 3.
                     Eſter 3.1. of the miſchiefe which Haman purſued againſt the Iewes, which K. Ahaſhueroh; & of Doeg, which through his backbiting was the cauſe of the death of 85.1. Sam 22.18 1. Sam. 24.10 perſons that did wear a lynen Ephod, & ſundrie other myſeries. And Dauid did attribute vnto ſlanderers al the euil which Saul had wrought againſt him. The backbiter is in degree neare vnto the flatterer, & hurteth three perſons, the abſent, of whom he ſpeaketh, the preſent, which giueth eare vnto him,2. Cor. 6.9. & himſelfe. And it is written in Eccleſiaſt. that hatred, enmitie,& reproch attendeth the backbiter. And S. Paul writeth that railers ſhal not inherit the kingdome of God:
                  
                     Eph. 4.31. & to the Epheſians: Let al bitternes & anger, & wrath, crying, & euil ſpeaking, be put away from you, with al malitiouſnes. Be ye courteous one to another, & tender harted, forgiuing one another, euen as God for Christes ſake forgaue you. Solon being demanded what was more cutting then a knife, anſwered, a ſlaunderous toung, the which Dauid calleth a ſharpe razor, and hot burning coales. The ſame writeth S. Iames in his Epiſtle more at large. And as it is taken for a ſigne of health, ſo is it a ſigne of a ſound vnderſtanding to be exempt from al words that may do harme.
                     Pro. 18.21. And not without cauſe ſaid Salomon, that death & life are in the power of the tongue,
                  Sup. pſal. 57.
                   & more periſh thereby then by the ſword. And addeth, that he which keepeth his tongue, keepeth his life. S. Augustin ſheweth that the truth hath written in our hearts this commandement: Do vnto an other, as thou wouldſt be done vnto thy ſelfe. And S. Ierom vppon Iſaiah in like ſort ſaith, euen as wee woulde not that men ſhoulde ſpeake euil of vs,
                     Iſaiah. 14. no more ought we to depraue our neighbour. S.

                  Paul willeth vs not ſo much as to eat or drink with the railers:1. Cor. 5.11. and ſo did S. Iames. Al kind of mockerie ought alſo to be ſhunned, which is a reproch couered with ſome fault, and which accuſtometh the mocker to raile, & lie,Mockery. & moueth more then an iniurie when it proceedeth from a wil to outrage, & a malice without neceſsitie. The which moued ſome to terme it an artificial iniurie. Salomon writeth in his prouerbs that God doth abhorre al mockers, the which Iſaiah comprehendeth C. 38. & 57. The lieutenant of K. Darius put to death one of his ſoldiars which had railed vpon Alexander,
                  Raylers and mockers punished. ſaiing that the part of a ſoldiar was to fight, not to raile. Antigonus cauſed one to dye for the like cauſe,1. King. 2.23. and they of Alexandria were well chaſtiſed by Veſpaſian, and diuers children were torne in peeces for mockinge of Eliſha, with wylde beares. At the leaſt wee ought to reſemble the Phiſitiōs which Hipocrates made to ſweare, that they ſhoulde not bewraye the ſecrete and hidden faultes and euils.Gregory. And Saint Gregorie in his Morals compareth the backebiter vnto him, which bloweth the powder that flaſheth into his owne eyes, and hindereth his ſeeing. For this cauſe ought wee to followe the councel giuen vnto vs by Saint Peter:
                  1. Pet. 2.1. that laying aſide all malitiouſneſſe, and all guile, and diſsimulation, and enuie,and all euil ſpeaking, as newe borne babes wee deſire the milke of the worde, that wee may growe thereby. And aboue all thinges, followinge the councell of Demoſthenes, wee muſt take heede of ſpeaking yll of the abſent, or giuing eare vnto the backebiters, as Alexander Seuerus was wont to ſaye and doe.
               And for as much as comedies are compounded of fixions,Comedies. fables, and lyes, they haue of diuers beene reiected.Playes. As touchinge Playes, they are full of filthie wordes, which woulde not become verie lacqueys, and courtiſanes, and haue ſundrie inuentions which infect the ſpirite, and repleniſh it with vnchaſte, whoriſhe, coſening, deceitfull, wanton, and miſcheeuous paſsions. Atheneus writinge of the inuention of a Comedie, and tragedie, ſayeth, that they haue euer been inuented in a time of vintage & drunkenneſſe. And for that, beſides all theſe inconueniences,Comedians. and ſtage-players. Comedians, and ſtage players, doe often times enuie and gnawe at the honor of another, and to pleaſe the vulgar people, ſet before them ſundrie lies, & teach much diſſolutenes, and deceit, by this meanes turning vpſide downe all diſcipline and good manners, many cities wel gouerned, would neuer at any time intertaine thē. And the citie of Marſeilles,
                  Marſeilles. hath beene maruelouſly praiſed in auncient

time, for that ſhe alwaies reiected ſuch kind of people. And the Emperours Auguſtus, Anthony, Frederick the firſt, and Henry the thirde, cauſed them to be driuen out of their Empire. And the Tribunes baniſhed one Neuius out of Rome.
                  Chriſoſtome. And S. Chriſoſtome, in his 17 homilie vpon S. Matth. ſaith, that there is no peril vppon the ſea ſo dangerous,
                  Theatres. 
                  as are the Theaters and places of Commedies & playes; and declareth at large what diſſolutenes, diſorder, factions, miſchiefes & inconueniences haue enſued thereby.Seneca. The like doth Seneca declare in his firſt Epiſtle of the firſt booke,Caelius Rodiginus. Auguſtine. & Caelius Rodiginus in his 5. booke & 7. Chapter. And S. Auguſtine in his Citie of God commendeth Scipio, for that he forbad the vſe of any ſuch paſtimes as an enimie to al vertue & honeſty. And ſaieth that the diuels vnder the ſimilitude of falſe gods erected them.Lacedemonians. The Lacedemonians alſo would neuer permit ſuch playes & acts, for feare ſomewhat might be imprinted into the peoples breſt, cōtrary to the lawes & truth. For as the Apoſtle writeth:1. Cor. 15.33. 
                  Euil words corrupt good manners. And this cauſed the good king S. Louis to baniſh them out of his court.
                     K. S. Louis. S. Ierome. And S. Ierom towards the end of his firſt booke againſt Iouinian writeth, that tragedies are ful of contempt of mariage & good lawes. And Seneca wiſely wrote in his Epiſtles that it is verie daungerous to be preſent at al ſhewes.Seneca. And by ſome counſels haue they beene flatly forbidden For the ſubiect therof is filthie & vnhoneſt, & the action of the players leaueth an impreſsion of wantonnes, whoredome & vilanie in the ſoule of the aſsiſtants, & that which they ſee ſo diſſolute & vile, when it is ioyned with words & deedes, (whereby the Comedians enrich their filthie & vnhoneſt ſubiect) infecteth more the ſpirits, & wrappeth them in paſsions, then drunkennes it ſelfe would do. And in Caſsiodorus, k. Theodorick writeth a long letter to his Prouoſt,K. Theodoric.
                   that he ſhould hinder all ſuch ſpectacles, as corrupted maners & honeſtie, & raiſed nothing but quarels, and contention the which moued Aristotle in his Politiques, to exhort all magiſtrates to forbid ſuch playes,Ariſtotle. and baniſh al vile wordes out of their Citie. And Sainct Paul exhorteth the Epheſians: that no corrupt communication proceede out of our mouth: and addeth, Greeue not the holie ſpirite of God, by whome you are ſealed vnto the daye of redemption. I woulde wiſhe that Theaters might bee defaced, and no occaſion giuen for ſuch plagues to enter within cities and houſes, accordinge to the opinion of Saluian Biſhoppe of Marſeilles, eſteeming all ſuch ſpectacles to bee a verie apoſtaſie, and leauing of the faith of Sacramentes, and Chriſtian religion; and therefore

as the occaſion of ſo great miſchiefe they ought to bee ſhunned.Plato: 
                  Plato his opinion was, that gouernors of common weales ſhould in ſort not ſuffer tragedies to bee rehearſed, except they had beene firſt conſidered of by cenſors and iudges, and founde good, and full of mortalitie, without any one the leaſt woorde that mought be offenſiue to chaſt eares.Ariſtotle. And Ariſtotle in the ende of the eyght booke of his Politiques, forbiddeth all youth to bee aſsiſtaunt thereat.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXVII. That accuſers, talebearers, falſe pleaders, and curious perſons, are of the ſame brotherhood of lying.
               
                  SInce that all the vertues of the ſoule ought to be applyed vnto charitie,Slaunders & falſe reports then are ſlanders and falſe reports to be greatly eſchewed, proceeding out of the ſame ſhoppe of lying. The ſlanderer doth euer vniuſtly accuſe & ought to be puniſhed, with the ſame manner of puniſhment, as the partie accuſed ſhould haue beene, if it had beene founde trewe: as the Emperours Theodoſius and Honorius, ordeyned in the latter lawe, and Tranquillus in Auguſto. And in auncient time they marked them in the forehead with a hote yron, as Plinie reporteth in Panegyr,
                  C. de calumni. and Cicero in his oration pro Roſcio. The Emperours Tiberius, Nero, Vitellius, and ſundry other taking pleaſure therein, haue beene the occaſion of much miſcheif. When Ageſilaus king of the Lacedemonians,
                  Ageſilaus. at any time had heard any prayſe, or diſcōmende one, he was wont to ſay, that he was as well to cōſider the behauiour of him that ſpoke, as his of whom he ſpoke. And after that a Romaine Knight, had ſhewed vnto Auguſtus the Emperour, that that was moſt falſe which had beene reported of him, he humbly beſought him, that for euer after he would haue great regarde, of what was laide to the charge of any perſon of qualitie, that it mought be doone by good men, and of an approued truth. God forbiddeth vs to iudge lightly, or to giue credite to a ſole witneſſe, and if our ſight, our hearing, and our taſt oft times deceiue vs, no doubt ſo may our iudgment. The Emperours Titus, Veſpaſian, Nerua, and Traian,
                  Punishment of talebearers. made talebearers to be whipped and baniſhed. Domitian, Anthonie, and Macrinus, thruſt them out of the Empire, ſaying: that who ſo did not puniſh them

encouraged them. And Leontius the Emperour after that he had put Iuſtinian to flight, cauſed two of his tale bearers to be trayled by the feete and burned. And after the death of Apollodorus and Phalaris the Tyrantes, they cauſed ſuch hell houndes to be fleede, and burned, and put them in the rank of the accurſed. The which was likewiſe done in the time of the Emperor Pertinax, & after the deceaſe of Maximinus,
                  
                     Pro. 18.8. and his ſonne. Salomon wrote, that the wordes of a talebearer are as flatterings, and they goe downe into the bowels of the bellie. And Pliny the younger calleth them robbers and theeues. And Eccleſiaſticus abhorreth them and all ſuch as are of a double tongue, and thanketh God (as alſo did Dauid in ſundry Pſalmes) that he had deliuered him from the ſnare of the falſe tongue,
                     Dan. 6.24. Diuell.
                   and talebearers. And Darius made the accuſers of Daniel to bee deuoured by the Lyons. the word of Diuell is as much to ſay as an accuſer. Doeg by the tale he carried to K. Saul,
                  1. Sam. 22.18 Ariſtobulus.
                   cauſed the Prieſtes to be murthered. Ariſtobulus the K. of the Iewes, thorough a falſe report put to death his own brother,Herod. and afterwards died for ſorrowe. Herod in like ſort cauſed his wife & ſonne to be murthered, & had like for griefe to haue died after that he was better informed of the truth: as alſo it befell to Conſtantine the Emperour,Conſtantine. who was the cauſe of the death of his owne ſonne & mother in law:
                     Francis D. of Bretaigne.
                   and to Francis Duke of Bretaigne that cauſed Gilles his own brother to be ſlaine. We reade of the ende of Seian, Tiberius, Plautian, and Seuerus. Many Emperours haue put men to death with hearing of them, and there is no perſon whatſoeuer be he neuer ſo vpright and innocent,Remedy againſt accuſers. but through ſuch helhoundes may very well be brought into trouble. As Socrates in Xenophon, and our owne experience may teache vs. And to be able to auoyde all ſlanders & reproch, we muſt obſerue that inſtruction which S. Paul giueth to the Epheſians, ſo holily & wiſely to behaue our ſelues, as no occaſion or place be giuen to the accuſer. He giueth the like aduiſe in his 2.1. Pet. 2.12. Epiſtle to the Cor. and S. Peter in his firſt epiſtle, willeth vs to haue our conuerſation honeſt, that they which ſpeake euill of vs, as of euill doers, may by our good workes which they ſhall ſee glorifie God. For good men by their vertue and innocencie do quench reprooch, as fire is quenched by water. Falſe pleaders are ſuch as betray their clyents, and diſſemble the truth,Falſe pleaders. 
                  l. praeuaricatores de verb. ſig. titulo ad ſenatuſc. Turpil. which ſetteth downe a puniſhment for ſlanderers, falſe pleaders, and wranglers. Such plagues did Plato baniſh his commonwealth. A man likewiſe may name them falſe pleaders, which doe not acquite themſelues of the charge committed vnto them, and

paſſe it ouer as it were only for a faſhion to be diſpatched of it. The which is alſo to be vnderſtood of ſouldiors ſuſpected of treaſon or failing in ſeruice of importance.
               And for as much as the condition of accuſers and talebearers is much ſupported by curioſitie and babling, and thereby hath great alliance with enuie and malice, and is engendred through idlenes and folly. I haue placed thoſe curious men in the ſame rank, which deſire ſo earneſtly to knowe the imperfections of an other. And ſuch ſhould doe very much for thēſelues, if they would beſtow that ſame deſire vpon their owne faults to amend them,Curious perſons. ſhutting their windowes & lopeholes that looke vpō their neighbour, to the end they may haue better ſunne, and more holeſome winde from ſome other part, and thereby better informe thēſelues of the priuate gouernment of their owne familie, and of matters fitter for them to knowe. They ſhall finde enough at home to paſſe awaye their time withal, without reſēbling the Lady faries, that ſome ſay do neuer vſe the aide of their eies but abroad, & out of their owne houſes. It was neuer lawfull for ſtage players among the Turiens to talke of any citizen, except he were either an adulterer or curious. And by the law of Locres, if any man cōming out of the countrey, ſhould aske, what newes were ſturring, he was by and by greatly fined, to the end curioſitie mought not haue too much place.Anthony. Sundrie write that Antonie the Emperour, going one daye to the houſe of one Ouilius a Senator, demaunded of him howe it was poſsible for him to recouer ſo great ſtore of Pillers of Porphire, to whome hee made aunſwere, that when you enter into an other mans houſe, you muſt learn to bee deafe, and dumme. The which the Emperour tooke in very good parte. And as wee feare thoſe windes which blowe about our eares our clothes, and cuſtomers & farmers when they prie too neere into ſmal traſh and priuate buſines, ſo ought euery one to looke to ſuch curious perſons, and when they once accoſt thē, to anſwere them that the retreate is ſounded, & the hens haue eſpied the Kite, and ſo ſhift frō them as ſoone as they may be able. For nothing can enter into their eares but what euill ſo euer they can heare, like vnto cupping glaſſes, which draweth nothing from the skinne but the naughtie bloud that is within it,
                     Eccleſ. 21.21 and manie times they interprete all to the worſt. Eccleſiaſticus admoniſhed vs not without great cauſe, to take heede of beeing ouercurious in matters ſuperfluous and ſayth: that A foole will peepe in at a doore into the houſe, but he that it well nurtered will ſtande without.
                  
And S. Paule in the ende of his ſeconde Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians, and in his firſt to Timothie,
                  Li. 10 de confeſsi. blameth ſuch as are curious. S. Auguſtine teacheth vs to change this curioſitie, into a care to amend our life, and to knowe that which appertayneth vnto our ſaluation: and Tertullian wrote that it ought to take no place at all with vs, ſince that Ieſus Chriſt was manifeſted vnto vs in the goſpell. And according to the Greeke prouerbe alleadged by Cicero, each man ought to buſie himſelfe in the art which he knoweth, and in his owne vocation. Of this vice Bartole writeth vpon the lawe, Doli mali de Nouatio. nu. 5.
                     
                        Tertullian. Voyages into farre countries.
                     Death of Ariſtotle. Death of Pleny.
                     
                     Remedies againſt curioſitie.
                   
                  chap. 17. I could here impute to curioſitie a great part of the art of nauigation, and voyages into farre countryes, whence nothing is brought home but ſtrange cuſtomes and corruption of manners: in like ſort the death of Ariſtotle not being able to comprehende the ſecrete of Euripus, nor why the ſea in the ſtraight of Negrepont euery 24. houres, flowed and ebbed apace 7. times: and of Plinie ſmothered in the flames and vapors of Montgibel, and the hereſies of ſundry other perſons. And that we may the better keepe our ſelues from ſinning herein, wee muſt accuſtome our ſelues not to be too muche inquiſitiue after matters that are lawefull, nor make account of inuenters and coyners of newes. As Phocion aunſwered vppon the brute of Alexanders death:Phocion. deliberate of your affayres: for if the newes bee true to daye, then will they be true to morrowe.Socrates. The aunſwere which Socrates made, to him which aſked him what the worlde was, ſeemeth worthy to be here remembred: that euer ſince he came to any iudgement, hee applyed his time to ſearch his owne ſelfe, thereby to knowe himſelfe the better: which as yet he could not attayne vnto, and when he ſhould then would hee imploye himſelfe to other thinges which might ſerue him for nought, or not import him ſo much. He was wont likewiſe to ſay,Geometry & Arithmetike. that it was enough to learne ſo much geometrie, as mought make him knowe, and maintayne his owne lande from his neighbours: and ſo much arithmeticke as to keepe the account of his owne money, moueables, and marchandiſe. And in the auncient time they were greatly ſeaſed, which vnprofitably conſumed their braine, in the ſuperfluous ſearch of matters buried in obſcure darkeneſſe, vncertaine, and friuolous.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Flatterers.
               
                  
                  WE haue before declared how neceſſary a matter it is,Flatterers. for one to haue neere unto him ſuch entire friendes as will always tell him the truth without flattery. For flatterers as S. Auguſtine ſayth, do poyſon mens vnderſtanding, and ſtill driue them into further errour, making of a Therſites an Achilles, and of a little flie, an Elephant, hauing no other ſcope in the world but deceite. And that which yeeldeth vnto them ſo large a fielde is ſelfe loue, and ouer winning of ones ſelfe, which cleane taketh away right iudgement,Selfe loue blinde and is blind in regarde of what it loueth, except it fall out among ſuch as haue of long time beene accuſtomed and taugh, more to eſteeme honeſtie, then that which naturally ſpringeth vp with it. Plato his followers would euer counterfeit his high ſholders, Ariſtotles his ſtammering, Alexanders his double chinne and ſhrilnes of ſpeech, & the Poet Ennius, his drunkennes. And in the time of Tiberius the Emperour,Tiberius a flatterer ſayde vnto him, that ſince his pleaſure was that euery free citie ſhould be free of ſpeech, a man ought not to be ſilent in that which he knewe would prooue profitable: and after he had prepared ſundry mens eares readie to giue him hearing, he began in this ſort. Hearker O Caeſar, wherein we finde our ſelues agreeued with thee, and there is no man which dareth openly to tell thee thereof. It is for that thou makeſt no accont of thy ſelfe, but abandoneſt thy owne perſon, and affficteſt thy body with the continuall care and trauaile which thou takeſt for vs, neuer yeelding vnto thy ſelfe thy dewe reſt, eyther by daye, or night. And as he went on further with the ſame diſcourſe, one cryed out. The libertie which this man vſeth will cauſe him to die, other ſayde he will marre the Emperour. Princes haue alwayes beene ſubiect to flatterers: for as the bigger the tree is, the mor fat there is for wormes to remayne in,Princes ſubiect to flatterers ſo the more wealth a man is of, the more is he ſought of flatterers, which addreſſe themſelues to that part of the ſoule which is moſt vnreaſonable. The Emperours Auguſtus, Titus, Niger, Alexander Seuerus, Frederic the ſeconde, and ſundry other helde them in great hatred:Auguſtus. yea Auguſtus being come into the Theater,
                  Flatterers banished the courts of princes. when one that was preſent cryed out, O good and iuſt Lord, ſhewed himſelfe highly diſpleaſed therewith, and forbad that any ſhould call him any more Lord, as Sueton writeth. And Philip ſurnamed Gods gift, Conſtantine and ſundry other, baniſhed them their courtes, as the very ruyne and

plague of Princes: and at Athenes they were put to death. A wiſe Abbot wrote of Charles the 3. that aboue all things he tooke heede, that flattering courtiers ſhould not rauiſh from himſelf, the fauour of his benefits: as they are whō they terme ſellers of ſmoke. For beſides the miſchiefe which they worke, they ſwarue with all change of fortune, & leaue men as lyce do a dead carkas, or flyes an empty chychen.Iouinian. And Iouinian the Emperour compared thē to the ebbe and flowing of the ſea,Ageſilaus. and ſaid that they only adored the rich robes of Princes Ageſilaus K. of the Lacedemonians was wont to ſay that they were far more dangerous then either theeues or murtherers. And Iſocrates,
                  Iſocrates. & ſince his time K. Alphonſus were wont to ſaye that of all miſcheifes,K. Alphonſus.
                   that were poſsible to happen to a Prince, the greateſt was, when he gaue eare to flatterers: & counſelled thē to ſhun thē like fire,
                     Hoſ. 7.3. plague, & wolues. The which the Prophet Hoſea cōfirmeth, and Salomon in his Prouerbes.Iulian. The Emperour Iulian, being one day highly cōmended by his courtiers, for that he was ſo good a Iuſticer, had reaſon to ſay, that if thoſe prayſes had proceeded frō any mens mouthes, who had durſt cōdemne, or miſlike his actions, whē they ſhuld be contrary therunto, then had he had occaſion to haue eſteemed thereof.Dion. Quintus curſius. 
                  Dion attributed the hatred, which was conceiued againſt Iulius Caeſar, & his very deth to flatterers. And Q. Curſius ſheweth that great ſegneuries & kingdomes, lie by that means more deſolate then by wars.Vopiſcus. 
                  Vopiſcus ſetteth down flatterie, as the principall cauſe that corrupteth Princes.Philip de Comines. And Philip de Comines, rendreth the reaſon thereof to be, for that Princes do lightly ouerwin too much of thēſelues, & of thoſe whō they find agreeable vnto their humor. One of Alexander his lieuetenantes on a time wrote vnto him,Alexander. that he had in his gouernmēt a boy of incōparable beautie, & that if it ſo liked him he wold ſend him vnto him: He wrote back vnto him, O accurſed & miſcheuous caytife, what haſt thou euer knowen in me that thou ſhuldſt thus dare to flatter me by ſuch pleaſures? Likewiſe hauing on a time vnderſtood, that one with whō he ran a race, had ſuffred him to win the wager, by his ſwiftnes, he grew maruelous angry:Dioniſius. contrary to Dioniſius of Siracuſa the elder who ſent Philoxenes the Poet to the gallowes, with ſuch as were condēned to die, becauſe he wuld not flatter him nor yeeld vnto him in Poeſie. For as Ariſtotle declareth in the 1. booke of his Politiques, Tyrants greatly take pleaſure in being flattered,Tyrants delighted vvith flattery. & fauour the wicked. Some are of opinions that flatterers are far worſe thē falſe witneſſes or falſe coyners, becauſe they infect the vnderſtāding. And Antiſthenes iudged

thē more dangerous then rauens,Plato: for that they do but deuoure the bodies of ſuch as are dead. And Plato in Menedemus calleth them inchanters, ſorcerers, & poyſoners. Theopompus & Atheneus witnes, that the Theſſaliens cleane raſed a citie of the Melians, becauſe it was named Flattery. One demāded of Sigiſmonde how he could endure flatterers about him?Sigiſmonde. he anſwered that he knew not how he gaue eare vnto thē, of his owne nature hating thē. For albeit that they cleane ouerturne & ruine kingdoms, yet haue they cōmonly better entertainment then plaine dealing or vertue. As Alexander ſaide that he loued better the idolatry of Epheſtion, thē the ſincerity of Clitus.
                  Seneca. And Seneca his book natural. quaeſt. writeth, that flattery is of that nature that it euer pleaſeth though it be reiected, and in the end maketh it ſelfe to be receiued. Thales, other ſay Pittacus being demanded of all beaſts which was the moſt cruell, anſwered that among Princes the flatterer. Phocion ſaid to K. Antipater,
                  Phocion. 
                  Thou canſt not haue me both for thy friend and flatterer. Atheneus & ſundry other aucthors do impute Alexander his faults & changes, his delicatenes, drunkennes,Alexander. diſſolutnes, & the murthers which he cōmitted to his flatterers: he remained a time without buriall, & his conqueſts occupied by ſtrangers, after the maſſacre of ſuch as were neereſt vnto him. The which ought to mooue vs to caſt off that opinion which we holde of our ſelues, & ſo to conſider of our imperfections & faults intermingled amōg our actions,Remedy againſt flattery that we ſuffer not our ſelues to be abuſed by flatterers, & as a man would ſay make litter of our ſelues for their pleaſure. For they transforme thēſelues into all ſhapes (as the Polepus & Cameleon) that they may pleaſe. And it was not amiſſe ſayd of him, that the flatterers of Princes doe reſemble thoſe which infect, and taint a cōmon ſpring, & which put out the eyes of the guide, & are the occaſion of the ſubiects harme,No man ſo peſtilent as the flatterers. as the wiſeman neere a Prine is the cauſe of the vniuerſall wealefare. Other haue ſayd that there is no kinde of man more peſtilent, nor which ſooner marred youth, then the flatterer, preſenting an ineuitable baite of pleaſure, wherewith they are deceiued. And if the ſayde youth looke not well about them, and hold a hard hand ouer their appetites, it is quickly entrapped: and they are among Princes like fowlers which take birdes in their ſnares by counterfeyting of their call.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXIX. That enuie is a miſerable lye, and of the meanes to remedy it.
               
                  
                  All chriſtians are one body where of Chriſt is the heade
                  FOr as much as all Chriſtians are members of one ſelfe ſame body, whereof Ieſus Chriſte our ſauiour is the head, thoſe giftes and graces which each one hath perticularly receyued at Gods handes, are for the ornament, pleaſure, and profitte of all: as beautie and the agilitie of one of the members of the bodie, is common to all the reſte, which are diſtinguiſhed, and ſeparate, each one hauing a particular office for their mutuall weale. And in that the members doe ſo knit and ioyne themſelues togither, it is not accounted of their free accorde, but as a ſatisfaction dewe by the lawe of nature. So doeth neyther the foote, nor the hande enuie one the other, though the one be adorned with ringes, & the other be at reſt, but as Hipocrates & Galien wrote, there is a kinde of diuine conſent, and accorde, betwixt all the members of the body. And the very trewe badge to diſcerne a Chriſtian by is mutuall loue, the which Tertullian named the Sacrament of fayth,Chriſtian loue and the treaſure of a Chriſtian name. And as the holy ſcripture teacheth vs, we are not to our ſelues, but to God, who moſt freely beſtoweth all thinges vpon vs, to the ende we ſhould impart the ſame vnto our neighbour. And we ought to eſteeme, whatſoeuer any man poſſeſſeth, not to happen vnto him as by chaunce or fortune, but thorough the diſtribution of him,
                     Mal. 2.10. who is the ſoueraine mayſter, diſpoſer, and Lorde of all. And as it is written in Malachie, Haue we not all one father? Hath not one God made vs? VVhy doe wee tranſgreſſe euerie one agaynſt his brother, and breake the couenaunt of our fathers? And it was wiſely ſet downe by an auncient father, that vppon whatſoeuer wee poſſeſſe we ought to engraue this title, It is the gift of God. And S. Paul wrote to the Corinthians,
                  1. Cor. 6.20 Gal. 3.15. that Loue enuieth not, and if ye bite and deuour on an other, take heede leaſt yee be conſumed one of an other. Notwithſtanding whoſoeuer he be that is already poſſeſſed and repleniſhed with this miſcheuous vice of enuie,Enuie. he violateth the diſpenſation of God, & is himſelfe mightily afflicted at the proſperity & good of his neighbour, whereas he ought to haue reioyſed thereat, as though hee had beene partaker thereof: and euen as if hee were greeuouſlie payned in the eyes, he is alwayes offended, not able to abide any cleareneſſe or light, but gnaweth & conſumeth himſelfe as the ruſt doth yron.Socrates. This moued Socrates to terme this vice the filth, ſlime & impoſtume of the ſoule, and a perpetuall torment to him in whom

it abideth, a venum, poyſon or quicke ſiluer, which conſumeth the marow of the bones, taking away all pleaſure of the light, of reſt, & of meate. And the wiſe man in his prouerbs writeth,
                     Pro. 14.30. Iob 5. Eccle. 30.24. & 31. that enuie is the rotting of the bones, and in Iob, that it ſlaieth the idiote, and in Eccleſiaſticus, that it ſhortneth the life, and there is nothing worſe then the enuious man. And in the Pro. that he ſhalbe filled with pouerty, & through enuie man is made incōpatible, And Plutarke writeth that it filleth the body, with a wicked & pernitious diſpoſition, and charmeth it ſelfe bewitching & darkning the body, the ſoule, & the vnderſtanding. For this cauſe Iſocrates wrote to Enagoras, that enuie was good for nothing, but in that it tormēted thē which were poſſeſſed therwith, which euil, the enuious do no whit at al feele, but contrariwiſe make it an argument of their vertue. As Themiſtocles in his youth ſaid, that as then he had neuer done any thing worthy of memory, in that there was no man whom he mought perceiue did any ways enuie him. And Thucidides was of opinion that a wiſe man was euer content to be enuied. This paſsion doth often engender enmitie & miſlike, which is flatly forbidden of God except it be againſt ſinne.Remedie againſt enuie. This was the very cauſe why the Philoſophers did giue vs councell, to praiſe our enemies when they did wel, and not to be angry when any proſperitie befell them, to the ende we mought thereby be the further off from enuiyng the good fortune of our friends. And can there be any exerciſe in this worlde, able to carie a more profitable habite to our ſoules, then that which cleane taketh away this peruerſe emulation of ielouſie, and this inclination to enuie, a ſiſter germaine to curioſitie, reioyſing in the harme of an other? And yet this is ſtill tormented with an others good. Both which paſsions proceede from a wicked roote, and from a more ſauage, and cruell kinde of paſsion, to wit malice. And not without cauſe did Seneca ſtande in doubt, whether enuie were a more deteſtable or deformed vice. And Bion on a time ſeeing an enuious man ſadde, demanded of him whether any euill had betide him, or good to an other.Deſcription of enuie. Neither was enuie amiſſe deſcribed by a Poet, imagined to be in a darke caue, pale, leane, looking a ſquint, abounding with gall, her teeth blacke, neuer reioyſing but at an others harme, ſtill vnquiet, and carefull, and continually tormenting her ſelfe. And the ſame Poetes haue written, that the enuious were ſtill tormented by Megera, one of the Eumenides, and furies, Megarein likewiſe in Greeke is as much to ſaye as to enuie. We ought then to conſider that a great part of theſe thinges which we commonly enuie, is attayned

vnto by diligence, prudence, care & vertuous actions; to the end we ſhould exerciſe, & ſharpen our deſire to honor, & ſeeke by al means to attaine to the like good,Agis K of Lacedemon. without enuie. Some report, howe Agis K. of Lacedemon, when it was tolde him that he was greatly enuyed, by his competitors, made aunſwere. They are doubly plagued: for both their owne lewdnes doth greatly torment them, and beſides are greeued at that good which they ſee in me & mine. For enuie, both maketh the body to be very ill diſpoſed, & chaungeth the colour of the countenance, therefore was it termed the wiche & feuer hepticke of the ſpirite.Ariſtotle. Pliny And as Ariſtotle & Pliny wrote, that in the mountaine of Care, and in Meſopotamia, there is a kind of ſcorpions, and ſmall ſerpents,The nature of certaine Scorpions & ſerpents. which neuer offende, or harme ſtrangers, but yet do deadly ſting the natural inhabitants of the place ſo enuie neuer doth exerciſe it ſelfe, but vpon ſuch as it moſt frequenteth, and is moſt priuate with. And moſt wiſely was it ſaide of the auncient fathers, that the enuious man is fedde with the moſt daintie meat, for he doth continually gnawe on his owne heart, and ſhorten his life,Hannibal. and often times is the cauſe of great ſedition and ruyne. Hannibal often times complained that he was neuer vanquiſhed by the people of Rome,
                  Belliſare. but by the enuie of the Senate of Carthage, as alſo did that great Captaine Belliſare, beeing thereby brought to extreme beggerye. I doe not exempt hence, their fault who, when they haue attayned to any ſcience, or perticular knowledge, that might be profitable, and ſeruiceable to the common wealth, will neuer impart the ſame to any: but chooſe rather to die, and let ſuch a gift receiued from God, bee buried with them, defrauding their ſucceſſours and poſteritie thereof, who ſhall in the end receiue dewe chaſtiſement therefore: the only cauſe of the loſſe of ſo many and excellent inuentions.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XXXX. How pride, ambition, vaine boaſting, and preſumption are lying, and how all paſsions leade cleane contrary to what they pretende, and who may be termed men of humilitie, and of the meanes which contayneth vs therein.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     ide.
                  DIuers haue ſet down two impediments as chiefe hinderers of the truth, to wit, deſpaire, & preſumption. And the wiſe Bion ſaide that pride kept men frō learning, & profit. And Eccleſiaſticus termeth it the beginning of ſinne. And Philo in his booke of the contemplatiue

life ſheweth, that the ſpring of pride is lying, as the truth is of humbleneſſe. And Ariſtotle wrote in his morales,Ariſtotle. that the proud boaſting man, doth faine things to be which indeed are not, or maketh thē appeare greater then they are, wheras the deſebler contrariwiſe doth deny that which is, or doth diminiſh it, but the true mā telleth things as they are indeede, holding a middle place between the preſūptuous & the deſēbler, as we haue before touched.Auguſtine. S. Auguſtine ſhewed how pride was the beginning of al miſcheif: & vpō S. Mat. entreting of the words of our ſauiour, he maketh pride the mother of enuie, & ſaieth that if one be able to ſuppreſſe it, the daughter ſhalbe in like ſort. And in the 56. Epiſtle which he worte to Dioſcorides he ſayth, As Demoſthenes the Greeke orator, being demaunded what was the firſt precept of eloquēce, anſwered, to pronounce wel, being demāded what was the 2. anſwered the like, & ſo to the 3. In like ſort ſayth he if I be aſked of the precepts of religion, I will anſwere that the 1.2. and 3. is humilitie.Humilitie. And S. Chryſoſtome in the homely of the perfection of the Goſpell ſayth that the very foundation of our Philoſophie is humilitie. For arrogancy is alwayes accō
                  panied with folly, audacitie, raſhneſſe, inſolencie, & as Plato writeth ſolitarineſſe: as if one would ſaye, that the proude is abandoned of all the world, euer attributing to himſelfe that which is not, neuer meaſuring his will according to his force, hauing much more bragge then matter of woorth. S. Auguſtine compareth him, to a ſhip toſſed with windes without a pylote. And an auncient father writeth, that preſumption is the mother of all vices,Preſumption. & is like vnto a great fire which maketh euery one retyre backe. Wee read in the works of antient Phiſitions, how ſome that were of a melancolicke or ſadde humour, thought their owne ſelues to be ſome ſenceleſſe thing, or beaſt. Ariſtotle and Gallen yeelde vs ſundry examples therof, & how ſome in their own fancies imagining wonderful matters through the illuſions of wandering & tranſported wits, conſtantly affyrmed, that they ſawe, and did that which indeede was not, as he which beleeued al the ſhips that came into the hauē to be his own: and other that thought they ſawe, and heard players vppon a wide ſtage, as Horace writeth. Such are the Proude which delight them ſelues in their owne fooliſh inuentions.
                     Dan. 4.20. There is in Daniel a notable example of Kinge Nabugodonozur, and of Sennacharib that was ſlayne of his owne children, after that the Angell had diſcomfited his armie. And likewiſe of Antiöchus and ſundry other which proueth that moſt true which our ſauiour ſaith, that he which

exalteth himſelfe ſhalbe brought lowe, and he which humbleth him ſelfe ſhalbe exalted. And that which is written in Eccleſiaſticus The beginning of mans pride is to fall away frō God, & to turne away his heart frō his maker.
                  
                     Eccleſ. 10.13. 
                  For pride is the originall of ſinne, and he that hath it ſhall powre out abhominatiō till at laſt he be ouerthrowen. I touch no whit at all here the Licantropie,
                  Licantropie. whē as ſundry certainly perceiue a change of humane ſhape, their minde and reaſon remayning in their accuſtomed order, referring my ſelfe to that which many haue written therof. All wits in like ſort that are giuē to preiudice, & opiniōs, iudge otherwiſe then they ought Salomon ſaith in his Prouerbes, that al that are proude in hart,
                  
                     Pro. 16.5. 
                  are an abhomination to the Lord, & that among the proud is nothing but ſtrife, & counſelleth vs not to haunte thē, nor to be too conuerſant with ouer far reaching heads, adding that the pride of a mā ſhall bring him lowe.
                     Ier. 50.32. In Ieremiah God ſayth, The proude ſhall ſtumble & fall, and none ſhal raiſe him vp, & I wil kindle a fire in his cities, and it ſhal deuour al round about him. And in Iſaiah they are ſore threatned, & he ſaith that the magnificence ſhalbe brought low, & that pride deſtroieth all cōmonwealth & ſtates. As alſo in Ezechiel, & in the 1.
                     Tob. 4.13. of Abdias it is writtē, the pride of thy hart hath deceiued thee. And in Tobit, In pride is deſtruction, & much trouble, and in fiercenes is ſcarcitie and great pouertie.
                  K. Philip.
                   The ſonne of Ageſilaus wrote vnto K. Philip, who much gloried in ſome of his victories, that if he meaſured his ſhadow he ſhould find it no greater then it was before the victory. The ſame poore king was ſlaine of one to whom he refuſed to miniſter iuſtice, and hiſtories declare how his ſucceſſors through their diſloyaltie fell into great calamities. And yet was he praiſed amonge the reſt of his vertues, for that one of his people ſaide vnto him 3. times euery morning, to the end he ſhould not waxe too haughtie, Remember thy ſelfe Philip that thou art a man. Theodoſius the Emperour had often times the like warning giuen him by his wife.Theodoſius. Alexander. 
                  Arrian in the 7, of his hiſtorie reciteth, how Alexander demanded of certain wiſe men of the Indies, why as ſoone as they had eſpied him, they ſtamped vpon the ground with their feete; they anſwered him that no man held ought ſauing the ground vpon which he trod, & that they eſteemed him like other men, ſaue only that he came ſo far, to put him ſelfe & other to much more paine, & that when he ſhould die he ſhould enioy no more earth, then of neceſsitie to couer his bodie: but ambition cleane turned him from following of anie good councell, and for a good time was he afterwarde depriued of any buriall. Nicanor, when he went about to aſſayle the Iewes,
                  
ſold them before he came neere them, but in the end he was ouercome: as in like ſort the Marquiſſe of Gaſt in our time, at Ceriſoles,
                  Marquiſs of Gaſt. deuided among his fauorites the ſpoile of the French, and prepared ſundry ropes to lead them priſoners, and to put them to ranſome, and yet in the end his ſelfe was vanquiſhed. Herod glorying in his rayment & the honor which was done him, was ſhortly after eaten vp with wormes. Like vnto this pride was the vanitie of Caligula,
                  Caligula. & of diuers other which muſt in any wiſe haue their feet to be kiſſed. Sigibert found fault with Charlemagne,
                  Charlemagne. becauſe that after he was choſen Emperour he diſpiſed the faſhions of France. For the ſame cauſe was Alexander reprehended. K. Lewys, the 11. was wont to ſay, that whē pride was on horſeback, miſchief & ſhame was on the croper.
                     Alexander. K Lewis 11. Compariſon. And as huſbandmē, rather allow of thoſe eares which bow down, & waxe croked; then ſuch as growe ſtreigh, as thinking leaſt ſtore of graine to be in them, & as it is written that if a ſtone be hunge vpon the bough of a tree to weigh it downe, it ſhall carie the more frute, and as valleys are commonly more fertile then mountaines, and as the more liquor a man putteth into a veſſell the more vayne ayre goeth out, and the emptie hogſheade carrieth a greater ſound then the full; ſo the more that men arme thēſelues with vertue, vanitie, hypocriſie, and lying doth depart, not ſeeking preferment before other but in honeſt actions, and the more that a man ſhall thinke of his vices and imperfections, the more ſhall his wings fall from preſumption. Experience teacheth vs,Mans imbecillity. that infancie is but a fooliſh ſimplicitie, full of lamentations, filthines, and harmes, as it were layde open to a mayne ſea, without a ſterne: and youth but an indiſcreate heate, outragious, blinde, headie, violent, and vaine: mans eſtate, trouble, and vexation of minde, full of repentance, and plunged in care. Olde age a noyſome languiſhing and full of greefe, ſtill feeling the exceſſe of immoderate youth: and all mans life conſumed in teares, trouble, and griefe, where pleaſures are the feuers of the ſpirite, goods tormentes: honours heauie charges: and reſt vnquietneſſe it ſelfe, and to paſſe from one age to an other, is to fall from one miſcheife to an other, drawing towardes death. With good diſcretion did Solon call townes, boroughtes, and villages, the retreates of mans miſeries, full of noyſomneſſe, trauaile, and fortune. And Ariſtotle termeth man to be the diſciple of imbecillitie, of inconſtancie, of ruines, and diſeaſes. All which ought to make vs humble our ſelues. The old prouerbe is common, who knoweth himſelfe beſt, eſteemeth himſelfe

leaſt. For if any man ſeeme to himſelfe that he is ſomewhat, when he is nothing,
                  
                     Gal. 6.3. 
                  he deceiueth himſelfe in his imagination ſayth S. Paul. This is alſo the reaſon why the prophet Abacuc writeth that the iuſt man liueth by faith: and that they which exalt themſelues ſhall haue a fall. Sundry writers make mention of K. Seſoſtris, that he made himſelfe be drawen by foure Kings which he held captiues, and one of them euer vſed to turne his face backwarde, and being demaunded why he did ſo, aunſwered, that in beholding the wheeles, howe the higheſt part became loweſt,Seſoſtris. he remembred the condition of men: with which aunſwere the ſame Seſoſtris became a great deale the more ciuill.Saladin 
                  Saladin after his death, made his ſhirt to be carried at the ende of a launce, and to be cryed that of all the Realmes and riches he had, nowe nothing was left him but that. In ſundry places doth the holy ſcripture, impute this qualitie of pride left to them which diſtruſt in God, and preſume of them ſelues. And would to God ech one would practiſe the exhortation of S. Paule to the Philippians,
                  
                     Phil. 2.2. 
                  To be like minded, hauing the ſame loue, being of one accorde and one iudgement. That nothing be done thorough contention, or vayne glorie, but that in meekeneſſe of minde, euerie one eſteeme other better then himſelfe. Looking not euery man on his owne thinges, but euery man alſo on the thinges of an other man. And to the Romaynes he deſireth them,
                     Rom. 12.10. 
                  to be affectioned to loue one an other with brotherly loue, in giuing honour going one before an other. Herodotus telleth of one Apricus Kinge of Aegypt,
                  Apricus. who was ſo inſolent that hee would ſaye that there was neyther God nor man could abate him, or diſpoſſeſſe him of his kingdome: but ſhortly after Amaſis put him by it, and hee was ſtrangled by his owne ſubiectes. The like doeth Ouid make mention to befall to one Niob. Goliah was ſlaine by Dauid.
                  Iulius caeſar. 
                  Iulius Caeſar was ſo arrogant, as he would ſay, that it ſhould ſtande for a lawe, whateuer pleaſed him. Other Princes haue had this woorde in their mouth, I will it be ſo, neuer conſidering that their willes ought to bee meaſured by the will of God,The vvill of princes ambitious. iuſtice, and lawes, for the preſeruation of their eſtate, as king Theopompus, and the Emperour Alexander, Seuerus, were woont to ſay, and as wee recited before of Kinge Antigonus, good Princes ought to eſteeme nothing honeſt and lawefull, that is not ſo of his owne nature, and agreeable to the lawes. And as touching ſuch as are ambitious, they neuer doe ought that is entirely pure and neete, but euer in their actions you ſhall diſcerne a kinde of baſtardie, full of faultes diſperſed according to the diuerſitie of the

windes, which driue them forwarde: and neuer meaſuring themſelues, doe dayly commit notorious errours, and ruine themſelues in vndertaking more then they are able, or then is honeſt. Whereupon it is very neceſſarie that the counſell of Eccleſiaſticus be put in practiſe: Seeke not out the things that are too harde for thee,
                  
                     Eccleſ. 3.21. & 23.2. 
                  neyther ſearch the thinges raſhly that are too mightie for thee, and burthen not thy ſelfe aboue thy power, while thou liueſt. Plutarke in the life of Agis,
                  Ixion. applyeth the fable of Ixîon, which was tormented in hell, and of him which found a clowde inſteede of Iuno, to ſuch as are ambitious & vngratefull. And ſo do ſome other refer that which Homer in his Odes reciteth of Syſiphus, who continually rouled the ſtone which he was neuer able to cary to the toppe of the mountaine,Siſiphus. Phaeton. and of Phaëton who would needs guide the horſes of the ſunne. It hath bin an old prouerbe, that he which aduaunceth himſelfe further then he ought, receiueth more thē he would. They reſēble the fiſherman in Theocrites, who ſatisfied his hunger with dreames of gold And with very great reaſon may a man impute, all ſects, hereſies, & diuiſions,Hereſies cō
                     bats and vvarres imputed to ambition fooliſh enterpriſes, combats, and vnneceſſarie warres, to the ambition of vnquiet & mouing ſpirits, which neuer content thēſelues in their vocation: for this cauſe S. Gregory Nazianzene wrote to Procopius, that he neuer ſaw any good iſſue come of any coūcel or Synode, by reaſon of ambitiō, which did more impare controuerſie thē amend thē. And Ariſtotle in the 2. of his Politiques ſheweth, that the greateſt part of faults which men cōmit proceedeth frō ambition or couetouſnes: as there are infinite examples of factions, which haue long time endured in France, Englād, & Italy. Heſiodus writeth that the vnwiſe do not vnderſtand that the halfe is more thē the hole. For this cauſe it often chaunceth that they loſe what euer they haue gotten & which peaceably before they enioyed,The ambitious often looſe vvhat they get. through a gredines of vndewly getting frō other, as we ſee it fell out, & ſo doth it euery day to a number, which haue not retyred themſelues in dewe time, not being able to ſtaye the courſe of their fortune. The which in the ende Antiochus full well vnderſtoode: for after that he was vanquiſhed, and that the Romanes had taken from him the prouince of Aſia, hee was wont to ſay that he eſteemed himſelfe much bounde vnto them, for the learning which they had taught him, and for their gratiouſnes and courteſie, which they had vſed towards him: for when I enioyed (ſayth he) ſo large a circuit of countrey I could not content my ſelfe, nor ſet an ende to my ambition, or deſires: but ſince ſuch time as the Romaines haue abrydged my limittes,

they haue ſo gnawen my wings of ambition, that I am more content then I was: and nowe my care needeth not to be ſo great, to gouerne well, my little kingdome which is left, before not beeing able to be ſatisfied. Auguſtus the Emperour ſaid that he wondered how ſo great a king as Alexander,
                  Alexander. who had conquered all Greece, Aegypt, and Aſia, and yet could not be quiet except he mought ſtil be in hande with new buſines continuing war, not conſidering that it was both as great a vertue, & redounded as much to his glory, by wholſome lawes and ordinances, to eſtabliſh the gouernment of a well pacified monarchy, as it was to conquer it. I greatly cōmend the councel of one Democrites,
                  The Councel of Democrites
                   that a man ſhould euer propoſe vnto himſelfe and couet thinges poſsible, and be contented with the preſent, and with that portion and meaſure, which it hath pleaſed God to yeelde vnto him, and to faſhion himſelfe according to that facultie and meane which is giuen vnto him, neuer coueting the manuage of any greater affayre then appertayneth to his owne eſtate, as the Pſalmiſt, and S. Peter exhorteth vs. They haue alwayes in like ſort beene highly eſteemed of, which haue ſtayde the violence of their deſires, and moderated the vnbrideled fierceneſſe of their ambition,To moderate ambition. by prudence, and will with regarde of honeſtie. As we reade of Lucullus, Diocleſian, Curius Cincinnatus, Scipio, and ſundrie other. The very ſame moued Traian to write to Plutarke, that he did more admire the contempt, which the ſaide Cincinnatus, Scipio,
                  Diocleſian. and M. Porcus made of great eſtate and wealth, then he did at their victories. The ſaide Diocleſian, aunſwered him which egged him forward agayne to reenter into the Empire, that hauing once eſcaped the plague,Pro. 28.25. hee woulde no more drinke poyſon, and was contented to become a gardener. Concerning ſuch as are proude in heart, Salomon ſayth that they ſtirre vp ſtrife. For as Saint Paule ſayth: VVe haue nothing which we haue not receiued from God, nor wee muſt not glorie in our wiſedome, in our ſtrength, nor in our riches, as Ieremie exhorteth vs.1. Cor. 4.7. Ieremy 9.23. The miſerable ende of ſuch as haue vaunted in their ſtrength, is fully ſet downe before our eyes, in Exodus of Pharao, of Abſolon, of Roboam, of Ieſabel, and of Beneadad. 1. Rings 14.19. and 20. of the K. of Aſsiria, and of Babilon, of Nabugadonozor Daniel 3. and 4. and in ſundry other places as well ſcripture as hiſtories. Plato, or rather better Eccleſiaſticus and S. Auguſtine haue taught vs, that experience ſufficiently ſheweth vnto ſuch as take heede therof, that all paſsions, concupiſcences, and greefes of the ſoule, are for the moſt part accompanied with inconueniences, which in ſhewe a

man endeuoureth to ſhunne by them, & yet they lead to the contrarie: as the vice of ambition is followed with diſhonour,Paſsions leade to the contrary. diſſoluteneſſe & pleaſure bringeth griefe and repentance, delicateneſſe & daintineſſe breedeth trauaile, ſtubborneſſe contentions with loſſe, & vnſhamefaſtnes, and while they ſeeke to ſhunne blame, fall into further infamie, peril & enmitie: and for fear of refuſing one that is importunate, ſuſtaine great loſſes and ſuites. Hee likewiſe which vnconſiderately maketh a promiſe, is oft cōſtrained to break it: & to poſſeſſe goods which one hath not deſerueth, giueth occaſion as Demoſthenes ſaith, to commit many follies,The laſt perfection is ſubiect to alteration. & to become vnfortunate. As alſo Hippocrates ſaid, that it is moſt perilous, whē a good diſpoſition aryueth at his laſt point; becauſe whatſoeuer is in the laſt perfection and excellencie is ſubiect to change, by reaſon of the feeblenes & imbecillitie of the bodie. And our life is a pilgrimage vnſtable and vnconſtant, and we containe within our ſelues the matter of all diſeaſes. And not without cauſe did Thales the Mileſian call vice, the moſt harmefull matter of the world;Vice. becauſe where that is, it loſeth all, and deſtroyeth what euer was before buylded. God reprocheth in Iſaiah: that they haue kindled a fire,
                  
                     Iſaiah. 50.11 
                  and are compaſſed about with ſparkes, and haue walked in the light of their feete, and in the ſparkes that they haue kindled.
                  
                     Wiſd. 11.13. And it is written in the booke of wiſedome, that wherewith a man ſinneth, with the ſame ſhall he be puniſhed. And S. Auguſtine teacheth vs, that euerie diſordinate appetite, carrieth his owne paine, as wee ſee ſundry examples of ſuch, which while thorough murther, vſurie, falſhood, thefte, or other vilanie, they ſeeke to enrich themſelues, do contrariwiſe loſe what wealth ſoeuer they before had, beſides the paine, and puniſhment which they endure. This is that which Salomon ſayeth,
                     Pro. 10.24. & 14.12. that what the wicked feareth ſhall befall vnto them. And that there is a waye which ſeemeth righteous to a man, but the iſſues thereof are the wayes of death. And it was a common ſaying of olde, that the proude fatt themſelues with vaine hope, which by litle choketh them, as water doeth to him which hath the dropſie, or naughtie fat to mans bodie, or the greaſe of an horſe, when it is melted. I will not ſpeake of paſtors, which haue only the bare name,Paſtors in name. neuer executing ought which apertaineth to their charge, employing thoſe blames which the holy ſcripture giueth them: and yet no man would haue a ſeruant ignorant of the charge, which is required of him.Hipocriſie. It were not impertinent to diſcourſe here, of the hypocriſie and lyinges, which is found in all eſtates and officers which acquite not themſelues

faithfully, were it not for feare of being too tedious. Wee may ſay, as that great Captaine Marcellus did vnto his ſouldiors, & alſo Xerxes to his, I ſee manie bodies, countenances & garmentes of Romanes, but no Romane. And howe farre are we eſtranged from our principall, and important profeſsion of Chriſtianitie? Rightly may they caſt vs in the teeth, as God by his Prophet Malachie did vnto the Iewes:
                     Mal. 6.6 
                  If then I be a father, where is my honor? if I bee a Master,
                  Faith vvithout vvorkes is deade 
                  where is my feare? conſidering that in vaine doth man boaſt of faith without good woorkes, from which it is no leſſe ſeperate then heate is from the Sunne. and the ſhadowe from the bodie as wee haue aboue declared.VVho are to be named men. For wee ought not to terme ſuch men (as S. Chriſoſtom moſt excellently ſaide) which haue hands, a head, feete, and ſome reaſon, but ſuch as remaine in the trueth and feare of God, and haue a liuely faith working by charitie. As Salomon ſheweth in the ende of Eccleſiastes ſaying:
                     Eccleſ. 12.13 
                  Feare God and keepe his commaundements, for this is the whole duetie of man. Euen the greateſt part of the Philoſophers haue maintained, that mans felicitie conſiſted not in this life but in another, and that his ſcope is to referre this life to the knowledge and ſeruice of God to enioy all bliſſe eternally in an other. But nowe in this olde age of the worlde, of all good things there reſteth nought, but the name, and a vaine ſhadowe.Remedies againſt pride. Nowe that wee may bee deliuered from a vice ſo pernitious as pride is, wee muſt fall into due conſideration of our owne vanitie, our faultes, and imperfections, and remember that wee are but filth, wormes, duſt and putrifaction, as the Pſalmiſt ſaith, & as Aug. vppon Iohn ſayth, verie diuels, and Satans, except God of his mercie ſhewe pitie vppon vs. The Birth-day is in Greeke called Genethliae, the beginning of trauels, and death Thanatas, thence vp to God. And Menander ſaide, that life and miſerie were two twinnes, which encreaſe are nouriſhed and liue togither. Ariſtotle alſo vppon the queſtion which was propounded vnto him, what man was aunſwered that he was the example of imbecillitie, pray of time, ſport of fortune and enuie, the image of vnconſtancie, & ſeate of phlegme, choler, and rumes. And Solon called Cities, the retreates of miſeries, teares, and ſorrows. The which is more plainly ſet foorth vnto vs, both in holie and prophane hiſtories. Some haue compared man to a bubble made of a droppe of raine, and to the dreame of a ſhadowe. It is ſayde of the Pecocke, when hee ſpreadeth abroade his goodly plumes,The nature of the Pacocke. if hee looke downe vppon his feete, hee ſhutteth them in again for ſhame, and remaineth

abaſt: ſo wee conſidering the excellencie of our ſoule in his owne nature, haue great cauſe to boaſt in God which hath giuen it vnto vs, and through his bountie hath vouchſafed to honour vs farre aboue all other creatures: but looking backe howe this nature hath beene corrupted, and eſloyned from her firſt originall, there remaineth nought to vs but ſhame. And if there bee any good in vs, it proceedeth from the liberalitie of God, by whome if wee bee not continually ſupported, wee ſhall fall into all miſerie and miſchiefe.All good proceedeth from god. Let vs likewiſe conſidered howe manye great perſonages, fearing to bee too much exalted, haue refuſed Empires, Kingdomes, Biſhoprickes, Abbayes, and other dignities. And haue accounted themſelues happie, when God hath done them the honour to humble them, and bring them vnto him through ſundrie afflictions. Philo the Iewe writeth, that the occaſion whie Leuen was forbid vnto the Iewes at the feaſt of Eaſter,VVhy leuen vvas forbid vnto the Ievves. was to teache them to haue a greate care to keepe themſelues from pryde and preſumption, into which they fell which helde any good opinion of their owne ſelues, and puffeth themſelues vp therewith, as the dowe is with the leuen.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XLI. That Painting is Lying.
               
                  FOr as much as ſinceritie, ſimplicitie, roundneſſe, and trueth,Paynting & diſguiſing. are proper to ſuch as are vertuous, and all diſguyſing hath beene accounted odious; It is not without cauſe that ſundrye haue blamed and found fault with paynting, which ſerueth not but to delight ſuch as are licentious, and proceedeth as Sainct Ciprian and Chriſoſtome wrote, from the Diuel a lyar, and deceiuer. And if Saint Peter,
                  1. Pet. 3 Tit. 2. and Saint Paul exhort weomen not to haue their appareling outwarde, as with broydered hayre, and golde put about, or in putting on of apparell, but what is comely to weomen making profeſsion of the trueth through good woorkes, much leſſe will they allowe of paynting. God in Iſaiah reprehendeth the daughters of Sion, becauſe they minſed as they went, and decked themſelues too curiouſly.
               
                  Among other things he ſayeth: that becauſe they were haughtie and walked with outſtretched neckes,
                  
                     Iſaiah 3 
                  and with wandring eyes walking & minſing as they went, & making a tinckling with their feete, therefore ſhall the Lord make the heds of the daughters of Zion bald, & diſcouer their ſecrete partes, and in that day ſhall take away the ornament of the ſlippers, and the calles, and the round tires, the ſweete balles & the braſſelets, and the bonnets, the tyres of the head, and the ſloppes, & the headbands, and the tablets, and the eare rings: the rings & the mufflers, the costly apparel, & the vailes, & the wimples, and the criſping pinnes, and the glaſſes, and the fine linnen, and the hoods, and the launes, and the men ſhal fall by the ſworde for ſuffring ſuch pride of women.
                  
                     Deut. 22.3. In Deuteronomie it is written: The woman ſhall not weare that which pertaineth voto the man, neither ſhall a man put on a womans raiment. And we muſt glorifie God in our bodies, and in our ſpirites,
                  1. Cor. 6.20. 
                  which are his, and the temples of the holie Ghoſt (as S. Paul ſayth) and take heede of giuing offence to any. It is without all doubt, that there chaunceth ſundrie great imperfections to children, when weomen with childe goe too ſtraite laced. Tertullian in his booke of the rayments of weomen, would haue them ſimple and differing from common maydens, and ſuch as were nice and drunken. S. Ciprian, and S. Ambroſe vppon the like argument, and S. Chriſoſtome vpon the 12. to the Hebrewes, forbid painting to women, and ſay that they giue occaſion of offence, and cauſe men to ſinne, and wallow in the ſtye of the brickle vanities of this world. And Sueton telleth how Auguſtus called gorgious garments,Gorgious raiments. markes of pryde, and neſtes of riotouſnes. And many olde doctors of the Church, haue greatly complained againſt ſuch as curle their haire, and aboue all things reproued the vſe of wearing of perwigs. And Clement Alexandrin writeth,Lib. 3. praed. c. p. 2.
                   that as a man would iudge one to be yll at eaſe, which weareth a plaſter on his face, or one that hath beene ſcourged to haue beene puniſhed by lawe, ſo doeth painting betoken a diſeaſed ſoule marked with adulterie, as Iezabel was founde fault with and puniſhed. And Platina reprehendeth Pope Paul the ſecond. The auncient fathers called it a corruption and ſtaine, if many colours were mingled togither. And Homer ſpeakinge of a peece of yuorie that was coloured red, writeth, that it was poluted with a ſtaine. A man may rather ſay ſo by ones face. As alſo Horace called Lentiſcus a lyar,Archidamus. becauſe he blacked his haire. And K. Archidamus tolde an Orator which had done the like, that he carryed a lye in his head,K. Philip.
                   & therefore could ſay nothing well. K. Philip ſaid as much to one of Antipaters friends, from whome he tooke

away his office, after that he vnderſtood that he curled his haire,Mariadge vvithout doure. & beard, telling him that he which in his haire was falſ & a liar, could hardly be loyal in any good affaire. This is the reaſon why Lycurgus forbad al kind of painting, & artificial garniſhing to be vſed in the citie of Sparta: ordaining in like ſort that maidens ſhould be giuen im marriage without dower, to the ende that for want of money none ſhould remaine vnmarried, nor any ſought for their goods,
                     Sparta a vvel gouerned citie. but reſpecting the maners of the maiden, eche one ſhould make election of vertue, in her whom he would marrie. A Lacedemonian being demanded by a ſtranger, why there was no lawe made againſt adulterers? Why ſaid he, ſhould there be any, ſince all riches, delicatenes, al painting, & outward garniſhing is forbidden in Sparta, & ſhame to do yll, honeſtie & obedience there hath al the authoritie, & preheminence. And if a painter would take it greeuouſly, & for a great iniury offred vnto him, if any other ſhould adde any colours to the picture whiche had finiſhed, eſpecially vpon the counterfaict of Princes, which themſelues would hold for a great contempt, & by the ciuil law,L. ſiſtatuas.
                   the child may haue an action of the caſe againſt him which ſhal deface the portract of his father. Wee may wel imagin how much it diſpleaſeth God, if by painting we ſeek to correct his work, & pollute his temple as S. Ierom writeth in an Epiſtle to Laeta, & againſt Heluidie. And S. Chriſostom vpon the ninth of S. Matth. addeth, that it maketh vs reſemble ſtrumpets, & haſteneth wrinkles before old age. Titus Liuius telleth of one Veſtale Postumea,
                  Poſthumia veſtale. that ſhe was accuſed vnder colour of appareling her ſelf too netely. S. Peter would haue a Chriſtian woman which maketh profeſsiō of godlines, to liue holily, as if ſhe were of a religion wel reformed. And it was excellently wel written by Tertullian, that the force of faith is ſuch, that it is perceiued by mans vnderſtāding,Tertullian. by his countenance, garments, & euery action. And Plato ſaid,Plato: that they which were curious in bedecking of their body, deſpiſed the care of their ſoule. It were not amiſſe, if euery one that were curious were ſerued, as a Treaſorer of Dioniſius K. of Sicil was, who bragging to Ariſtippus of the garniſhing of his houſe, & furniture in al reſpects, the ſaid Philoſopher not ſeeing where he might ſpit without marring,Ariſtippus. caſt his phlegme in the face of this Magnifico, telling him that hee ſawe nothing leſſe filthie.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XLII. That Witches, ſouthſayers, ſorcerers, & vſurers, are repleniſhed with lying, & how a man may exempt himſelfe frrm them.
               
                  
                  Southſayers vvitches and aſtrologers.
                  SOuthſayers, Wytches, and Aſtrologers, iudging without the compaſſe of the order of nature, haue alwayes beene deteſted and condemned, thorough the whole courſe of the holie Scripture, in that they durſt foretell of thinges to come: except it were, of that, which they mought make coniecture of, thorough the ſaide order, by long experience, and obſeruations giuen from hande to hande, followinge the ordinarie courſe of the heauen, common rules, and as God hath beene accuſtomed to doe at all times, hauing all in his owne hande, moderatinge and guyding the courſe of heauen, and the iſſues of all enterpriſes: as Pindarus wrote that a good husband ought to foreſee a tempeſt many dayes before: and ſundrie Phyloſophers by ſpeculatiue aſtrologie, haue foretolde the dearth, and plentie of frutes as ſhoulde fall out that yeare, following the ſayde rules and ſignes which haue beene accuſtomed to precede, and when experience aunſwereth to the cauſe. For otherwiſe they are not able to foretell ought without lying, & ayding themſelues with Arte, long experience and reuelation of the diuel, the father of lyes, to whome they haue whollye abandoned themſelues, as S. Auguſtine ſheweth in his booke of the citie of God.
                     Li. 24. c. 11. 
                  Aulus Gellius writeth, that if they foretell any thing that is good, and deceiue thee, thou ſhalt attende them but in vaine. If they threaten thee miſchiefe, and lye, thou art alſo miſerable, fearing in vaine. If they aunſwere thee according as thou feareſt, thou art vnfortunate before it happen. And if they promiſe thee happie ſucceſſe, the attending of that hope will ſo trouble thee, holding thee ſtill in ſuſpence, that that verie hope will take away the flower and fruite of thy ioye.Iudiciall ſcience is but vaine. Ptolome.
                   And this proceeding which dependeth of the variable ſences,of many which obſerue, it is both harde and falſe. And that iudiciall ſcience is but vaine, as Ptolome ſheweth it in his Quadripartite, adding verie wiſely, that the opinions of Aſtrologians are not the decrees of ſoueraigne Iudges. And many yeares paſſe ouer before one ſelfe ſame conſtellation of heauenly bodyes do againe appeare. And the moſt part of the accidents of this worlde being vnfortunate, the knowledge thereof would breede great inconueniences and trauaile.
                     Lib. 3. 
                  Tacitus had reaſon to write, that whatſoeuer dependeth of deſtenie or the diuine ordināce, cannot be auoided, albeit it be foretold. The which opinion Plutarque is likewiſe of in the life

of Hannibal. A man hath enough to doe to digeſt things preſent, without buſying himſelfe with future,Francis marquiſse of Saluſſes. and wee read of great inconueniences that haue enſued too much truſt giuen to Prognoſtications, to which ſome haue attributed the reuolt of Francis Marquiſſe of Saluſſes, both harmfull to him, and all France. And to ſuch prognoſticators ſwallowed vp in the gulfe of lying,Icarus. the fable of Icarus is applyed, who fell from heauen into the ſea, becauſe in flying to high his waxen wings were melted.Porphyre. 
                  Porphiry who greatly eſteemed of oracles, was yet conſtrained to confeſſe, that diuels or gods foretold of naturall things, by the order of naturall cauſes which they obſerued, & of things which depended of our will, by coniectures taken of our actions: but as they are more ſuddaine then wee, and of a more ſharpe eyeſight, ſo do they preuent & goe before vs, in ſuch ſort that as naturall things are falſe, and humane accidents moueable and vncertaine, ſo are they ſubiect to lye: that is to ſaye, that they cannot foretell any things of vs, but what they learne out of our own actions, nor of naturall thinges, but what they read in the courſe of nature: for neither Angels nor diuels can read in ſtarres that which is not,Prophets. nor in men that which they know not, as did the Prophets inſpired of God, who ſeeme to haue touched as in a hiſtorie, whatſoeuer happened more then one hundred yeares after. The which cauſeth vs to admire the mightines, and trueth of God, creator of the whole worlde. Beſides what neede wee be ſo curious to vnderſtande what ſhoulde happen vnto vs, when wee can by no meanes auoide it. Doeth it not double ones miſerie, as Demonax ſayd? Ariſtotle likewiſe in the fourth of his Ethicques, findeth fault that their coſinages and lyings went vnpuniſhed. And the Romanes made ſundrie ordinances to baniſh them Italy as Tacitus writeth: yea, the lawyer Vlpian ſayeth,
                     Lib. 12. Latem apud. S Si quis de minor. that the cunning man, which ſhall tell any thing of one that ſtole ought which was loſt, ſhall not be quit for an action of the caſe, but ſhalbe grieuouſly puniſhed. The Greekes alſo terme a wiche Mantin, which approcheth the French word Menteur. As touching propheſies, which haue bin made through the inſpiration of God, concerning alterations of kingdōs, wee haue alwaies founde them proue true, wheras the anſwers of the Pagans oracles,Prophetes. li 4.
                   were euer vncertaine & obſcure, as Euſebius declareth. Wherefore following the commandement of God, the ordinance of France, eſpecially the iij eſtates aſſembled at Blois, the 36. Article, & ſundrie councels, which haue excommunicated witches & ſorcerers, we ought to abandon

ſuch as lyars and pernitious abuſers, who are not able to iudge of ſpirites,
                     Deut. 28. Exod. 12. the houre of death, and mariages. And it is impietie to be too inquiſitiue therein. God himſelf in Leuiticus adiudgeth them to dye;
                     Lib. 9. c. 9. and as Euſebius recyteth in his Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie, the Emperours Auguſtus, Tiberius, Galerius, and Maximinus, cauſed them all, either to be baniſhed, or put to death: as alſo they did thoſe prieſtes which ſtirred vp to crueltie.1. Sam. 15.23 And Samuel ſayde: that Rebellion is as the ſinne of witchcraft.
                  2. King. 23:24 And in the ſecond of the Kings, Ioſiah tooke away them that had familar ſpirites, and the ſouthſayers. And in the firſt of the Chronicles,1. Chro. 19.23. it was imputed vnto Saul for a great tranſgreſsion which he had committed againſt the Lord,
                  
                     Ier. 50.36. 
                  in that he ſought & asked councel of a familiar ſpirit. And it is written in Ieremy, that a ſword is vpon the ſouthſayers.
                  
                     Iſaiah 44.25. Other tranſlate it lyars. And Iſaiah blamed them, & ſaith, that God wil deſtroy the tokens of the ſouthſayers; & turne them into furie, & commandeth only to take councel of himſelfe, & his word: bicauſe that if we refer not our ſelues thither, the morning wil no more ſhine vnto vs. Eneas Siluius maketh mention of a vertuous Prince,Eneas Siluius. who was verie bountiful to learned men, & being demanded why he was not ſo to Aſtrologers, ſaide, that the ſtarres gouerned fooles, & that wiſe men commanded them, & that it apertained only to ignorant Princes, to honor Aſtrologers, witches & ſouthſayers.Scipio. Lycurgus. 
                  Scipio as ſoone as he ariued in his camp, did fourthwith baniſh al ſorts of witches & tellers of fortunes. Lycurgus did the like. And if we mark it wel, we ſhal find that they caſt & ſow in the aire, as it were in a ſea, without any iudgement, and at the aduenture of ambiguous words, tending to al ſorts of accidents, paſſions,De nat. deo. & chance, of a hundred perhaps one falleth out right, which was neuer foreſeene or thought by them, & for the moſt part wee ſee the contrarie happen of that which is prognoſticated. Cicero for this cauſe writeth, that Plato was wont to ſaye, that hee marueiled when ſuch people met togither, how they could abſtain frō laughter,
                     Ier. 10.2. ſeing the coſening tricks which they playd. And God by Ieremie commanded vs not to be afraid for the ſignes of heauen: from whence theſe abuſers ſay they take their foundation.Homer. And Homer bringing in the gods deliberating of things to come,Daniel. declared thereby how it paſſeth mans capacitie as Iſocrates writeth: yea, Daniel in the end of his propheſie, ſaieth, that he vnderſtoode not the wordes of the Angel, ſpeaking of the end of the world. The which maketh mee greatly to condemne ſuch as haue writen therof, & eſpecially Leouitius,
                  Ende of the vvorlde. who ſetteth it down to be in the yere 1583, & yet he forgeth

an Ephemerides of nigh hand 30. yeares after that yeare. Aſtrologers likewiſe foretolde of the yeare 1524, that ſuch an other coniunction ſhould meet as was at the time of the floud, and that al the face of the earth ſhoulde be couered with water, and there was neuer ſeene a more fayre and dry yeare then that was as Viues writeth. In ſhort, that kind of people haue skill of any thing, but to tell true. For ſorcerers, the lawes of the 12. Tables, and ſundrye other,Sorcerers. haue condemned them to death, as worſe then murtherers, moſt wicked and abhominable enemies both vnto nature, and mankinde. The title of the Code, de maleficiis, and the lawe neminem, containeth this curſſe that the cruell peſtilence eate them out and conſume them.Li. 4. de ciuit. dei c. 3.
                   And God condemneth them in Exod. c. 2. Leuit 20. & 21. Deu. 18. Iſaiah 3. Iere. 19.17. & 50. For ſuch ſorceries Iehu made queene Iezabel to bee eaten with dogs. It is verye requiſite that Iudges take great paines and be very ſeuere herein, becauſe they growe ſo common, and God threatneth that hee will roote out the people, which ſhall leaue them vnpuniſhed.
                     Deut. 18. Lib. 11 
                  S. Auguſtine alſo greatlye deteſteth them. And the reaſon why the Cananites were rooted out is expreſſed in Deut. to wit for the abhominable ſorceries which they vſed. And Plato in his lawes condemned them to die: for they renounce God & all his religiō, they blaſpheme him, they do homage to the Diuell, they vow their children vnto him, they promiſe to drawe vnto him whatſoeuer they are able, they poyſon men, beaſtes and fruites, they are inceſtuous, and worke much miſchiefe.Of Vſurers. And as touching vſurers Plutarque in his booke which he made, to which I referre the Reader, is of opinion that no kinde of people of the worlde, are ſo notorious lyars, nor which vſe more to falſefie their faith in all their practiſes: they haue beene condemned both by the law of God and man, and excommunicated by a counſell holden in Spaine. And the Perſians alwayes reputed loane to vſury, to be deceat, lying and wickedneſſe. Appian in his firſt booke of the ciuill warres wrote, that by an auncient law at Rome vſurye was forbidden vpon great paines: and we ſee in Titus Liuius, and in Tacitus, the great ſearches and puniſhmentes that enſewed therefore. And in the time of kinge Philip Auguſtus, of S, Lewys, of kinge Iohn and Charles the ſixt, the Iewes and Italiens which held banques,Iewes and Italiens chaſed out of France.
                   and exerciſed vſurye thorough out Fraunce, were driuen out and rifled: becauſe they marred the houſes and families, that adioyned neare vnto them. The ancient Cato held them as lyars, murtherers, theifes,Cato. and a continuall fire, which euer encreaſed, thorough the loſſe and

ruine of ſuch as fell there in. And ſo they which haue to do with vſurers, are by little and little, conſumed and gnawne a ſunder. And as he which is ſtong with the aſpe dieth ſleeping, ſo ſweetly doth he conſume him ſelfe which hath borrowed vpon vſury. And Michah writeth that they deuour the fleſhe of the people, flea their skin and gnaw their bones.
                  
                     Micah. 3. Moreouer the worde vſury in the hebrew tongue is as much to ſay as biting. And mony is brought forth before it be begot.Vſury the daughter of auarice and ambition. The which cauſed ſome to terme, loan to vſury the great chaſtiſer of fooles for their incontinencie. And vſury was euer accounted, the daughter of couetouſnes and ambition, which leadeth to all euill. Wherefore according to the leſſon of the wiſe man, eache one ought to beware that he fall not into ſo great a miſchiefe, but it is requiſite rather to be content with a little,Remedy againſt vſurie to ſhun thinges ſuperfluous, to vſe parſimony and ſparing: thinking that if one bee not able to liue with a little, he will leſſeliue with nothing. And as in ſundry places debtors were priuiliged, among other in Dianas temple at Epheſus: ſo was the temple of ſparing and well ordered expenſe into which vſurers mought not enter, open vnto the wiſe and yeeldeth to them a ioyful reſt. And for becauſe ſuch as intermeddle with ſelling againe, do it without anye art or trauile, and with lying, they haue beene in like ſort blamed as well by Ariſtotle, as by Cicero.
               
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 43. Of the punishments that hath be fallen vnto ſuch as haue giuen eare vnto malitious ſurmiſes, reiecting the truth.
               
                  Falſe accuſations in the end diſcouered.
                  IF what we haue before ſet downe, touching forged accuſations, doe not ſo ſone diſcouer it ſelfe, & if choler, falſe reports & opinions, do ſo far inſinuate them ſelues, as truth can take no place, nor iuſtifications be heard, yet will God the protector of innocency ſet to his helping hande, and diſcouer the truth, as the holy ſcriptures affirme. And Theophraſtus ſaid, that ſurmiſes woulde die by litle and litle, but truth was the daughter of time. Among an infinit number of exāples, I will content my ſelfe with a few the moſt notable. Leo the emperor, condē
                  ned Michael to die, & the execution was differred but vntil Chriſtmas was ended, in which time he died ſoddainly: & the ſame Michael was not onle deliuered from priſon, but choſen Emperor of Constantinople. Mathias the ſon of that great captaine Hunniades, was

charged of ill behauing him ſelf, towards Ladiſlaus K. of Boheme, & Hungary: & as he was ready to be condēned, his eldeſt brother hauing bene before executed throgh enuy, & falſe information, the ſaid Ladiſlaus mindinge to marrye Margrite daughter to Charles the 7. died ſoddenly, and the ſaid Mathias,
                  Caſtrutio. attending but the hangman of Prag was choſen K. of Hungary. As alſo one Castrutio retired frō an obſcure priſon, was choſen gouernor of Lucques, by the death of the tirant Vgutio. And one Iacques de luſignan,
                  aques de Luſignam. Theodoric. priſoner at Genes was choſen K. of Cipres. Theodoric, K. of the Ghots, in his rage through a forged accuſation, executed Boetius, & Simmachus, two very honorable perſonages, ſhortly after he was ſerued at the table with a head of a fiſh, which ſeemed vnto him to be the head of the ſame Simmachus, loking a ſquint vpon him, & grinning with his teeth, & ſo with this fright & conceit, fel he ſick and died. Thraſibulus K. of the Iewes cōceiued ſuch a greif in that he had ſlaine his brother without hearing his excuſe, that he died. The like alſo befell to Ariſtobulus for murthering his brother Antigonus, & for ſorow vomited vp his own bloud, which was caſte in the place where his brothers was ſpilt, & with a remorſe of conſcience died as Ioſephus writeth. And in thend of his hiſtory he telleth of a gouernor, of Libia vnder the Romanes, who with falſe ſurmiſes, hauing made many be put to death to get their wealth, was ſurpriſed with a ſudden fright & aſtoniſhment: & often cried out, that the ſhadowes of ſuch as he had cauſed to bee murthered apeared vnto him, & caſt him ſelf vpon his bed, as if he had bin in tormēts, & fire, & in thend died his intrals guſhing out of his body. They which by wrong accuſatiō cauſed Socrates to die not being able any longer to abide,Accuſers of Socrates Herode.
                   the publike hate which was carried vnto thē, hong, & ſtrangled thēſelues. The great Lord Soliman made his own ſon be ſtrangled: K Herod did the like vnto his, and after that the truth was diſcouered they both too late ſorrowed. There is as much written of a K. of Spaine, and of Cambiſes the K. of Perſia, who put his brother to death, wherof enſued great alteration of ſtate. Mary of Aragon, accuſed an Earle,Mary of Aragon. before the Emperor Otho, her husband, faining that he wold haue defiled her, & he was beheaded: but the truth being afterwards diſcouered, ſhe was publikly burned. Nicephorus writeth as much of the wife of Conſtantine the gret. Sedechias cauſed Ieremy to be impriſoned, who had told him the truth to keep him frō breaking his faith, was led away captiue,
                     Ier. 59. after his eyes were thruſt out, & his childrē beheaded. Conrad that writeth the chronicles of Magence, ſaith of one Henry Archb. of the

ſame Sea,
                     Henry archbishope of Magence accuſed by Arnold.
                   who to purge him ſelfe, of a certaine charitie which was lent vnto him, ſent to Rome one Arnold whom he had highly aduanced: but inſtead of excuſing him hee aggreuated the matter, to the ende that thorough preſentes he might attaine vnto his maiſters ſeat, which he did compaſſe with his maiſters owne monye: and there vpon carried home with him as farre as Vnormes two Cardinals from Rome, where he cauſed the ſayde Archbiſhop to be depoſed from his ſea, who appealed vnto God the moſt iuſt iudge. Anon after one of thoſe Cardinals miſerably burſt a two, the other as franticke, tore his handes in peeces with his teeth, and ſo dyed. And the ſayde Arnold who had compaſſed the Archbiſhopricke by ſo lewd meanes,
                     Ferdinand K. of Caſtile.
                   was murthered by them of the Citie. Ferdinand the fourth kinge of Caſtile, cauſed twoo of his greateſt Lordes of Spaine, which had beene falſely accuſed to haue conſpired againſte him, to leape downe from the top of a high towre: they appealed before God, before whom within thirty dayes they adiourned him to appeare, and at the ende of thirty dayes the ſame king when men thought he was a ſleepe was found dead. It is alſo written of the great M. of the Templers, that when he was vpon the point to be burned at Bourdeaux,
                  The greate maiſter of the Templers. he adiourned Pope Clement the fift, and king Philip the fayre, to appeare before the throne of God to receaue iuſtice: ſhortly after they both dyed. So hath God alwaies beene accuſtomed to reuenge periuries, and ſuch as will ſhut their eares to the truth, which ought to be conſecrated onelye to heare what is iuſt good, true, and appertaining to his glory.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. 44. That we muſt auoide ſuites in law, becauſe of the lyinge and cautell of the practiſers.
               
                  Pleas and ſutes to be auoyded.
                  THe knowledge of the truth holdeth manye backe, and keepeth them from embarking them ſelues amid the floudes of ſuites, and ſeates of Petefoggers, which are but the ſhoppes of falſehood, deceat, and counterfait lying, thorough diſguiſing and formality peruerting the vprightnes of a cauſe. For as Demoſthenes, & Anacharſes ſayd, wiſedom and eloquence, without truth and iuſtice, are a Panurgie, that is to ſay a guyle or ſleight, ſuch as we reade the ſlaues to vſe in Comedies,

which ſtill turneth to their owne domage and confuſion. And in truth, the faſhion which they hold in manye ſoueraigne and baſer Courtes, is but a kind of Sophistrie, which caſteth ſmooke and duſte into the eyes of the iudges, to the ende to couer lying and pilferie. And we may ſay with Eccleſiaſticus,
                  
                     Eccleſ. 3.16. 
                  I haue ſeene the place of iudgement where was wickednes, and the place of iuſtice where was iniquity. It were alſo very requiſite, that Lawyers, beſides that God doth eſpeciallye commaund them, woulde obſerue the preceptes of Plato repeated in Thucidides, that in pleading they ſhould not ſo much regarde to pleaſe men, as to ſpeake the truth:The office of a good Lawyer. to the end they ſhoulde neither charge their own conſciences nor their clients, knowing that wealth gotten with lying will neuer profite. Salomon ſaide that the beginning of a controuerſie is, as when waters ſoking thorough a banke, by little and little, make a great breach, or like Hidra who for euery head which was ſtroke off, brought out ſeuen other.Tacit. l. 6.
                   
                  Seneca found fault with the Lawyers of his time, as alſo Tacitus did, becauſe they ſold their lyes. The Emperour Licinius termed them the plagues of a common wealth. Apuleus named them Cormorantes, becauſe of their gredines. Other termed them j Rauenous fovvles, or heilish furies deſcribed by Vergil in his Eneidos.
                   
                  Harpies. And Florus wryteth that when Varus was vanquiſhed in Germany they put out the eyes of all the Lawyers which they could find,Florus. lib. 4.
                   and from ſome pulled out their tongue. Frederic the third ſayde, thy defiled the place of iuſtice, and equity, making it a banke of deceat and coſinage. S. Auguſtin in one of his ſermons writeth,Auguſtine. that there is nothing ſo impudent as arrogancie, and the babling of a Lawyer.Ambroſe. And Saint Ambroſe ſaith that they deceaue the Iudges, and gaine them by falſhood and that they ought to repaye whatſoeuer they take againſte the truth. And S. Bernard ſayde that they were the enemies of iuſtice,Bernard. ouerthrew the truth, and gnawed like ratts. And Origen called them ſwolne froggs, which ſell euen their very ſcilence, & rather encreaſe the charge, more then the profit will auaile, when they haue gained their cauſe. And Ammian thought that it was as vnposſible, to find out in all Aſia a true Lawyer as a white Crow. Tacitus writeth that there is nothing ſo ſaleable. Cicero likewiſe complained that thorough them good lawes were corrupted. And it is too notorious to ſee, how many of them giue raſhe and vncertaine counſell, verye lewdly acquite them ſelues of their charge, pleading onely vpon the ſuperſcription of their bagges, or not loking halfe waye into them, whence much iniuſtice hath proceeded. Pauſanias writeth that in the pleading place of Atheues were two benches,The pleading place at Athens.
                   the one of contumely,

the other of impudency. It was alſo vncouered, as that at Rome was,Cato. which Cato made be paued with ſharp flintes, and wiſhed that it might be flowred with yron caltrops, to the end the Romans ſhoulde haue no delight to plead. He forbad any to be called to the bar, whō he knew eloquent in a bad cauſe. And ſaid as Plutarque reciteth, that it was meet for a prince or iudge, to giue no eare to the perſuaſiō of an Orator, or lawyer, making a motion for any matter vniuſt. For as Cicero writeth (which was alſo attributed to the Emperor Valentinian) if he ought to be puniſhed which corrupteth a iudge with mony or preſents, how much more ought he which coſeneth thē with his faier ſpeech,Babling of Lavvyers more dangerous then preſents. & babling: becauſe a vertuous man will not ſuffer himſelf to be corrupted with preſents, but he may be deceiued thorough their cunning tales & lies. And Cicero in his Oratiō which he made for Murena, diſcourſeth at large, of the vanity, & deceit of practiſioners. We proue by the ciuil law, that in ſundry places, the nū
                  ber of lawyers hath bin limited, & how K Ptolome conferring with an embaſſadour,L. petitionem de aduocat. tit de ï reſcri. pr. which the Siciones had ſent vnto him, inquired of him of the ſtate & forme of their cōmon wealth: he anſwered, that his Lords maintained no inuentors of new things, nor receiued any phiſitians which alter health, & much leſſe lawiers, becauſe they diſguiſe the truth,Practiſers in lavve driuen out of Rome.
                   & prolong ſuites. Pope Nicolas the 3, thruſt al practiſers in the lawes out of Rome, ſaying that they liued by the bloud of the poore people. And it was a vſe in moſt holy France, that no proctor ſhould be appointed but by licence frō the K. & all procurations ended togeather with the yeare, which was a great cauſe of diſpatch of ſuits. Domitian in like ſort baniſhed ſome, & Galeace duke of Milan, cauſed one to bee hanged for his delatory pleas, & delaying of a ſuit, againſt a manifeſt and cleare debt. And Pope Pius 2. compared pleaders to birdes, the place of pleading to the fielde, the iudge to the net, the proctors & aduocates to fowlers, & birders. A man may ſay that the cauſe why Caligula would haue burned al law bookes,Caligula vvould haue had all lavve bookes to be burned. although himſelf were very ill giuē, was to haue ſuits ſoner diſpatched, & to meete with the cautels and delaies, which men toward the law ſtudy, by their boke & practiſe. And herevpon I will not let paſſe, a tale of Mathias Coruinus K. of Pannonia, who hauing maried the daughter of Ferdinand K. of Naples, brought a lōg in his traine out of Italy certaine lawiers and aduocates of great practiſe, who as ſone as they were ariued in his realme, by litle & litle changed the courſe which they had found, in maner that an infinite nū
                  ber of ſuits were bred therby. And the K. perceiuing how euery day the number encreaſed, he was conſtrained to ſend thē back againe,

that he might eſtabliſh the ancient cuſtome, ſimplicity, & quiet. In like ſort they write that Ferdinand themperor, ſending a viceroy into the Indies, which had bene newly diſcouered, forbad him by no meanes to carry ouer any lawier with him, to the end he ſhould not ſow there, the ſeeds of ſuits. There are ſome which attribute this infection, & contagiō of petifoggers, brought into France in the time of Philip the faier, to Pope Clement 5, whē as he tranſported his ſeat frō 
                  Rome to Auignon, together with al his bulliſtes, practiſers,VVhen petifoggers firſt ſet foote in Fraunce.
                   & petifoggers, by frequenting of whō french men firſt learned this braue piratical art, as it were neuer once dreamed of before. And ſundry authours as well french as Italians and Germanes haue written that ſince that french men haue ſuffred them ſelues to be gouerned by the Popes which were retired to Auignon, and haue intermingled their affaire and practiſes together, they haue euer waxed worſe and worſe, and their delicatenes hath euen abaſtarded the good warlike diſcipline, wherof there was forewarninges,The Druides and their authority. comment. lib. 6 when as the ſaide Pope Clement made his entry into Lyons We read in the time of Charlemagne and before him how the Druides in France tooke notice of all differentes and proceſſe in law, and Caeſar in his commentaries reciteth the like. And if there were any which wold not ſtād to their award, they ſtraightly forbad him their ſacrifices, which of all other was the moſt grieuous puniſhment: becauſe thē they were held in the ranke of men abhominable and accurſed, euery one abhorred their company, or to talke with them, for feare leaſt ſome misfortune might enſew, after ſuch comunication: which were to bee wiſhed, might now take place, for the diſpatching and aboliſhing of ſuites. And Paulus Emilius writeth, that the french men in matter of triall,French men ſimple in matters of trial. and law, did ſo ſimply behaue them ſelues, that they ſtucke to their firſte iudgement, and neuer appealed further. But ſince deceit was the cauſe of a ſoueraigne iuriſdiction, which held once a yeare for a few daies, and afterward the ſaid Philip the fayre, cauſed the palace to be builded, which ſuffiſeth not for all that to ſatisfie the heat of pleading. Eſchines in that famous Oration, which he made againſt Ctheſiphon, reprehending the maners & corruptiō of his time, & calling to remēbrance the ancient cuſtomes, & good laws ſaith that if they were wel obſerued al things would go wel,Many ſutes and pleas the greateſt miſcheife can happen to a common vvealth. and there ſhould be few ſuites or pleas at al, as if the cōmennes of thē, were one of the greateſt mischiefes could happē to a cōmōwealth, as Plato was of opiniō in his diſcourſes. And Socrates ſhewing how good lawes neuer engēdred ſuits, ſaid the multitude of thē to be a ſign of corruption.

                  Strabo commended the Indians,
                  The Indians no pleaders. becauſe they were no pleaders, and euer in their lawes and barganes vſed great ſimplicity, & kept their word, without vſing of any witnes or ſeales. The Poets in their verſes, wiſhe for ſeates and triales without pleaders, and eſteeme that mā happy which hath no proceſſe in law. And the Germane prouerb ſheweth it, that if a mā haue two kine, he were better giue awayone, then not to enioye the other quietly, or go to iudgement, in which place it ſeemeth that many turmoiles & troubles meet, & a multitude of people throng them ſelues together. For this cauſe the ſaid Iſocrates in an Oration which he made being of the age of 80. yeres and two,Pleaders in ſmal eſtimation or accoūt. ſaid that he had al his life ſhunned proceſſe, & benches of pleading, & that men accounted him an vnworthy aduocate to haue any diſciple, and he was ill accounted of at Athenes, which haunted the ſaid benches, and was often ſeene there. And the principal doctors which haue written vpon our ciuil law haue alwaies bin of opiniō,Queſtions betvveene the Lavvyer and Phiſition that euery good man ought to abhor ſuites, & that ſuch as loued them ought to be accounted cauillers, and exception to be taken to their witnes. Vpon the contention & queſtion which grew before Sforce Duke of Milan, who ought to take place the lawyer or phiſician, it was not ill geſſed of him which ſaid, that when a theife is led to hanging, the theif goeth before, & the hangman commeth after. It were very requiſite, that as the emperor Probus promiſed he would ſo order iuſtice, that there ſhould be no more neede of cōpanies at armes, ſo that ſome good king would in ſuch ſort tame the malice of men, & eſtabliſhe ſuch a diſcipline, that there might be no more proctors nor aduocates, but that where anye doubt grew, the parties might appeare at an asſigned daye & howre, by bill carrying a cleare demand, readily to receiue ſentence, as almoſt it is thorough out the world. And in all the countries of Zuizerland, & in the imperial cities, there is neither proctors nor lawyers, & ſuits are ordinarily diſpatched at the firſt asſignation, & without coſt or trouble. And truly the natural ſence asſiſted with an vpright conſcience, ioyned with experience, ſetteth a rule downe for iudgements: For France, it hath of long time had this Epitheton giuen vnto it, that ſhe is the mother nurce of practiſers: & a ſtranger which made a commentary vpon Ptolome ſaith, that in France is more petifoggers, and waſters of paper to be found, thē in al Germany, Italy, or Spaine. And Claude of Seſſel, Archb. of Marſeilles, in the 15. cha. of the monarchy of France ſaith, that there are more there, then in all the reſt of Chriſtēdom.Statua of Martia. 
                  Horace in his Satires maketh mention of a ſtatua of Martia,
                  
which none durſt behold, that vndertoke not a good cauſe. It is not my meaning for all this to ſpeake againſte a ſufficient number, of proctors & lawiers which are honeſt, & of great knowledge & diſcretion, which wil not alter the truth, nor charge either their owne conſcience or their clientes, with any goods gotten vniuſtlye or by cautel, nor make thēſelues the miniſters of a wicked gaine, which in ſmal time is taken againe out of their hands or their heires which poſſeſſe it, as the holy ſcripture & experience doth teach vs. For other I thinke the prouerb was ment by them, that with a white net they coſin other of their wealth. For by their writings, pleas,Quintil. l. 12. c. 1. Gell
                        •
                     us l. 1. c. 18.
                   formalities, & petifogging they pill the whole countrye, & as Iuuenal writeth, they ſel the very ſight of their hoods & long robes, plumming and deuouring vp to their very ſnowt & fethers, their poore clients euen to the bones prolong their cauſes as much as may lye in thē, & faſten, & cleane vnto thē, as the hop doth vnto the pole. And it ſeemeth that Ieremiah ſpeaketh hereof when he ſaith,
                     Ierem. 5.27. & 6.13. 
                  As a cage is full of birdes, ſo is their houſes full of deceit: yet they proſper though they execute no iudgement for the pore. For from the leaſt of them euen to the greateſt of thē euery one is giuen vnto couetouſnes. And in Hoſea you haue eaten the frut of lies. And Micah curſeth them that pluck of the ſkins of the people and their fleſh from their bones, and work wickednes in their owne imaginations. He ſaith further, that the heades iudge for rewardes, and are full of rapine and deceit. They ſhal eat and not be ſatiſfied, euery man hunteth his brother with a net, the beſt of thē is a briar.
                  
                     Iſaiah. 9.6. And in Iſaiah you haue eatē vp the vineyard the ſpoile of the pore is in their houſes. And wo vnto you which ioyne houſe to houſe, & lay field to field. And in truth the facility of arguing, ſcāning and pleading which is in Fraunce, is the cauſe of ſo manye proctors lawyers and iudges, that they grow like hornets and graſhoppers, which will liue as Plato writeth without doing ought els then ſting & bite. Lycurgus alſo which by his lawes banniſhed al ſuperfluity out of Lacedemon, toke away practiſers and al kind of pleading. And we may ſay with the ancient Poets,Aſtrea. that Aſtrea which maintained good lawes, & by the equity thereof gaue great quiet & contentment to euery one, is flowne her waies vp into heauen,Ate. not being able to endure ſuch iniquities, and Ate, which is the goddeſſe of al confuſion damage, diſorder, troubles & wickednes that may alter a ſtate, hath ſucceeded in her place. The ſayd de Seſsel in his monarchie, Philip de Comines, Gagnin, and late M. Bude vpon the pandects, haue greatly bewailed, the corruption, confuſion & diſorder of ſuch petifoggers as the very ſcumme of Italy, and a moſt dangerous infection.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. 45. That it is a lying in Iudges to receaue preſentes, and what exerciſe is to required to meet with auarice, bying of offices, and couetouſnes.
               
                  
                     CAto the Cenſor was of opinion, that a man ought not to pray a Iudge or magiſtrate for any thing being iuſt or vniuſt. He ſaide alſo that iudges, captaines, or gouernors, ought not to enrich thēſelues in their charges, but with honor & good reputation. And Aristotle in the 5. of the politiques writeth, that nothing is more to be conſidered in a common wealth, then that the lawes ſhould prouide, that magistrats be not couetous not bitter for their own commodity.
                  
                     Iſaiah. 1. & 33. And God by his Prophet Iſaiah reprehendeth the princes & gouernors of his people, terming thē theues, becauſe they toke preſents, and praiſed the faithfull man, becauſe he kept back his hand from any preſent, or vnlawfull gaine Polibus alſo writeth that,
                     Alexander ſeuerus. Buying of offices. that the ancient Romanes puniſhed a Iudge by death, which receiued any preſents. And the Emperor Alexander Seuerus, cauſed ſuch to be depoſed & greuouſly puniſhed, as bought their of ſices, ſaiyng they ſold dearer in retaile thē they bought in the groſſe. Which opinion Lewis th 12, the emperor Antoninus & ſundry other were of; and therfore beſtowed they al offices by conſent of the Senate,
                  
                     Niger. VVages appointed to officers. and after a very carefull conſideration had. And the Emperor Niger ordained thē wages, to the end they might not be a charge to any, ſaying that a iudge neither ought to take nor giue. And Plutarque in his politiques teacheth vs, that a magiſtrat ought not to go to the court or common wealth as to a faier to buy & ſell, as ſome wicked ones haue ſaid that they went to a golden harueſt. For this cauſe the Emperor Iuſtinian in his 8 inſtitution vipraeſides,
                  Lavves of Iuſtinian.
                   & in the 24, & 25, eſpecially forbiddeth all ſuch marchandiſe & corruptiōs of iudges, adding that they ought to carrye a fatherly affection towards the people. The which likewiſe was the cauſe of thoſe ancient lawes which ordained that all magiſtrats ſhould be called to a reckning, & render accoūt of whatſoeuer they had don, & might be accuſed of euery one if they had taken ought. Among the othes of iudges repeated by Demosthenes,
                  Othes of Iudges. one was that they ſhoulde take no preſent. The ſentence of Iuſtinian the emperor ought not to be forgotten auth. de iudicibus, that all iudges ought to contemne riches and to ſhew their handes vndefiled to God, their emperor, king and law: which alſo

is to be vnderſtood of all counſellors, & gouernors,A poeticall fiction applied. 
                  auth. de manda princ. And the Poets faining that Iuno thorough her riches, Mercury thorough his eloquence, Venus thorough her nicenes, Mars thorough his threats, and the reſt of the Gods hauing all conſpired againſt Iupiter, & yet were not able to pull him out of heauen, ment thereby that a man of vertue coulde by no meanes be turned a ſide from iuſtice. It hath ben ſaid of many that they which giue preſents to iudges are moſt notably abuſed, for the contrarye partye giueth likewiſe, & maketh the balance equall,They vvhich giue preſents to iudges are notably coſened. & often time the veluet diſgraceth the ſatyn, & the horſe taketh away the force of the hacney, and the chaine of gold couereth the ring. And yet by the oth which iudges haue made to God & to their king, they are debtors of iuſtice, without reſpect of perſons: ſo when they receaue preſents, they deceiue the pore ſuters, and lie giuing them hope, that their giftes ſhall preuaile with them. For this cauſe Diodorus great eſtemed a picture which was within a chamber of the Palais,
                  A picture vvithin the pallace. Philip.
                   of thirtye Iudges which were all without handes, and the Preſident loking onely vpon the image of truth which hôg about this neck. K. Philip ſaid to his ſon Alexander, that he deceiued himſelfe, if he loked for fidelitye at their hands whō he had corrupted by mony. And we muſt not maruel if the firſt day they be receiued in they be periured, ſelling again what they haue bought, & exerciſing as it were the art of robbing, throgh out the pallace & preſidial ſeats. K. Ageſilaus had once a cuſtome, to ſend a beuſe to euery Senator of Lacedemon, as ſoone as he was choſen, in ſigne of his vertue. The Ephores which were as ouerſeers of euery one, condēned him in a fine, to the publike vſe adding that it was becauſe throgh ſuch fauors he wēt practiſing & gaining to himſelf alone thoſe which ought to be cōmon to al.Iuſtice a virgine vndefloured. For as Heſiodus ſaid iuſtice is a virgin vndeflowred alwaies lodged with honor, reuerēce temperance, & publike vtility, and hating al preſents. There are certaine old ordinances euen in Bourgundy, which forbid al kind of preſents to gouernors & iudges. K. S. Lewis, made a moſt rigorous law, which it were well if it were reuiued. And in the Alcoran it is forbidden vpon paine of death, that iudges receiue no preſents.Lavves forbidding iudges to receaue preſents. And if we receiue what Plutarque teacheth, inſtructing ſuche as manage the affaires of ſtate, that he which enricheth himſelf by the handling of publike cauſes, and taketh preſents is a committer of ſacrilege, an vnfaithful councelor, a periured iudge, a magiſtrate polluted and defiled with all the wickednes which man can commit: and that which was ſaide that he which firſte gaue mony to the people, taught the true waye to ruine and confuſion of a popular eſtate. The ſayde Plutarque in the lyfe

of Pompe, ſheweth what miſchiefe hath enſued thorough preſents. It was not without a miſtery contained therein,Iudges drawn vvithout handes. that at Thebes, the Iudges and councellors were drawne without hands, and the Preſident blindfold: to giue to wit that iuſtice ought not to be defiled, fauourable, nor corrupted thorough preſentes. And as the eares when they are full of busſing, and noyſe, are not able comprehende what is ſayd,Marius as Marius excuſed him ſelfe that the ſounde of trompets made him that he could not heare the lawes. So if there be any preſent which ſoundeth backe, hardlye ſhall truth and iuſtice take place, but rather fauour and iniuſtice. The lawyers in the treaties de officio praeſidis, & de officio proconſulis, & legati, expreſly forbad all gouernours and Iudges to receaue any preſent. And ſo doth the law Cincia.
                  
                     Iſaiah. 1.23. & 33.1. 
                  Iſaiah complained that the princes were rebellious and companions of theiues, euery one loueth giftes, and followeth after rewardes: and pronounceth a wo to them that ſpoile, for they ſhall be ſpoiled. In ancient time as ſone as it was knowne that a Iudge had taken anye thing, all the honor that in his whole life he could gaine, was now cleane ſtained and loſte. And if it were but knowne in the Cantons of Surich or Berne, that one of the councell had taken were it neuer ſo litle,
                     Exod. 23.8. Micach. 3.11. Deut. 16.19. 1. Sam. 12.3. the beſt bargaine he could make were baniſhment. God in Exodus forbiddeth to take rewarde, for the rewarde blindeth the eyes of the wiſe, and peruerteth the wordes of the iust. The which alſo is repeated in 16. of Deutronomy. And Samuel rendring an account of his whole life, inſiſted principally, in that he neuer receiued bribe to blind his eyes therewith, his children were blamed for receiuing and were the cauſe of the chaunge of the ſtate. Iudas went and hong him ſelfe. And Iob ſayde that fire ſhall deuoure the houſes of bribes: and he whoſe handes are pure ſhall increaſe his strength.
                  
                     Iob. 15.34. & 17.9 VVhence gredines of bribes proceadeth. And S. Ambroſe vpon S. Luke ſayth, that euen as they that are in a traunce, can not diſcerne thinges in ſuch ſort as they indeed are, but onely the illuſions and fanſies of their pasſiōs: ſo the thought of a gredy iudge, wraped within the cordes of couetouſnes, & faſtened by the bonds of auarice, neither ſeeth or thinketh of any thing but gold,Plato his Councell.
                   ſiluer, and riches, and all his ſtudy is but how to augment his wealth. And Plato in his cōmon wealth calleth them drones which mar the hony, and Pikes which deuour the reſt of the fiſh. The deſire of theſe bribes proceed from a greedines, which repugneth his fill, whereas all other yeeld thervnto: For it exerciſeth the appetite, & taketh away the pleaſure: & the childrē of ſuch corrupt iudges do often times folow their trace. Plato gaue counſel to accuſtome yong men in their infancy to think that it was not lawfull to haue or weare any gold to be decke their body with,

to the ende that when they came to the maniging of affayres, they ſhould not ſeeke to enrich them ſelues, nor receaue bribes, knowing that the inward gold which is vertue is proper vnto them. But now we may ſay that we are in the golden age, where no account is made but of golde and ſiluer. And as one finding fault with the corrupt maners of the Athenians ſayde, that at Athenes all was honeſt, ſo may one affirme now that of vice is made vertue.The remedy to meete vvith couetouſnes and greadines of bribes. Our auncient fathers had great reaſon to thinke it fit, that there ſhoulde be an exerciſe to meete with couetouſneſſe, and the greedineſſe of hauing and receauinge bribes, which was to abſtaine from anye lawfull gaine, to the ende men mought be accuſtomed to eſtrange them ſelues from all vniuſtice and vnlawfull taking of monye, and from long continuance mought tame and chaſten that greedineſſe to gayne, and get, which thorough inough of other habites and actions is nouriſhed and exerciſed alwayes to bee willinge to gayne impudentlye, and ſeeketh after vniuſtice, hardlye abſtaining from autraging of any, if any profit may thereby enſewe vnto them, ready to take at all handes. For as Eccleſiaſticus writeth,
                     Eccleſ. 19.1. 
                  He that contemneth ſmall thinges ſhall fall by little and little. And according to the opinion of Iſocrates, the couetouſe man at all aſſaies forſweareth and deceaueth him ſelfe: but this couetouſneſſe ſhall neuer aſſault or ſurpriſe any, which ſhall not be euen giuen ouer to receiue giftes and rewardes, hauing his hart well ſetled and yeelding to no motion that ſhall not be honourable and good. And truly where bribes take place, there is law and iuſtice baniſhed, and it can not be, that he ſhould not inclyne to him, which giueth, becauſe as we haue before mencioned, bribes make men blinde. And in Eccleſiaſticus they are termed a brydle for his mouth which receaueth them:
                  
                     Eccleſ. 28.25 & 31.5. 
                  and he that loueth gold ſhall not be iuſtified, but he that hateth giftes ſhal liue. For after that entraunce be once thereto admitted, all honeſty and integrity ſlideth awaye: and as it is ſayde in a common prouerbe, gold maketh all thinges preignable. And bribes reſemble hookes hid vnder a bayte, which beaſtes can better auoyde then men. I thinke that giftes betweene man and wife, beſides cauſes contayned in the ciuill law, were forbidden to the ende weomen ſhoulde take leſſe of ſtraungers, and their loue be mutuall without hier or mercenary rewarde. It is alſo to be preſumed that that which moued the Emperour Adrian, and Alexander Seuerus to proportion the expenſes of Iudges, and there to giue them wages, was to the end they ſhould take nothing of parties, as alſo of ſome it was expreſly

forbidden.Spice money for ſutes. And that which through out all France they take vnder colour to buy ſpice, was at the firſt a pound of comfites of leſſe valew then 12. pence, and that was euer whē their ſuit was ended.Romanes very continent. And in Titus Liuius we ſee how the ancient Romanes abhorred preſents, & Cicero wrot of the Fabritii, Curiens, Scipioes, Piſces, & Catoes, that they were not only honored for their prowes, but in that for al their pouerty, they could neuer be gotten to receiue preſent. And Titus Liuius.
                  Valerius. highly cōmended Valerius who hauing bene 4. times Conſul, yet ſo poore he died, that they were faine to bury him at the charge of the cōmon ſtock He telleth the like of one Agrippa,
                  Agrippa. who apeaſed the ſeditions which were betwene the people & nobility. Thoſe two great captaines Epaminōdas,
                  Epaminondas. & Pericles, of which the one gouerned the Thebanes, the other the Athenians many yeares, & obtained great victories, neuer augmēted their patremony the valew of one bare denier, nor euer would accept preſent, as a thing vnworthy of a mā of courage, & a valiant head. Scipio refuſed to ioine with a certain Senator, after he knew that he toke. And bribes were ſo highly deteſted of all people, that it was not ſo much as lawfull for embaſſadors ſent to princes to receiue any thing, wheron grew the complaint,Not lavvfull for embaſſadors to receaue preſents. Phocion.
                   which Dioniſius K. of Sicile made, becauſe them baſſadors of Corinth refuſed to take what he offered them, as if that law there were ſuch as a tirant had a better. The like was written of other embaſſadors, ſent vnto Ptolome. Phocion refuſed the preſents of Alexander the great of Antipater & other, adding that if they eſtemed him an honeſt man, they ſhould leaue him ſo. It is written of him that would not asſiſt his ſon in law, which was accuſed for taking, ſaying that he had made him his allie only for lawful & reaſonable cauſes. Xenocrates wold not take anything either for him ſelf or his friends of the 3000. crownes which Alexander ſent vnto him. Alcibiades and other could neuer faſten vpon Socrates to make him receiue ought: for he ſaid that his good ſpirit abhorred al preſents and ſent worde vnto Archidamus which offered it vnto him, that a peck of wheat was ſold at Athens for a duble, & watercoſt nothing & that he cōtēted him ſelf with what he had. Menander alſo foūd but two things neceſſary for the vſe of our life bread and water, for the pleaſure of life according to the opiniō of Cicero, is rather in deſire thē ſatiety.Ageſilaus 
                  Ageſilaus refuſed the K. of Perſias preſent: Demetrius, Iulius Caeſars: the ſaid Epaminondas ſent backe to the K. of Perſias, his 3000. Daricques or crowns, extremely chafing with Diomedes which preſented thē, asking him if he had vndertaken ſo long a nauigatiō, to think to corrupt Epaminondas, cōmāding him to make report vnto

his K. that as lōg as he wiſhed & procured the good of Thebans, he ſhould haue him his friend, & it ſhold coſt him nothing, but if he ſhold ſeek their endemnity, he wold be vnto him a mortal enemy.Iaſon. And Iaſon prince of Theſalia cōming on a time to the city of Thebes with which he was allied, ſent vnto the ſame Epaminondas 2000. crownes for a gift, knowing him to be very poore, but by no means wold he receiue thē, & the firſt time that he ſaw him after he tolde him, thou beginneſt to outrage me. In the mean time he borowed of a Burges of the town a litle ſome, with which he entred into armes within Peloponeſe, now called la Mores, & put away his eſquier, hauing vnderſtood that he had receiued a preſent.
                     Eliſeus. 2. King. 5.16. 
                  Eliſeus refuſed the preſents which Nahaman the cōſtable of the K. of Siria whō he had healed of the leproſie wold haue beſtowed on him: & Giezi became a leaper for receiuing them. Abraham refuſed the preſents of the K. of Sodom albe it he had wel deſerued thē. The aduiſe of Philopemen general of the Achaians, writtē of by Plutarque ought not to be omitted, who after he had refuſed 612000, crownes of the Lacedemonians told thē,Philopemen. that it was not for thē to go about to corrupt, & gaine with their mony, honeſt mē & their friends, in that they might at al aſſaies aſſure thē ſelues to be ſerued by thē, but that it was for thē to be lewd fellows & mutinās, to the end that hauing their mouthsſtopped by bribes,Cimon they ſhold leſſe annoy thē. It is written of Cimon, that he demanded whether they wold haue him a friend or hireling, & ſince he was a friend that they wold cary away their gold & ſiluer. They write of many ſaints, which neuer wold receiue any preſents. The Romans refuſed 400000. crowes ſent frō the K. of Aegipt.
                  Romaines. They did the likeby the crown of gold offred by the K. of Sicile. Titus Liuius in the 2. boke of the 3. decade, & 6. of the 4. ſheweth how the Romans refuſed the preſents which the ambaſſadors of Naples and they of Peston had offred vnto thē, and ſo did they K. Philips and Ptolomes. Yea they wold not receiue the very payment which was due vnto them before their time; for feare leaſt that had bound them as a preuenting,Menander. and preſent made at that time. Menander the tirant of Samos, by reaſon of the coming down of the Perſians,
                  Cleomenes. retired him ſelf into the city of Sparta with much gold and ſiluer which he ſhewed to Cleomenes, praying him to take what liked him therof. He refuſed to take any thing, but fearing leaſt he wold haue giuen to other of the city, he went to the Ephores, & ſaid that it was better for the weal of Sparta to put out their Samien gueſt out of Peloponeſe, for feare he ſhould entiſe any Spartians to become naught. The ſaide Ephores giuing

eare to this aduiſe banniſhed him the very ſelfe ſame day. And Demoſthenes was banniſhed by the Senate of Areopage,
                  Demoſthenes. for hauing receiued a preſent from Arpalus. Curius and Fabritius, refuſed the preſentes of the Samnites and Pirrhus.
                  Fabritius. As alſo did Daniell of king Baltazard: and the ſayd Fabritius ſayd that as long as he coulde commaund his owne members, he ſhould neuer haue neede of much mony. Lyſander would not receaue the apparell and iewels which was ſent vnto his daughter frō 
                  Dioniſius the tyrant ſayinge that his preſents more diſhonoured then honoured his daughters.Sophocles. 
                  Sophocles before ſayde the like. The which was the very cauſe that Alexander Seuerus,
                  Tulg. l 6. ca. 3
                   ſo grieuouſly puniſhed ſuch of his officers, as hee knew had taken bribes. And according vnto that moſt excellent ſaying of our ſauiour Chriſt Ieſus, recorded by S. Paule, it is a bleſſed thing to giue, rather then to take. Which alſo king Ptolome Philadelphus was wont to repeate, and that it was better to enrich an other then him ſelfe. Euen the very Epicuriens helde, that it was more excellent and pleaſaunt to doe good to an other then to receaue a benefite. And Cicero in his Oration which he made for Plancius declareth, that it is an inhumane thing, and brutiſh, to ſuffer ones ſelfe to be ouercome thorough benefites. And as king Cyrus was wont to ſaye, that hee heaped vp great treaſures when he enriched his friendes and ſubiectes. And Constance the Emperour had often in his mouth, that it were better that publike riches, and appertayning to a king were poſſeſſed by priuate men, then kept in a coffer or treaſury. And for the eaſe of the Empire he vſed onelye earthen veſſell, and was content with little: for as Seneca writeth, he is as great which vſeth earthen veſſell as ſiluer, and ſiluer as if they were earth.Remedy againſt auarice 
                  Cato, Cicero, and Titus Liuius, teacheth vs a meanes to meete with auarice, in taking away all riotouſneſſe and ſuperfluous expence, as ſundry common weales and Empires haue done. Pluto was called Dis,
                  Pluto the god of riches. that is to ſay the God of riches and hell, as if too great wealth made the way more eaſie for vs. And the Poets faine that the Furies were the daughters of Pluto and Proſerpina, allotted to great reuenewes: as if the aboundaunce thereof tooke away our vnderſtanding, except God enclined vs to vſe it better. And with great conſideration did Lycurgus king of Sparta aboliſhe the vſe of all gold and ſiluer,Lycurgus. as the very occaſion and ſubiect of the wickedneſſe which man committed. And Plinie wiſhed that gold mought be cleane rooted out,Pliny. as if it had beene firſt found out for the ruine and deſtruction of mans life, eſteeming that age happye

in which thoſe things changed. Artaxerxes was wont to ſaye, that it was farre more royall to adde then to take away. And Iſocrates wrote to Nicocles, that he ſhoulde bee more eſteemed of in giuing,Iſocrates then taking, for theſe reſpectes one ought not eaſily to receiue a preſent, and to charge himſelfe hereby with a further recompenſe, except hee wilbee polluted with that vilanous vice of ingratitude heretofore deſcribed.VVhereon the mindes of men moſt runneth. If we conſider the intents of the moſt parte of men, we ſhal find they tend to the heaping vp of wealth, to ioyn ſtone and wood, one vpon another, without once thinking of the life of the ſoule, as though we had none at all. The which cauſeth me to remember an aphoriſme of Hipocrates. They, ſaith he,Hipocrates aphoriſme. which in their ſicknes feele no paine at al, & toſſe, & tumble their clothes, teare their hayre, and pill ſtrawe, it is a verie yll ſigne, and no apparance at all that they ſhall liue. For it is leſſe decent to ſettle our wittes vppon heaping vp of riches, then to drawe a peece of cloth of golde through a ſinke. And ſuch as are giuen thereto, are cleane out of taſte, as they are which haue the greene ſicknes, who loue to eate coales and aſhes, which is a ſtrange cacochimie, and corruption of nature. And riches do not conſiſt but in opinion,Themiſtocles. and eſtrange vs from God: Themiſtocles ſaid, that it was verie requiſite for the chiefe of an armie to knowe the enemies councel, yea (aunſwered Ariſtides) but it is more decent, and praiſe worthie to haue pure hands. As Pericles was alſo wont to ſaie. And if wee ſhoulde put in practiſe the iudgements of K. Cambiſes,
                  Cambiſes who cauſed a Iudge to bee fleade which was corrupted with brybes, and faſtened his skinne to the ſeat which afterwarde he cauſed his ſonne to holde, & that of Darius, who for the like cauſe cauſed one to be hanged,
                     Darius. Bishope of Cologne.
                   and of a Biſhop of Cologne, who cauſed the eyes of ſixe of his counſellors to be put out, and left one to the ſeuenth, which had taken leaſt of any, to the ende he mought guide the reſt through the citie, thereby ſhewing how much himſelfe deteſted to bee corrupted with bribes, there would be an infinite number at this time, flead, hanged, & made blind. I could here diſcourſe,Auarice. howe great miſeries auarice breedeth, & how much it ought to be deteſted, reſembling the diuel from whence it is ſprong, which deliuereth vp his followers to the hangman, & breaketh their necke after that hee hath a while colled thē; but ynough of others haue entreated therof. And the holy ſcripture cauſeth vs often times to flye it as a plague, and roote of al euil, & a bottomles pit, making vs ſuſtaine much euil, to attaine vnto euil, & to turmoile & toyle ones ſelfe, to pleaſure his

heire, who is often time vnknowen. And the better hap a man hath to attaine therunto the more is he accurſed, in being more tormē
                  ted with the feuers of the mind, & vnquietnes. Not without cauſe do they compare a couetous man, to one in a dropſie, or to him which hath bin ſtong by that dangerous ſerpēt Dipſas, both which are neuer ſatiſfied with drinke vntil they dye therwith. And it was wiſely ſaide, that the poore man wanteth but a litle, and the wiſe man al things: & that he neuer doth good vntil he dye, & the longer he liueth the more he tormenteth himſelfe. S. Chriſoſtome often times preached that the more money a man heaped togither, the more he coueted: & that with great welth pouertie encreaſed. And Salomon writeth:
                     Pro. 15.27. 
                  He that is greedie of gaine troubleth his owne houſe, but he that hateth gifts ſhal liue, & the couetous are excluded out of the kingdō of God, 1. Cor. 6. Epheſ. 
                  
                     •
                  . 2. Tim. 6. Seneca writeth that if couetouſnes do once ſurpriſe youth, ſhe wil ſtrangle it before ſhe wil leaue it. It is a ſtrange matter to ſee, how many are withdrawn from the feare of God through riches & wealth,Riches withdravve from the feare & loue of god. which notwithſtanding proceed but frō his liberalitie, & therfore ought rather to make the poſſeſſors of thē more deuout, & affectionate vnto his ſeruice. And how we pul vp the bryars & weeds which hinder the good ſeedes from growing in our gardens;
                     Luke. 7. & yet fewe haue regard to this couetouſnes, which kepeth the word of God (the onely incorruptible ſeede) from being able to take roote,Crates. & choketh it when it would growe. Crates finding that the wealth of this world did hinder him frō the ſtudie of Philoſophy, caſt his goods into the ſea, ſaying, that he had rather drown them, then be drowned by them. Wee haue before made mention of ſundrie other, which haue left their goods & poſſeſsions, the better to intend their ſtudie: the which poore Pagans wil condemne ſuch as are ſlaues to their own ſubſtance. And would to God men would learn that leſſon of S. Paul:
                  
                     Tim. 
                     
                        •
                     .6. 
                  Godlines is great gaine if a man be contented with that he hath. For wee brought nothing into the world,
                  Celeſtiall gods. 
                  & it is certaine that we can carrie nothing out: therfore whē we haue foode & raiment, let vs therwith be content. And ſheweth of how many miſchiefes couetouſnes hath bin the cauſe. And he writeth in the 3. to the Philippians that after that he knew Ieſus Chriſt, & the great riches which he brought to them which receiued & poſſeſſed them through faith,3. Col. 7.31. he then began to account al thoſe things which the fleſh was accuſtomed to glorie in, but as loſſe & dong. And al ſuch as through reading & preaching, haue known & wel taſted of thoſe goods which God the father, by the meanes & fauor of his ſonne, would beſtow of vs, eſteem not of this worldly riches & muck, but

enioy thē as though they enioyed thē not, & do not ſet their hearts vpon ſo friuolous & vncertain things, as we haue infinit examples in the ſcripture to declare: for as we haue aboue noted, the knowledge of ſpiritual goods maketh vile the price of earthly. The deſire & loue wherof beginneth to vaniſh as ſoone as we haue but taſted of the other, which are ſound, permanēt, & breed true contentmēt.
                     Iſ
                           ••
                        h. 9.6. Rom. 5.
                        •
                     . VVordly goodes. Our ſauiour Christ is called in Iſaiah, the Prince of peace; & that faith which wee haue in him is ſuch as thereby wee haue peace towarde God, & reſt in our ſpirit: And contrariwiſe couetouſnes & deſires trouble the ſame; for they are vnſatiable, & infinit, & they which are poſſeſſed with them are accurſed like the ſerpent: for that like vnto him they liue with earth, & therin ſettle their paradiſe like Moles. For where their treaſor is, there is their heart their God & paradiſe. Let vs conſider, that very litle wil content a mind, which is but deſirous of what is neceſſarie for to entertain it here; and if we ſeek his kingdō & the righteouſnes therof, al temporal things as he hath promiſed ſhalbe giuen vnto vs without needing for our further enriching, to faſhion our ſelues or do ought againſt our dutie or honor, or rendring our ſelues too much addicted vnto them. It is here wher we ought to vſe violence, not only, if our eye cauſe vs to offend, to plucke it out: if our hand or foote cauſe vs to ſtumble, to cut them off, & caſt them frō vs, as our ſauiour councelleth vs in the 18. of S. Matth. but to cut off theſe accurſed deſires which in ſuch ſort preſſeth downe our harts, & keepeth thē from not being able to lift vp them ſelues on high, to ſearch out heauenly things,
                     Col. 3.1. as al good Chriſtians ought to do. The which I haue the rather amplified, beſides that which is before contained in the 25 diſcourſe, to the end we mought endeuor to diminiſh theſe accurſed deſires, which are the cauſe of ſo great miſchiefs, annoyes, & miſeries throughout the world. And to make vs to haue leſſe occaſions to take, we may not be too curious in our raimēts, banquets & buildings; for as Cicero writeth,Remedy againſt couetouſnes. if one wil exēpt himſelf frō couetouſnes, he muſt take away riotouſnes which is the mother, & it ſhalbe very requiſite that they by no offices,Buying of offices. which the Emperor Iuſtinian thought to be the very beginning of naughtines And the Emperors Theodoſius & Valentinian, ordained that al Iudges & gouernors of prouinces ſhould at their entrance into their office, ſweare, that they neither gaue nor promiſed any thing, nor had any wil to giue, or cauſe ought to be giuē, & alſo that they ſhoulde take nothing but their wages. And if it were foūd that they had receiued any thing, in which it was lawful for euery one to be an informer, then paid they quadruple, beſids the infamie they ſuſtained of periury.

And the like paine was ordained to him which gaue the brybe. I would commend it much more for the weale both of the King & realme, if the youth mought rather giue themſelues to learning, diſcipline, and Philoſophy, or to the Mathematiques, diuinitie, phiſick, or ſome honeſt trade of marchandiſe, to huſband wel their reuenues left vnto them by their anceſtors, then both dearly & fooliſhly to buy offices, to gaine by them, & pil the poore people. That would be a cauſe both of fewer officers, fewer ſutes, & more learned men. And for the moſt part the money which cometh of ſuch a ſaile, turneth into ſmoke, through a iuſt iudgement of God: and often time ſuch purchaſers leaue behind them no heires. Now the Preſidents, counſellors, & Iudges, beeing choſen according as the ordinances carie, would be much more honored & France in more quiet.
                     Li. 5. 
                  Sabellic recyteth that in the graue Senate of Areopage, none was receiued, except he had made ſome notable proofs of his vertue, knowledge, & dexteritie. And if any one ſuffred himſelfe to be corrupted & impayred, he was ſo aſhamed among ſo many vertuous men, that voluntarily he quited his eſtates, & abſented himſelf. And euery one was aboue fortie yeres of age. The holy Scripture attributed the change of the Iewiſſe common wealth, to that they demanded a King,3. Sam. 7.3 founded vppon that the ſonnes of Samuel turned aſide after lucre and tooke rewards. And Dauid ſaid, that man was happie which tooke not. And our Sauiour bad his diſciples giue for nothing,Liberality of princes. what they receiued for nothing. Yet wil I not herby reſtrayne the liberalitie of Princes, as wee haue ſundrie examples in the ſcripture, & it is praiſe worthie to releeue ſuch as haue neede thereof, and to entertaine amitie, and reconcile themſelues, and eſpecially the holy ſcripture commaundeth vs to giue of our ſubſtance to the poore, as if it were to God, euen to attaine to eternall life. Tiberius the ſecond made a notable aunſwere to his wife, that a man ſhoulde neuer want wealth, while he gaue great almes. And that good Biſhop Nilus exhorted vs to intertaine the poore, becauſe they rendred our Iudge more fauourable vnto vs. Guiciardin in his ſeconde booke greatlye commended the Venetians,
                  Liberalitye of the Venetians.
                   becauſe they did not onely encreaſe the paye to ſuch as had valiantly behaued them ſelues at the daye of Tournauue, but alſo yeelded penſions and ſundrie recompenſes to manye of their children which dyed in that battaile, and aſsigned dower to their daughters, which was alſo done by ſundrie other Princes.
               Let vs follow the leſſon of Eccleſiaſticus: Let not thy hand be ſtretched

out to receiue, and ſhut when thou ſhouldeſt giue. But Demosthenes and Plutarque haue ſet downe, that by howe much their particular which beare publike office is encreaſed, that common profit is diminiſhed, as we haue before ſet downe by the example which Theodoſius made of the ſpleane, which putteth all the partes of the bodie in hazarde, it being too much increaſed.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XLVI. That it is a lye, to be intemperate, drunk, exceſsife, whoremonger, player, and ydle, and to ſaye that one would be in health, of muſicke & Phiſicke, as wel for the bodie as the ſoule.
               
                  THey cannot be well exempted from lying,The intemperate in vaine ſeeke health. as Democrites ſaide, which ſo much commend health, and ſeeke all meanes poſsible to preſerue it, and yet runne into ſo great exceſſe, of eating, drinking, ſleeping, and other pleaſures, neuer applying them ſelues to honeſt exerciſes, ſuffring their members and ſenſes, to bee mortified with ydlenes: and eſteeme more of a ſlauiſh bodie, then of the minde, which ought to commaund, of the raiment more then of the bodie, of the boxe or bag more then of the pretious ſtones contained therein: they feare wandring, as they go by the way, and yet in their life and conuerſation, they ſtil go cōtrarie to the way which they ought to hold: they haue eares & heare not, eyes & ſee not, they are blockiſh in whatſoeuer they doe, & (as Horace ſaieth) made drunk with their ſweete fortune: and which is worſe, they will neuer examine their life according to the true rule, nor amend in themſelues, what they reprehend in an other, & asking health at Gods hands, they marre it through their diſordinate life. Zonarus & Sigebert make mention of one Alexander Emperor of the Eaſt,
                     Alexander an emperoure of the eaſt. giuen to great ydlenes and gluttonie, who on a time demanded of his wiſe men if he had long to liue: they anſwered him, yea, if he could take away the teeth, & priuie partes of a braſen bore that ſtood in the market place, meaning thereby that hee woulde ſhorten his dayes except he became more temperate & continent. The which happened ſhortly after, as it hath done to ſundry Emperors & Kings, which haue died thorough intemperancie. And a Senator of Rome which was ſaluted by another riding in his chariot, aunſwered, I will not ſaye vnto you,

God ſaue you, ſince in going thus at your eaſe, you ſhewe you haue no deſire to liue long. And a certaine K. ſaid vnto one of his counſellers, which pampered vp himſelfe verie much without doing any thing. Ceaſe to buyld thee ſo greeuous a priſon of thy body. And Epaminondas diſcharged all his ſouldiars which grew fat thinking,
                     Epaminondas allovved not of ſoldiars. that as a woman too fat doth not eaſily conceiue, ſo doeth fat hinder a man from doing of his charge, as armes do, which are too heauie. And when he was choſen Captain of Greece, immediatly he made al his people to exerciſe, & al ſuperfluities to be taken away.Scipio. As alſo Scipio did, who being ariued at his campe, baniſhed al ſouldiers ſlaues, and Pages, and all vnprofitable people, & made eche one carrie his owne armour.Fat. Li. 2. c. 1 A girdell of the Gaulois & Iberiens.
                   Likewiſe the worde fat, as well in the Latine tongue, as in ours, is taken for groſeneſſe, and without ſpirite. Alexander telleth how among the Gaulois and Iberiens. the magiſtrate had a ſtraite gyrdle, with which they gyrt men and weomen which were not with childe, and ſuch as by reaſon of their fatneſſe were not able to enter therein, were eſteemed as diſhonoured. And in Lacedemon they condemned them in a fine. Elian telleth how that to this ende there were certaine deputes appointed to controll youth,Controllers of youth. and to correct their ydlenes and exceſſe. And in Aegipt, before they did eat, all youth was of neceſsitie to exerciſe themſelues vntill they ſweate, eche one according to his qualitie. The like was done in Perſia.
                  Exerciſes againſt Idlenes. And Lucullus who was euer wont moſt ſumptuouſly to entertaine his frinds, had ſtil one of his ſeruaunts to ſtand behind him, to put him in mind of ſobrietie. And Aulus Gellius telleth how if a knight of Rome grew to fat,
                     Lib. 22. the Cenſors would euer take away his horſe.The Lacedemonians very ſober. In Lacedemon exerciſe was verie much vſed and their dyet was verie ſlender, to the end that of long continuance they ſhould accuſtome themſelues neuer to be full, that they might be the apter for warre, if the learned, to take paines, liue ſoberly, & laſt long with ſmal expenſe, and they called their publike feaſts Phedetia; becauſe they learned to liue ſoberly, of the worde Phido,
                  Fateneſſe. which ſignifieth ſparing: & euery man ſent thither in the beginning of euery moneth, a fewe victuals, as Plutarque & Aristotle wrote: for fulnes hath always bin the fountaine, from whence ſundry griuous & long diſeaſes do proceed, repleniſh the bodye with humors, wind, inflammations, diſtillations, and opilations, which happeneth vnto ſuch as through a diſordinate appetite, & gluttonie, feede of euery kind of meat which is ſerued vnto them, & being ful, ſeeke to pleaſe their appetites. And if any preſēt vnto them

any exquiſite or ſtrange meate at the end of all the reſt, they wil for al that they be alreadie ful, feede thereof through verie doltiſhnes. And for the moſt part this change & diſguiſing of meates,Change of meats. maketh our health to decay, although we cōfeſſe that the mingling of ſundrie meates engender ſundry accidentes; becauſe it is that which draweth pleaſure out of the bounds of ſufficiencie, pleaſure, in all things which pleaſeth: wheras in ſimple & vniforme kinds, delight neuer exceedeth the appetite, & naturall neceſsitie,
                     Eccleſ. 21.23. Liſimachus.
                   it is written in Eccl. Paine in watching & cholerike diſeaſes, & pangs of the belly are with an vnſatiable man. K. Lyſimachus, hauing yelded himſelf by reaſon of his extreme thirſt, after he had drunk ſome water ſaid: O god how great felicitie haue I loſt for one ſo ſhort a pleſure. A man may wel ſay ſo of ſuch as are intēperat, which loſe their health therby, & oftē times their life. It was wiſely ſaid of olde men in time paſt, that the wel conditioned belly, & laſting, brought great libertie and health And Iſocrates gaue councel to bridle it, & not too much to pamper it, becauſe it was verie vnthankfull.Seneca. And Seneca called ſickneſſe the chaſtiſement of intemperance. Caliſthenes aunſwered him which would needs vrge him to drink, as other did, at Alexander his feſts, I wil not for to drink to Alexander haue need of an Eſculapius, meaning a Phiſition. The ſaid Alexander after he was wel tipled, was banqueted by one of his captaines, where he fell againe to tipling more then before, wherof he dyed. He was alſo compared by Daniel foretelling of the Monarchies, to a Leopard, which cannot be ſo wel taken as through wine: for being dronke hee falleth into the toyles as ſome write. The wiſe man ſaith verie well to purpoſe, reprehending the drunkards: To whom is wo? to whom is ſorrow? to whom is ſtrife? to whome is murmuring? to whome are wounds without cauſe? and to whome is the rednes of eyes? Euen to them that tarrie long at wine, to them that go & ſeeke mixt wine. And S Paul exhorteth vs, to walke honestly,
                  
                     Rom. 12.10. 
                  as in the day, not in gluttonie & drunkennes, neither in chambering & wantonnes, nor in ſtrife & enuying: becauſe ther is euer great diſſolutenes, riotouſnes, & loſenes in al ſuch exceſſe. The gluttō & the drunkard ſhal be poore ſaith Salomon, & eſpecially forbiddeth it to Princes as both Eccl. & Iſaiah doe. And it was not amiſſe ſaide, that wine hath drowned more then the ſea. Plutarque in the life of Cleomenes writeth that Ptolome Philopater,
                  Ptolome philopater. ſo named in mockerie ſaith Zonarus becauſe hee put to death both his father and mother, was deſtroyed through Wine and Weomen, and dyed like a beaſt. Another Ptolome was tearmed the bellie man becauſe of his gluttonie.

                  Callicratidas being ſent to Cyrus, after that he had remained certaine dayes,Neceſſary points to preſerue health. & not had any audience, by reaſon the King was retired & occupied in continual banquets & feaſtings, it was thought meete he ſhould returne without doing any thing, ſaying that as there was great reaſon they ſhoulde haue conſideration of their weale ſo ought they to commit nothing vnworthie of Sparta. Caeſar writeth in his commentaries, that the Almanes would not ſuffer any wine to be brought. Men in olde time ſet downe three moſt neceſſarie pointes to continue health, to eat without being ful, to labour without ſparing ones ſelf, and to preſerue his ſeede. There hath beene alſo certaine Prieſtes, which woulde neuer vſe ſalt with their meate,Salt. becauſe it ſharpened appetit, and prouoked to eate & drinke more, fearing to be fat, and leaſt that diuine part which was in them, ſhoulde be preſſed downe and kept vnder by the mortall. And thereunto that the extremitie in good point according to the opinion of Phyſitions is verie dangerous, & the excellencie of too much welfare enclineth towarde the oppoſite. Ioſephus deſcribing the manner of liuing of three ſortes of Philoſophers or ſects in Iudea, eſpecially of the Eſſeniens, highly commended them becauſe they loued trueth, & neuer did eat or drink ought, whereby nature mought be offended: & by reaſon of their great ſobrietie they liued long in health, ſome vnto a hundred yeares. And truely it is a great meane to liue happily, when a mans bodie is wel diſpoſed, and in good temper not drowned with wine, nor grieued with meates, readie to be imployed in any actiō he deſireth.Plato The which alſo moued Plato to call intemperancie a roote proper to euery diſeaſe. And Gorgias being demanded how he attained to ſo great yeres, of a hundred & eight, aunſwered, in neuer hauing eaten or done any thing through pleaſure. The old prouerb ſaith: much meate, much maladie. And verie wiſely was Socrates wont to ſay, that ſuch as were accuſtomed to frugalitie, & continencie, enioy great pleaſure & delight, aſwel for the quiet of their conſcience, as good diſpoſition of their body. And for as much as in ancient time, fiſh was accounted a more deintie,Fat and hungry ſoyles. & exquiſite kind of meat then fleſh, they which often fed theron were called by an infamous name, Opſophagi, gluttons, & wantons. This is the reaſon why in Titus Liuius barrenneſſe is preferred before frutefulnes; becauſe that men in a fat ſoyle are often times cowards & lubberly fellowes, & in a hungrie, they are more induſtrious, ſober, and painfull as experience teacheth vs. And whenſoeuer wee haue a mynde to eate, let vs conſider that

we haue to banquit both the ſoule, and body togeather, following the aduiſe of Epictetus. After that Alexander had vanquiſhed Darius, he cauſed a goodly pillar to be hewen downe, and burſt in peeces, wherein was engrauen the order, and quantitie, of ſuch meates, as were euery daye ſet before the Kinges of Perſia, ſaying that it was not fitte for kings to learne to ſuppe ſo prodigally and ſumptuouſly. And Diodorus the Sicilian writeth that there were lawes ſet down to the kinges of Aegypt, not onely to ſhewe what they ought vnto their ſubiectes, but alſo to ſerue as a rule and dyet of their owne perticular. And Zonarus after Xenophon in his Pedia writeth,The bringing vp of the perſian youth that all the youth of Perſia, at ſchooles and places where they learned and exerciſed, were neuer nouriſhed but with bread and water, & ſome time for better cheere ſayth Cordamus they added a fewe Creſſes. And they neuer eate vntill they had done their ordinarie taske. The which in his ſecond booke he writeth was alſo enioyned to ſouldiars, and in that countrey it was a very great diſhonour for one to ſhewe himſelfe ſubiect to naturall eiections; which they neuer knew to doe, but with abſtinence, moderateneſſe, and good diet: thorough which togeather with their exerciſe, they conſumed and diuerted ſuch ſuperfluities and humors,
                     Socrates his councell. as proceeded from too great nouriſhment. Socrates in Xenophon wiſheth ſuch as would liue in health, to beware of meates which entiſed them to eate when they had no appetite, and of drinkes which prouoked them to drinke when they had no thirſt, teaching vs onely to vſe that which wee haue neede of, in ioyning pleaſure togeather with neceſsitie. Iulius Caeſar, Auguſtus, Titus, Veſpatian, Traian, Tacitus, Alexander Seuerus,
                  Princes very ſober. and Charlemagne, grew moſt famous for that they vſed ſo great ſparing, and their table talke was more accounted of then great fare. And they made ordinances vpon expenſes, for the preſeruation of health and ſparing of the giftes of God. It is written of Veſpaſian that once a moneth he would faſt one whole daye.Veſpaſian. Cato, And of Cato that for the moſt part he neuer eate but of breade and beefe, and neuer dranke but water, with which ſometime he mingled a little vineger. The like is ſayde of Scipio. Fabritius was founde by the Samnite Embaſſadors feeding of Turnups which he roſted between the cenders. Maſsiniſſa King of the Numides neuer did eate but of rauell bread, and very ſimple meate, without ſauce, and that but once a day according to the auncient order. Hannibal neuer vſed other ordinarie then the worſt of his ſouldiers. And Cicero alleadgeth the ſaying of Plato, that it was verye ſtrange to ſee one feede

twiſe on one day. And he which ſayth that the life of a ſober man, and one that is content with litle, reſembleth him which maketh a voyage in the ſpring time, by little iourneys, through a pleaſant & fertill countrey, cōpareth it very fitly, and ought to withdrawe vs Frenchmen, frō ſo great wantonnes, for which the very Turkes haue founde fault with vs, as Paulus Iouius writeth. At Rome in old time wine was forbid vnto womē, the which the inhabitants of Marſeilles long time obſerued.VVyne forbidden to Romain weomen.
                   We ſee likewiſe that veſſels when they are more frayght, then they are able to cary do ſinke: euen ſo fareth it with ſuch as eate & drinke too much. As it is written in Eccl. Exceſse of meates bringeth ſickenes,
                  
                     Eccleſ. 37.29. 
                  & gluttony cōmeth into cholericke diſeaſes, By ſurfet many periſheth, but he that dieteth himſelfe prolongeth his life. And Socrates was wont to ſay that there is no differēce between a cholericke man & a beaſt.Xenophon. As alſo Xenophon declareth in his Pedia, cōmending k. Cyrus for his ſobriety, & for that he exerciſed, vntill he ſweat. And in the 2.Socrates. booke of the deeds & ſayings of Socrates, he aduiſed a mā neuer to contract amity, with any that is too much addicted to their belly, to drinking, eating, ſleeping drowſines, & couetouſnes. Who will haue pittie on the charmer that is ſtinged with the ſerpent? As Eccl. writeth:
                     Eccleſ. 12.15 leſſe pittie then, ought ther to be had of him which ſuffreth himſelfe to be throwen down hedlong through pleaſure, which is ſaid to reſēble the theeues of Aegypt, called Philiſtes, which euer made much of the people, & embraſed ſuch as they had a mind to ſtrangle.Pleaſure. And Iſocrates called her a traytor, deceiuer, hangmā, cruel beaſt, and tyrant.
                     Amos 6.4. God by his prophet Amos greatly threatned thoſe that loue to liue delicately, as alſo did our ſauiour by the example of the wicked rich man. And S. Auguſt. vpon the 41. Pſalme, alledgeth the old ſaying, that the incontinent mā calleth vpon death. As alſo the prouerbe carieth, of a ſhort pleaſure cōmeth a long diſpleaſure. And there lyeth poyſon euer hiddē, & the hooke is couered with a baite. And we muſt behold thē behind, & not before as Ariſtotle coūſelleth vs. For pleſures ſeeme very beautiful before, as do the Sirenes, & ſundry other monſters: but behind they traine a long & vgly ſerpents taile. Whordome is alſo forbidden by god, & the immoderate vſe of the act of venery ought to be ſhunned,Of VVhoredome. as altering, drying, & marring the body, weakning all the ioynts & mēbers, making the face blobbed, & yellow, ſhortning life, diminiſhing memory, vnderſtanding, and the very heart,1. Theſ. 4.3 as Hoſea ſayth. S. Paul in the firſt to the Theſſalonians writeth, that the will of God is our ſanctification, and that we ſhould abſtaine from fornication, that euerie one ſhould knowe howe to poſſeſſe his

veſſell in holineſſe, and honour: and not in the luſt of concupiſcence. In the firſt to the Corinthians he exhorteth vs to flye it,1. Cor. 9.18. 
                  becauſe he that committeth fornication ſinneth againſt his owne bodie, that is to ſay, he doth iniurie it, profaning and defileth the pouertie, and holineſſe thereof, he ſayth further that of the members of Chriſt we make them the members of an harlot, and profane the temple of the holy Ghost, and that being bought with great price, we are not our owne but Gods, and therefore ſhould glorifie him in our bodie and ſpirite. Publicke honeſtie lyeth there violate, and as Cupid was made blinde, ſo do they which are bewitched with this fooliſh loue, ſtayne, and abandone, their owne honour,
                     Pro. 7.22. wealth, libertie, and health. For this cauſe Salomon compared the whoremonger, to an oxe that goeth to the ſlaughter, and to a foole to the ſtockes for correction, and to a byrde that haſteneth to the ſnare, not knowing that he is in daunger. We reade what happened to Dina, the Beniamites, and Dauid. And hiſtories are full of examples of miſchiefes which haue enſued thereon. And he which committeth that ſinne, wrappeth and ſetteth an other as far in, and ſinneth not alone. By Gods lawe adulterie was puniſhed by death. Gen. 20. Leu. 22. and according to the ciuill lawe. Inſtit. de pub. iud. Sicut lib. Iulia. de adult. lib. in iuſ. C. But to caſt off ſo daungerous a vipor,Remedy againſt whoredome. we muſt craue at Gods hand, that he wil beſtowe of vs a pure and chaſt hart, that we may liue ſoberly, auoide idleneſſe, & all foule and filthy cōmunication, be it by mouthe, writing, or picture. Ezechiel attributeth the ſinne of Sodom, to fulneſſe of bread, and abundance of idlenes.
                  
                     Ezec. 16 49. 
                  Dauid prayed to God to turne his eyes from vanitie. Pſalm. 119. and Iob ſaid, I made a couenant with my eyes, why then ſhould I thinke on a mayde? And in Gen. 6. the children were blamed that kept not their eyes,
                     Iob. 13.1. but looked on fayre women as alſo did Sichem. Gen. 34. and Putifer his wife Gen. 39. and Ammon 2. Sam. 13. Notwithſtanding as Iſocrates ſayde, that a leſſe labour and greefe is made not to be left through a greater, ſo doe thoſe pleaſures, which proceede from vertuous and honourable actions, as from temperance continencie, and other vertues, cleane mortifie, with their ioye and greatneſſe, ſuch as come only from the body, which engender nothing but gowtes, ſciaticas, cholicques, palſies, greefes of the ſtomacke, tremblinges, leproſies, panges, vomits, inflammations, and other daungerous accidents. And when we feele heauineſſe, and weariſomneſſe in our members, head akes, or ſtitches in our ſide, which for the moſt part proceed frō crudities, & lacke of digeſtion, we muſt not perſwad our ſelues to doe as before, and as they ſay to cach heare from a beaſt,

but reſt quietly and obſerue good dyet, and long before to foreſee the ſtorme that is at hande. And when we goe to viſite ſuch as are ſicke, and vnderſtand the cauſe of their diſeaſes, we ought to looke into our ſelues according to Plato his councell, and ſee whether we commit not the like exceſſe, to the ende we may take heede by an other bodies harme, and to ſtande vppon our gardes, and conſider howe precious a thing health is. And let vs thankefully receiue at Gods hande, ſuch inſtructions, as by chaſtiſing of vs, he ſendeth by reaſon of our intemperancie, to the end we may learne to preuent ſuch as may happen vnto vs.Antigonus. And as king Antigonus ſayd, that ſickneſſe had warned him not to waxe proude, ſo ought wee to learne to humble our ſelues, and to liue better, for that God ſendeth that as a meanes, as well to vs as other, to awake vs, and keepe vs within the boundes of our dewetie. For vices are as the very proper inheritance of man, which wee muſt ſeeke to correct, taking awaye from goods a vehement couetouſneſſe,Correction of vices. and vnbridled greedineſſe, and from euils, feare and ſorrowe, which come but from conceite, the very cauſe of vnquietneſſe, and perturbation, which putteth me in minde often times of the ſaying of an auncient father, that as the body in health eaſely endureth both colde, and heate, and maketh his profit of all kinde of meates, ſo doth the Chriſtian, which hath his ſoule well compounded, moderate anger, ioye, and all other affections,
                     Hipocrates aduiſe to phiſitians. which offende both body and ſoule. Hippocrates aboue all thinges recommendeth to a Phiſitian, that he ſhould well aduiſe himſelfe, if in plagues, and ordinary diſeaſes, he founde nothinge which was diuine, that is to ſaye, whether the hande of God were not the proper cauſes of the ſickeneſſe, of the partie diſeaſed. For truely,Siknes, and aflictions are ſent from god for our good and profit. he often times ſendeth ſickeneſſe for remedies, and meanes to withdrawe thoſe whome he loueth from eternall ruyne. And to puniſh ſuch exceſſe, he armeth graſhoppers, noyſome flies, wormes, froſtes, windes, plagues, warre, dewes and vapors of the earth. As before we declared thoſe thinges which they call euils, are as great helpes to the good to do well, and to profit in the exerciſe of vertue: Pouertie, to moderate their deſires, baſenes to humble themſelues, ſickeneſſe to liue patiently, and more ſoberly, and al kinds of griefes to make vs runne vnto God,Good & euil. and reconcile our ſelues vnto him, and to ſuccour our neighbour in like diſtreſſe when God ſhall haue drawne vs out. For I eſteeme none good but ſuch as followe trewe riches which are godlineſſe and vertue: and contrariwiſe the wicked are faſtned to trewe euils, that is vice and impietie.

That was the reaſon why in the councell of Latran it was enioyned, that the ſicke man ſhould cal for his ſpirituall Phiſitian. Diognes was angrye with ſuch as ſacrificed to health, and in the meane time liued in all pleaſures and idleneſſe: and ſayd that as in a houſe where much prouiſion and victuall is, are many rats and cats: ſo the body that is repleniſhed with meates drawe ſundry diſeaſes vnto it.Frugalitie. And he called frugalitie the mother of health, for which without great neede a man neede not vſe laxatiue medicines, becauſe they are offenſiue to the ſtomacke, and often times breede more ſuperfluities and excrements, then they drawe out of the body. Plato alſo in the 8. of his commonwealth, councelleth vs not to prouoke ſickeneſſe with phiſicke, except the diſeaſe be moſt dangerous and vehement.Phiſicke Aurelius It is written of the Emperour Aurelian and ſundry other, that they neuer called for phiſitians or vſed phiſicke: as at this day moſt part of the Almanes & Zuzers vſe, but they healed themſelues throught good and ſpare dyet, and ſome of them with a quart of ſtrong wine and ſpyce. And as Herodotus wrote,Babilonians. the Babilonians neuer vſed phiſicke but all ſicke perſons were brought into the market place,In the temple of Eſculapius, vvere all receipts regiſtred. to whom al ſuch as had beene cured of the like diſeaſe, taught their remedies. And there was founde in the temple of Eſculapius, enregiſtred, all ſuch receites as had beene experimented, for to ſerue in like caſe.Plin. lib. 29.
                   For otherwiſe phiſicke conſiſted in the knowledge of ſundry herbes, and they were almoſt all inſtructed in anatomies, and ſimples, as Galen writeth. And we ſee euen very many beaſtes and birdes, to finde out herbes and remedies fit for themſelues which they haue taught vnto men, with the vſe of letting of bloud and gliſters. Yet they haue alway thought, that they are often deceiued, when there is nothing but experience without iudgement and contemplation, to apply remedies in time and place, with other conſideration of the age, ſtrength or debilitie of perſon, condition, maner of liuing, the ſeaſon of the yeare, the cauſe, beginning, encreaſe,Aſclepiades. growing, and declyning of the diſeaſe. Aſclepiades ſet all phiſicke at nought, and counſelled only ſobrietie, to rubbe ouer the whole bodie euery morning and to exerciſe. And ſome haue compared ſuch as take phiſicke, to thoſe which driue out the burgeſſe out of the citie, to place ſtrangers there.Cato. 
                  M. Cato feared leaſt the Grecians would ſende phiſitions to Rome, and therefore made ſome to be baniſhed and driuen thence; and expreſly forbad his ſonne in any wiſe to vſe or deale with thē, as appeareth in a letter he wrote vnto him. They in like ſort of the ſame profeſſiō which ſince haue crept into Rome,
                  
were meere ſtrangers,
                     Rome lo
                        •
                     ng time vvithout phiſitians the Romaines themſelues hauing beene aboue 600. yeares togither without Phiſitians, & ſince they haue euen abhorred thē, ſaying their irreſolutiō & hazardous aduiſe: which was the very cauſe that they termed thē hangmen & theeues, and ſo the moſt part of the citizens endeuored only to be skilful in ſimples, vſing no other drogues then what proceeded frō nature, & of their own growing. Indeede they had certaine deputies which ſent them panniers ful of ſimples out of the iſles which appertained vnto thē as ſundry haue written. And were it not that I feare being too tedious, I could alledge a great nūber of Kings & Princes, which haue bin very curious in knowing, & ſeeking out the property of herbes & plants, & ſome haue writtē therof to the great profit of their poſterity, & an immortall glory is remained vnto thē. Galē
                   himſelf writeth, that ſundry emperours haue gratly ſtudied to attaine vnto the knowledg of ſimples, & to adorne that art amidſt their buſines & in ſundry places entertained arboryſts, and in their triumphes cauſed rare plants to be caried.The temple of Eſculapius vvithout the citie. The tēple of Eſculapius was in old time builded, without the citie, teaching vs therby how we ought to eſloyne our ſelues frō Phiſitians & phiſick, which kind of people Plato could neuer like of, except they were ſurgions, & meruelous wel experienced, thinking it to be a great ſigne of intēperancy wher he foūd any of the other ſort. And in his dialogue Philoſophus he eſteemeth phiſick to conſiſt only in opinions & vncertaine coniectures. Nicocles called Phiſitians happy men, becauſe the Sunne made manifeſt what good ſucceſſe ſoeuer happened in their cures, and the earth buried what fault ſoeuer they cōmitted. And ſome ſay they are very angry men when they ſee their neighbours in health, & not to need them. The ſaid Plato and Cato were likewiſe wont to ſay, that men in doing nothing learned to do ill. And Eccl. coūſelleth vs to exerciſe, becauſe Idlenes breedeth much euill, & ſlothfulnes pouerty, which tēteth vs to do ill as Iſocrates wrote. And Xenophon exhorted Hierom to ſpend his time in honeſt exerciſes, to make both his body and mind better diſpoſed. And the Athenians ordined a great puniſhment for idlenes. For this cauſe Scipio was wont to ſay, that he was neuer leſſe in reſt, then whē he reſted himſelf, vnderſtāding therby that when he was not buſied in publick affaires, his owne perticular & his ſtudy ſufficiently held him occupied & that in ſolitarines he cōſulted with himſelf. The wiſe mē of the Indies called Gymnoſophiſtes ſo greatly deteſted idlenes, that they cauſed euery mā to render a perticular account of what he had learned or did euery day. We read in S. Ambroſe in the 82. Epiſtle of

his 10. booke, & in S. Ierom in ſundry treaties, and other eccleſiaſticall aucthors that monaſteries were firſt ordained for academies & ſcholes of trauaile and exerciſe as well of the body, as of the mind, of learning, vertue, abſtinence, faſting, patience, & all good exāple. And the word of the Emperour Seuerus was, Trauaillons. And the Emperours Adrian, Antonius, Cyrus, Sertorius and ſundry other captains, haue ſtill kept their men of armes, and ſouldiers, yea their very horſes in continuall exerciſe, trauaile, & ſobrietie. And we reade in the Commentaries of Caeſar, that his ſouldiers had no other prouiſion, then corne, and a little vineger to mingle with their water, and that ſome would neuer ſuffer any to bring thē wine, imagining that that made men more nyce & effeminate, and leſſe able to endure paine and trauaile: and ſheweth as alſo did Titus Liuius, how they ſought to cut off all occaſions, and meanes of delicateneſſe: and howe the ſouldiers were all the day long kept to trauaile in workes, and conſtrained to cary about them ſufficient corne for one whole month, and ſeauen piles to ſerue for a rampire.
                     Veget. L. 1 c. 19 And Vegetius ordayned that young apprentiſes and nouices ſhould carie burthens to threeſcore pounde weight. And Marius ſo charged his ſouldiers and employed them in the diches neere vnto the Rhyne,
                  
                     Marius his Moyles. that they were after termed the moyles of Marius, yea they were often times imployed in amending the high wayes called militarie, and there they made diches to make them the dryer, and the waters to ſoake away. The ſayde Marius ſayde likewiſe in Saluſt, that his father and ſundrye other perſonages had taught him, that daintineſſe,De bello Iug. and niceneſſe were fitte for weomen, but trauayle for men, and that all good men ought rather to eſteeme a good reputation, then riches: and that weapons beautified a houſe, and not fayre mooueables. The ſayde Saluſt recyteth before,
                     Metellus kept the diſcipline of vvarre. howe that when Metellus was ariued in Africa, he tooke away whatſoeuer might ſeeme to nouriſh ſlothfulneſſe, and cauſed proclimation to be made throughout the campe, that none ſhould be ſo hardie as to preſume to ſell eyther bread, or any other meate dreſſed, that the cariers of water ſhould not follow the campe; that the ſimple ſouldiers ſhuld neuer haue page, nor beaſt of carriage: that ech one ſhuld keepe his rank, caſt his trench, and carry his victuall together with his furniture. And Xenophon in the ſecond of the Pedia of Cyrus writeth, that the ſouldiers and men at armes, did neuer dyne and ſup, vntill they trauailed and ſweate. The which ought to make our men aſhamed, that haue ſo many boyes, & drabs to cary their furniture; ſuch ought rather to be held

in the ranke of theeues, robbers, cowardes, and boyes, then of valiant men for cōbat. The ſayd Caeſar writeth alſo of a faſhion which the Gaulois had,The auncient fashion of the Galois at an entrance into vvarre. the which Titus Liuius and Tacitus doe likewiſe affirme, that when by publick ordinance proclamation of warre was made, all young men aboue the age of 15. yeares were ſummoned to appeare armed, and furniſhed as they ought, and he which ariued laſt, was put to death. The which Plinie alſo doeth recite of ſtorkes, how they deteſt ſlothfulnes. And in certaine Iſlandes namely the Baleares nowe called Maiorque and Minorque, the children can not breake their faſt nor eate,Baleares. vntill with their ſlinges they ſtrike downe, their meate which is ſet vpon the toppe of a high beame or pole. Other vſed to giue their childrē nothing but what they could get by hunting. And they of Crete, cauſed them continually to exerciſe, to make themſelues the more nimble. Yea Amaſis K. of Aegypt, forbad to all his ſubiectes vppon a great penaltie, that none ſhould eate before he had long iourneyed or trauayled in his occupation,Alexander and thereof ſhould render account. Alexander the great called trauaile a royall thing, and idleneſſe ſeruile. And in the prouerbes idleneſſe is forbidden, and he writeth, that A ſlothfull hande maketh poore: and he that ſleepeth in harueſt is the ſonne of confuſion. And in Eccleſiaſtes The ſleepe of him which trauaileth is ſweete. And the ſayde Kinge Amaſis condemned to death all idle perſons except they had wherewithall to liue: and in all ſortes greatly blamed idleneſſe, and would that once a yeare each one ſhould render account, by what ſcience or occupation he gayned his lyuing.The Aegiptians & Athenians rendred account how they liued. The which the Atheniens and ſundry other well ordered cōmonwealth diligently obſerued. And Cicero entreating of the lawes writeth, that none went in the ſtreates but he caried the badge and marke whereby he liued. Which is yet obſerued in ſundry cities of Germany, and Cantons of Zuizerlande. Of others they write that ſometimes men ſo imployed themſelues at Rome that there was not to be founde ſo much as one ydle man. And a Philoſopher ſayde that as a woman can not engender any thing to purpoſe without a man, no more doth hope without trauayle: and there is nothing which continuall labour will not attayne vnto, and thorough care and watchfulneſſe, a man ouercommeth thinges more then harde, as Seneca ſayde. And Heſiodus counceled the laborer, to make his prayes to the Gods before he went to his worke or ſaying, marry he muſt lay his hande on the plough tayle. And Plato hath moſt holily written, that as through great, and continuall labours, concupiſcences, and ryotouſneſſe

were quenched, ſo were they ſet a fire agayne by idleneſſe.Mony loſt lent to an idle perſon. 
                  Stobeus writeth that in ſundry countryes, if a man lent money to one that were idle or giuen to his pleaſure, he ſhould looſe it for euer. And if at Rome one had negligently husbanded his inheritaunce,
                     Ezec. 16 49. he was ſtraightwayes cenſured. And God in Ezechiel among the cauſes of the deſtruction of Sodom ſetteth downe idlenes for a principall. And Themiſtocles was wont to ſay, that ſlothfulnes buried men while they were liuing in their graue. And S. Ambroſe called idlenes the pillow of Satan. And it is written in Eccleſiaſticus, what euer thou doe, take exerciſe, and cruell ſickeneſſe ſhall not meete with thee, and that idlenes breedeth much euill. For ſhe is the ſpring of iniuſtice, of pouertie, and euill diſpoſition. And Seneca wrote that trauaile nouriſhed gentle ſpirits. And the holy ſcripture teacheth vs that as the birde is borne to flie, ſo is man to trauaile, and to imploy himſelfe to many fayre and good offyces: for vice which watcheth hard, cōmeth and runneth ouer, as ſoone as euer it perceiueth that one is giuen ouer to idlenes, & maketh thē giue way, becauſe that nature being alwaies in a perpetual motion, deſireth to be driuē to the better part,Mans nature. or elſe ſhe ſuffreth her ſelfe to be weighed downe as a balance to the worſer. Which was the cauſe that Plato was wont to ſay to his children when they went out of his ſchoole, Goe to maſters,1. Theſ. 2.9 ſtudie to imploy your leaſure to ſome honeſt paſtime. S. Paul in the firſt Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians declareth howe he had eate his bread trauayling both day & night, to the end he would not be chargeable vnto any, and that he which refuſed to worke ought not to eate, adding that ſome walked diſordinately, doing nothing, and liuing wantonly: wherefore he commaunded thoſe which were ſuch and be ſought them thorough Chriſt Ieſus, to eate their breade laboring peaceably. Xenophon reciteth among the ſayinges of Socrates,
                  Pithagoriens that it is idleneſſe if one do no good. The Pithagoriens cōmanded none to helpe their friendes to eaſe them of their burthen, but to charge them well, as not approuing idleneſſe. And K. Cyrus boaſted,Cirus. that he neuer did eate, before he had firſt done ſome exerciſe,Alexander. as a ſauce to breede him a good appetite. The which Alexander was often times wont to ſay, & that he had no need of any other cookes for his dinner then to riſe earely, nor for his ſupper then to eate little at dinner, and refuſed the cookes which the Queene of Carie ſent vnto him. The like is written of Iulian the Emperour.Ageſilaus. To which purpoſe we reade that the Theſſalonians ſent vnto Ageſilaus certaine refreſhinges of corne, foule, comfits, baked meates and other exquiſite fare, and

moſt daintie wine: He tooke the corne only and commanded ſuch as brought it to carry away the reſt, as a thing which hee had no neede of: but in the end, thorough the great inſtancie, which they made vnto him, he tooke them, and willed them to make diuiſion thereof among the ſlaues, telling them that it was not meete, for ſuch as made profeſsion of valor and proweſſe, to receiue ſuch nice daynties: and that which is proper and ſerueth to a ſeruile nature, ought not to agree with ſuch as are of a franke & free courage.A Lacedemonian.
                   A Lacedemonian anſwered one, that wondered howe he could liue ſo ſparingly, conſidering he was of ſuch wealth; that it was an honeſt matter when one hauing great ſtore of riches, could notwithſtanding liue according vnto reaſon and not appetite. And Archidamus tolde one that had promiſed to giue him excellent wine,Archidamus. that that would ſerue but to make one drinke more, and become leſſe man,of Sleaping. Too much ſleeping alſo fatteth and diminiſheth the ſpirits of life, and of time. And not without cauſe ſayd a Philoſopher, that it annoyed the bodie, the minde, and all buſineſſe, except it were moderated to ſuffice nature, egalling our felicitie with an other miſerie: and that like vnto a tole gatherer it tooke away the halfe part of our life. And if as Plutarke, Varro and Plinie wrote, to liue is to watch, then they which ſleepe doe not properly liue, as they write of Epaminondas, who after that he had killed one of his ſouldiers,Epaminondas that was ſet to watch, becauſe he founde him ſleepinge, aunſwered that he left him in the ſame eſtate he founde him in. Frō whence I imagine the cuſtome firſt grewe, of which I ſpake before, to awake the Kinges of Perſia and Macedonia earely,
                     K. of Perſia & Macedonia. to put them in minde to take care of that which God had committed vnto their charge.Vertue. 
                  Heſiodus deſcribeth vertue vnto vs to be enuironed, with ſweate, watching and great trauaile. And we ſee that ſluggiſhneſſe maketh both mind and bodie to languiſh. And if the ayre in which we liue, and the waters were not toſſed with windes there would be nought elſe but corruption. Quintus Curſius writeth of Alexander and of the Lacedemonians, and Titus Liuius of Hannibal and the Carthaginians, that they which were not able to be ouercome and vanquiſhed by their enemies and infinite harmes which they endured were notwithſtanding cleane deſtroyed through delights and pleaſures. And the Poets wrote of Perſeus, that through the ayde of Minerua he cut off Gorgons head, which turned men into ſtones, vnderſtanding therby that Princes through wiſedome, haue ſurmounted pleaſures, which make men as blockiſh as images. And we ſee by experience

that the poore hath this aduantage ouer the rich, that they are exempt frō pleaſure. The which Curius & Corancanus wel knowing, when it was told thē that ſome referred all to pleſure ſaid,Soldiors employed in trifles to auoyde Idlenes. wold to god that the Samnites & Pirrhus had bin as wel perſwaded herein, to the end that giuing thēſelues to pleaſure, they mought more eaſely haue bin vanquiſhed. And many haue ſayd that all pleaſure was followed by enemies, & it is to be coniectured that it was not thorough folly, that ſundry emperors haue made al the ſpider cobwebs through out the citie of Rome, to be gathered & heaped togeather & created a Senate of weomen, led their armies to the ſea ſhore to gather cockles, as though there were want of enimies, to ſtand catching of flies, but it was to auoide idlenes, & rather to occupie their ſouldiers in ſuch trifles, & toyes, then quarels, to ſel ſmoke rather thē to do worſe, which likewiſe as Plinie wrote, moued thē which builded thoſe ſo wonderfull Pyramides where about one of thē 300. and threeſcore thouſand men wrought the ſpace of 20. yeares; & yet he writeth that their remēbrance was clean loſt, which ſpent ſo much treaſure and time in ſuch vanities. And it had bin much more commendable, to haue beſtowed that time & expence,By vvhat meanes health is preſerued. in matters profitable to the common wealth. Gelon after that he had vanquiſhed the Carthaginians, led the Siracuſians often times into the field to labour and plant as well as to warre, to the end to enrich their lande, and that they ſhould not waxe worſe in doing nothing. The auncient prouerbe carieth, that the Gods ſell riches vnto men for their trauayle. So following Galens counſell, who ſo would be in health ought to liue ſoberly, and to take paynes, except he will coſen him ſelfe, as we ſee that all thinges alter, except they be put in vſe. A great Lorde tolde Kinge Alphonſus that hee toyled too much, to whome hee aunſwered: thinkeſt thou that God and nature haue giuen handes vnto Kinges in vayne? And if they deſire to liue in health, why ſhould they ſeeke the contrarie thorough idleneſſe and delightes? As Salomon teacheth in his Prouerbes, Eaſe ſlayeth the fooliſhe, and the proſperitie of fooles deſtroyeth them. Our forefathers counſelled vs to exerciſe our bodie and minde equally togeather, as a couple of horſes, ſette in a coach togeather. And Zenon was woont to ſaye, that the life of ſchoolers, that is to ſaye, of ſuch as are giuen to idle ſtudie, dyffereth not from the voluptuous and Epicurians. For knowledge and ſtudie ought as well to profitte other as ones owne ſelfe.Of gaming. And for as muche as idleneſſe draweth to vnprofytable and diſhoneſt games, heere were a verye

good place to ſhewe the miſchiefes, noyſomneſſe, blaſphemies and coſonage, that they carie with them: and to prayſe Chilon the Lacedemonian, who returned from Corinth without deliuering what he had in charge, becauſe he found the gouernors playing at dice. And it were very requiſite that the good ordinaunces, which are made therefore were well obſerued.Alphonſus. The which Alphonſus forbad to thoſe in his court, and to all his ſubiectes, not permitting them to playe vnder a great forfaiture.Turkie. And in Turkie he was noted of great infamie, which played for money, and greeuous paines are appointed, if he returne to it againe. Sundrye haue written that King Cyrus to puniſh them of Sardes,
                  Cirus. commanded them to paſſe away their time in playes and banquets, therby to render them leſſe men and keepe thē from rebellion. It were very requiſite that all playing at chance and hazard were baniſhed out of France, as well in deed, as they are by the edictes,Young gentlemen wndone by play. by the lawe Martia, & ſundry other. Euery man may ſee how many young gentlemen haue beene cleane vndon by playing at cardes and dice, by gluttonie, drunkenneſſe, whordome, expences,Honeſt paſtime allovved. and exceſſe, which proceede thereof. I will not for all that miſlike honeſt paſtime, and yet we ought to be ſorrie with Apelles, if we ſcape a day without drawing a line, or with Cato the Cenſor, if through negligence we haue neyther done nor learned any thing that is good, and at night call all our actions to account, and ſee what loſſe we haue made of the time, which is ſo precious, and not able to be againe recouered. And in a good beginning we ought to perſeuer without looſing courage. And foraſmuch as meere leaſure is the cauſe of diſorders, and little honeſt thoughtes we ought not to ſpend one bare houre in vaine. Many haue counſelled youth to exerciſe themſelues in Muſicke,Muſicke. to employ their time in thoſe harmonies, which ſtirre vp to commendable operations and moral vertues, tempering deſires, greedineſſe, and ſorrowes, for ſo much as rimes & melodies conſiſt in certaine proportions and concords of the voyce. And ſo long as this pleaſure without wantonneſſe allureth them, they looſe the occaſion of deuiſing any leſſe honeſt ſport, according to Plato his opinion, the ſeconde of his lawes and eight of his commonwealth, and Ariſtotle in his Politiques lib. 8.3. 5. & 7. This mooued Architas to inuent a certaine muſicall inſtrument,
                     Architas. Men giuing ouer, publick charge to liue priuately to ſtay the running wit of children. I could here extoll Curius, Diocletian, Lucullus, and ſundry other, who retyred themſelues into a little ſmall farme to the ploughe. And Cicinnatus, who after he had giuen ouer his Dictatorſhippe, returned to his plough, as

did Attilius Calatinus, Attilius Regulus, and ſundrye other, who contented themſelues with the labour of the field, deſpiſing all honours. The which in my opinion mooued Plynie to write that the grounde tooke pleaſure in being ploughed by Emperours. Wantonneſſe, and daintineſſe breedeth vexation of minde, ſtrange faſhions, and choler: whereas facilitie of manners, maketh one content with what he hath in hande,Maner of the Egiptians.
                   and to ſeeke nothing too exquiſite or ſuperfluous. I am of opinion that the manner which the Aegyptians helde, and long time obſerued, in carrying vp and downe the hall at feaſtes, a dryed anatomie of a dead mans bodie, and ſhewing it vnto the companie, thereby admoniſhing men to remember that in ſhort time they ſhould be a like, was to make men more ſober and temperate. And ſundry before time haue written that the diſeaſes of the body be not to be feared ſo as the ſoule be ſounde, the health whereof conſiſteth in the good temperature of powers couragious or wrathfull, coueting and reaſonable,Temperature of the ſoule. ſhe being the reaſonable miſtreſſe, and bridling the two other, as two furious and vnbroken coltes. For as wee are curious to preſerue the health of our bodie, through the receites which are giuen and preſcribed vnto vs by Phiſitians or experience, and ſo abſtayne from meates and exceſſe, which may offende or alter the ſame, it is more required at our handes to remayne in the trueth, and to haue a greater deſire and care to preſerue the health of our ſoules, diligently obſeruing all the rules which God the ſouerayne Phiſitian of all preſcribeth vnto vs: and taking great heede on the other ſide that we ſhunne and auoyde whatſoeuer he hath forbidden. And if we be carefull to ſeeke out,The health of the ſoule. thoſe remedies which nature, art, and experience preſent vnto vs to preſerue the health of our bodie, much more ought wee to drawe, and ſucke out of the holy ſcriptures and hiſtories, that which formeth, dreſſeth, teacheth, aduiſeth, reformeth and healeth the moſt noble and excellent part of vs, which prepareth and ſtrengtheneth vs at all aſſayes, to receiue and carie with great contentment & hope, (God aſsiſting) whatſoeuer may befall vnto vs in this life.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XLVII. What we ought to iudge of certaine examples of lying.
               
                  
                  WE haue before recited the maxime which Vlyſſes in Sophocles would teach the ſonne of Achilles, as a matter very neceſſarie, neuer to bee aſhamed to lye when a man may reape profit thereby: as alſo we put in vre what Plato permitted to Magiſtrates and Phiſitians to lye, ſo ſome other benefit mought be reaped: for the ſcriptures, and Doctors of the Church, forbid all kinde of lying as well to great as to ſmall. And none ought to ſaue his corporall life, to looſe his ſpirituall.
                     All maner of lying forbidden of god.
                     Lying ioyfull or offici, ous.
                   And ſuch helpe as we ought to miniſter vnto our neighbour, ought to be without offence to God, & by iuſt, vpright and honeſt means. A man muſt not in like ſort doe euill in hope of good. And as touching that kinde of lying which is called ioyfull or offycious, it diſcouereth it ſelfe eaſely, & doth no great harme. Now to ſatisfie what may be obiected of the ly which the midwiues of the Hebrewes made, and of Rahab which hid the ſpies of the children of Iſraell,
                  The Lye vvhich the midvviues of the hebrewes made. of Iacob which ſaide he was Eſau, and of other places which ſeeme to derogate from the truth, S. Auguſtine ſayth, that as touching the midwiues we ought not ſo much to reſpect the lie, as the fayth which they had in God, and the affection and mercie which they ſhewed vnto the children of Iſraell. In the reſt wee are to conſider the will of God, and that they haue beene moued thorough the holy Ghoſt, to foretell like Prophets, what God had ordayned for his glory. And when he willeth a thing, then is ſinne cleane excluded: and what may ſeeme vnto men moſt vniuſt, is in reſpect of our ſoueraine Lorde moſt iuſt. Conſtance the father of Conſtantine the great, made proclamaton that all Chriſtians ſhould giue ouer their offyces, and lyuing, which the good did and went from the court, but ſuch as were but in name, gaue ouer their religion. The ſayde Emperour ſhortly after, cauſed all thoſe to be called home agayne which were departed, and droue away the reſt, ſaying that if they were not faythfull to God, they would not be to his ſeruice.2. King 10.25 The like was doone by Iehu, who after he had ſummoned all the Prieſts of Baal, as though he would reeſtabliſh their idolatrie, put them all to the edge of the ſworde, and made a iakes of their temple. Yet ceaſed he not to worſhip the golden calfes. We ought then to admire the ſayinges and deedes of great perſonages and not to imitate them in what is not conformable to the rule which God hath preſcribed, or wherein they ſhall fayle like men, and to followe the counſell giuen vnto vs by S. Paul to trie all things and holde that which is good.
                  1. Theſ. 5.21.
               
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XLVIII. Of the meanes how to render a nation true and happie, and of the bringing vp of youth.
               
                  ALbeit that ſundry of thoſe meanes, may bee perceiued by that which we haue before touched, yet by reaſon of their importance & to be meete with ſundry inconueniences which happen, I thought good to ſet forth more at large, howe the very fountayne of all trueth,Bringing vp of youth of vvhat importance. godlines, bountie, iuſtice, pollicy, and vertue, proceedeth frō a naturall good, and that thorough the careleſnes of heads & Magiſtrates, guiding their affayres by hazard without any foreſight, & according to the humor of mē which in all time haue halted in their dutie, youth neuer hauing receiued good bringing vp, corruption hath in euery place mightely increaſed. For as Iſocrates wrote in his Areopagiticke; it is not great reuenewes nor riches, nor lawes & ordinances which make a citie quiet and happie, but the good nourture of youth; which being ill brought vp maketh no account of lawes;Good lawes ſtraighly to be obſerued. L. 5. c. 6 and contrariwiſe becommeth very obedient vnto Magiſtrates, & giueth it ſelfe to all kind of vertue, if betime it receiue a good impreſsion. It were alſo very requiſite to cauſe lawes to be ſtraightly obſerued; but in vaine do mē make lawes as Ariſtotle in his Politicks ſaid, if youth be not brought vp in good manners, and nouriſhed therein. And Plato in the 4. of his commonwealth was of opinion, that it had no great neede of lawes, by reaſon of the good diſcipline in which his citizens had beene nouriſhed, as ſuch as without lawes were able to gouerne themſelues as they ought. And in his Politiques and bookes of lawes, he attributeth all the diſorder of a countrey or citie, to the multitude of lawes and ſo often change of them,Nourture & bringing vp of children. and all delightes to lewde bringing vp, & ſheweth that the principal ſcope of a good eſtabliſher or reformer of a commonwealth, ought to be in cauſing youth to be well brought vp & inſtructed: & to the end it mought be more capable of good diſcipline, it is required that the fathers and mothers ſhould be ſober, moderate, and quietly minded: that when children are borne, they ſhould ſucke their owne mothers breaſtes, to be ſure that they ſhould not be nouriſhed in delightes

nor idleneſſe, and in playing might faſhion themſelues to vertue. He would alſo that whatſoeuer might breed happines, were engrauen through good nourture in the maners & hearts of men to remayne there all their life as a good impreſsion: becauſe that while they are young, they haue more neede to be well looked vnto & diligently taken heed of, then any other kind of beaſts. And it is more meete that care ſhalbe taken hereof, then of getting or preſeruing of wealth, or encloſing our parks, or gardens, with walls, or hedges. And there is no doubt, as S. Ierom and other ancient doctors haue written, that the cauſe which moued the moſt part of ſuch, as heretofore founded Churches,The foundation of churches prebends and colleges Prebends, & Colleges was chiefly for to bring vp youth in learning, & to render thē more capable to ſerue God & the cōmonwelth, and the better to imprint in thē the feare of God which is the beginning of all wiſedome, & which formeth the mind to the true mould of truth & vertue, and carieth it far off frō vice, fooliſh faſhions, & lewde cōpanies, whence there is always caried away, ſome botch & ſtayne of the infection of their wickednes.Good bringing vp of children maketh them moderate and temperate. And by the ordinance of the three eſtates in all Cathedrall and collegiall Churches of this Realme, the reuenew of one prebend, is ſtill allotted to a ſcholemaſter. For that according vnto the ſaying of Plato, when youth in the beginning hath bin wel taught, then is the nauigation & voyage of this world happie; and all the life after is accompanied with contentment, felicitie, & good hope, and ſuch as haue bin well nouriſhed & brought vp, become for the moſt part very moderate & temperate & the old prouerbe auerreth that nourture paſſeth nature. The which Licurgus ſhewed by the nouriſhing of 2. dogges, the one to the field, the other to the kitchin: & if one ſowe good corne in harueſt he ſhall reape the like. Themiſtocles was wont to ſay, that colts & fierce beaſts became tame through diſcipline. And it is manifeſt that the Almanes and ſundry other nations which were meruelous barbarous, as we reade in Caeſar and Tacitus, became more meeke and induſtrious by better education. And ſome haue written that at Rome in auncient time, it was ordayned that children for the firſt fault ſhould be tolde of it,Punishments of childrens faults at Rome.
                   for the ſeconde puniſhed, for the third hanged, and the father baniſhed. And Plato was alwayes of opinion, that enourmious vices proceeded more from a generous nature corrupted, then from vilitie, or low eſtate. And the firſt thing which ought to be beaten into youth, is to loue honour, to feare God and to obey his will, to make no account of the brickle goods of fortune, but of the eternall and ſpirituall and

of vertue; to ſet before their eyes the examples and praiſes of vertuous perſonages, and the blames and miſeries of the lewde and wicked, to the ende they may become wiſe by others harmes, and deteſt all vice and euill companie, receiuing correction at the handes of euery one, without preſuminge ought of themſelues, ſhunning wantonneſſe and delightes, neither ſpeaking nor beleeuing too lightly, not beeing to obſtinate, harde, ſtubborne, cholericke, impatient, nor vnconuerſable. Saint Ierome writing to Nepotian, thought that all poore ſcholers,Poore ſcollers nourished vvith tenthes. Dan. 1.5. and ſuch as had will to ſerue the common wealth or the church, were to bee nouriſhed with the tenthes. Wee ſee in Daniel, the care which was had to the bringing vp of youth. And Strabo in his Geographie, ſhewed ſundry examples of the Indians and Perſians, for the eſchewing of that vice of ignorance, whereof wee haue before entreated,
                     
                        Deut. 25. L. 2. c. 6 L. 2. de ſtud. litera.
                      
                     The principal care vvhich parēts ought to haue ouer their children
                   as Moyſes complained, and Ioſephus. And the ordinance of the Emperours is ſet downe in the eleuenth of the Code. It falleth out oftentimes, that the wicked abhorre the remembrance of their fathers and mothers, when thorough their damnable libertie, wanton pleaſures, laſciuiouſneſſe, fond collinges, and euil examples they haue beene lead awaye; whereas contrariwiſe the well nouriſhed, giue thanks vnto them which haue beene the occaſion of their ſo great good. And Salomon affirmeth, that A wiſe ſonne maketh a glad father, but a fooliſh ſonne is a heauineſſe vnto his mother. The wife Crates was wont to ſaye, that if it were poſsible for him he would climme vp to the toppe of the citie, and crye alowde: O men, whither doe you carrie your ſelues thus headlonge, that take what care you can to heape vp wealth, and yet make ſmall account of thoſe to whome you are to leaue it, as caring more for the doublet or ſhowe, then the bodie or foote. The ſame Salomon in his prouerbes ſaieth, that wiſedome cryeth thoroughout. To this purpoſe, the contentes of an Epiſtle written by Xenophon to Crito, ſeemeth worthie of marking. Knowe ye that Socrates hath often told vs, that ſuch as leaue great riches to their children, without ſeeing them brought vp well and honeſtly, are like vnto ſuch as giue much prouender vnto young horſes, but neuer breake them at all: for ſo they waxe fat, but vnprofitable. The praiſe of an horſe conſiſteth not in the faſhion of his bodie, but in his ſeruice and dexteritie. They alſo are in as great an errour, which buy heritages for their children which ſet little by them; becauſe they will eſteeme of the wealth, but deſpiſe them, wheras there is a great deale more reaſon that the gardien

ſhould be better liked then the poſſeſsion. He then which maketh his ſonne worthie to be had in eſtimation, hath don much for him although he leaue him but litle wealth. For it is the vnderſtanding which maketh euery thing ſeeme great or ſmall, becauſe that whatſoeuer the wel brought vp poſſeſſeth,Knovvledge and vertue a more ſure inheritaunce then riches. is moderate & ſufficiēt, but vnto the euil nurtured it is verie litle. Leaue no more then vnto thy children, then verie neceſsitie requireth: for they ſhal verie much eſteem that which is ſufficient, if thou haſt wel brought them vp:Phocion. and if they be ignorant, then wil they haue leſſe care, feare, and occaſion to do euil. The which Phocion practiſed, refuſing the preſents of Alexander as Plutarque writeth. Let vs then conſider that knowledge is not laid open to fortune as are richeſſe, the which are verie often poſſeſſed by the wicked: nor mutable as glorie: nor cō
                  meth by diſcent, as nobilitie: nor of ſmal laſting as beautie: nor changeable as health: nor decayeth & diminiſheth as ſtrength: but encreaſeth with time,Stilpon. & is not vanquiſhed by warre, as Stilpon tolde K. Demetrius. And the Laconien ſcholemaſter, aunſwered verie well, that he would make the noble gentleman which was his pupil, to ſport himſelf in things honeſt, iuſt & true: and to be offended at vnhoneſt, vniuſt, & lyes. For maners being through diſcipline well compoſed within, are the verie fountaine, whence al contentment proceedeth.
               And children are by cuſtome trayned into the waye of vertue. And the Pithagoriens leſſon ſeemeth vnto mee to bee very wiſe, Chooſe the beſt way, cuſtome ſhal make it agreeable, & pleaſant vnto thee. The Komanes had a good cuſtome, to place their children with thoſe whom they would haue them to imitate, And in France, there is great account made of one which hath bin brought vp as a page to ſome valiant and wiſe gentleman.Good example to be shevved to children. 
                  Cirus in the end of the 7. booke of Xenophon, deſireth euery man to giue a good example to children, becauſe if they ſee no vncomlines, they ſhalbe enforced to follow goodnes, and vertue, & be fit for al things. A King of Sparta anſwered him wiſely, which asked what children ought to learne; That ſaid he, which they ought to doe when they are men: he told another, that they were to learne to knowe how to obey & to commaund.Leſſons to youth. We muſt then more ſtudie to fil the vnderſtanding then the memorie, not onely to haue a care to beſprincle the ſoule with knowledge, but to make it grow perfect, and learne by ſtudie, not of the tongues, but of wiſedome, courage, and reſolution, to auoide the baytes of pleaſure, and to throwe downe with an inuincible

courage the threates of Fortune and death to be ſounde and ſhort in diſcourſe, to render themſelues, and quite their force to trueth, as ſoone as they ſhall perceiue it, without beeing too ſtubborne, that their conſcience, ſinceritie, and vertue, be manifeſted in their wordes and deedes, that in companie they caſt their eyes rounde about, and in themſelues controll the manners of eche one, to followe the good and contemne the wicked. And they ought not to let one worde or ſentence fall to ground, without putting it in their tables, to make their profite thereof, as Bees drawe honye out of ſundry flowers, ſo learning the diſcourſe of Phyloſophie, they ſhall cleare the tempeſtes of Fortune. They muſt alſo take away ſtrangenes and partialitie, enimies to ſocietie, and apply the ſupple bodies to all kinde of faſhions, cuſtomes & companies, to bee able to doe all thinges, but louing to doe but what is good. And if they goe to the warre,Youth going to vvarres. to feare nothing but God, and an euil renowne. To learne to combate with the enemie, and aboue all things to obey their head,
                     Com. 6. as Caeſar in his commentaries deſired the French to doe. To accuſtome themſelues to endure paine, colde and heate, to lye harde, to aſſault well, and to keepe a forte. The cheefe care which Kinges and gouernours ought to take, is of the honour of God, and maintainance of his Churche, and nexte of pollicie and iuſtice, followinge the leſſon of our Sauiour, in ſeekinge the kingdome of God, and then whatſoeuer is neceſſarye for them ſhall bee giuen vnto them. Nowe the kingdome of God is the Church of the faithfull, the ſeede whereof is youth, which is conſecrated to God thorough baptiſme, vnder the Churche. Then this ſeede ought to bee well husbanded, and kept from weedes, which might choake it, that the eares may bee gathered full of graine.
               It is an olde ſaying, that hee which hath begunne well,The beginning is cheefly and principally to be conſidered. hath halfe ended. The beginning is in the firſt youth, whence the good Bourgeſſes, Magiſtrates and gouernours doe ſpring. And there is greate aduauncement and hope to bee looked for in that place, where youth is well brought vppe in godlyneſſe, and honeſtie. For this cauſe Aristotle in the ende of the ſeuenth of his Politiques, would haue them turne their eyes and eares, from all iniuries, fowle and vndecent actions, and communication. And the more that we ſee all thinges to impayre, good manners ſubuerted, wickedneſſe, couetouſneſſe, ignoraunce, and vniuſtice, not by ſtealth, but publickely, and without ſhame to

runne their courſe, of which our predeceſſours greatly complained, and wee complaine of at this daye, and it is verie likely, that they which come after vs ſhall rewe it: the more regarde ought we to haue, that the nurcerie of our poſteritie, which is the youth, may be taught to liue ſoberly, and iuſtly, & not ſo much to ſpeake well as to liue well: to the ende that what the veſſel beeing newe hath once beene ſeaſoned with, it may long keepe the ſent thereof, as Horace writeth. And there is no doubt, but that man being deſirous to knowe,Adoleſcencie is from 12. to 21. years. and encline to vertue from his birth, if by a good guyde he bee vntill the laſt yeare of his adoleſcencie kepte and defended from the ſnares, which the delightes of ſences and pleaſures drawe with them, his vnderſtanding beeing once fortified thorough good inſtructions, ſhall after of himſelfe bee ſo well rooted in the loue of knowledge, vertue, and the feare of God, that it ſhalbee verie harde euer after to withdrawe him. The which was the cauſe that the Lacedemonians aunſwered Antipater, that they woulde rather dye then giue him their children whiche hee demaunded for hoſtages, ſo great account made they of their education. This felicitie and happineſſe, as Ariſtotle ſheweth in the ende of his Ethickes, dependeth principallye of the grace of God, of a good reformation, of the liberalitie, magn
                     ••
                  cence, bountie, and courteſie of Princes, which heereby prouoke, and pricke forwarde the aduauncement of Artes, and of good wittes; as contrariwiſe they languiſh, and cleane decaye, thorough the ignorance, enuie, couetouſneſſe, tyrannie, and ſtubberneſſe of ſuch as gouerne, and thorough great diſorder, and corruption. I haue before touched the inconueniences and miſchiefes which happen in France,
                  K. Francis 1 by reaſon that the nobilitie is not trayned vp in learning: And not without cauſe the greate King Francis ſaid, that it greatly grieued him that the gentlemen of his Realme, gaue themſelues no more to ſtudie, and learning, to the ende he mought haue prouided for them the cheefe offices of the long robe; thinking that thereby hee ſhoulde haue been better ſerued, both in his gouernmentes and warres.Bayart. And that great Captaine Bayart, aunſwered him that asked him the difference betweene a learned man and an ignorant: as much as betweene a Phiſition and a patient, a liue man,Ariſtippus. and one dead. Ariſtippus aunſwered likewiſe, ſende them into a farre countrey, and then you ſhall knowe, and there is nothing but knowledge which cauſeth a man to bee eſteemed.
               
                  And the oracle giuen vnto the Greeks, of the doubling of the houſe, was interpreted by the wiſe men, that it was ment thereby, that they ſhould leaue armes, and conuerſe with the Muſes and learning, which would mollifie their paſsions and driue away ignorance, and procure courage and good councell:Ageſilaus. as Ageſilaus maintained, that the lawes of Lycurgus bread a contempt of pleaſures. To accuſtome youth in like ſorte to followe vertue, to brydle paſſions and choler, to ſhunne vice, and lying, to enter into conſideration how good and vertuous perſonages haue in all times behaued themſelues, to remember the harmes happened to the wicked, and the bleſsings and honours which haue accompanied the good, bredeth a great quiet al the life long, becauſe ſuch a cuſtom hath a maruailous efficacie, in aduauncing of a man: And betimes is the iudgement that proceedeth from an euil cuſtome to be corrected, the which in a vile nature doeth ofte by proceſſe of time throwe downe and abaſe our mindes, and render vs contemptible. The which may be helped and amended through vertuous exerciſes. For if that reſiſtance which reaſon maketh to the appetite of eating, and drinking, forceth verie often hunger, & thirſt: much more eaſie ſhal it be for one to cut off couetouſnes, ambition, pride, enuie, choler, curioſitie, lying, and other vices, by refraining and abſtaining from thoſe things which he coueteth, ſo as in the end they ſhall al remaine cleane diſcomfited. To abſtain alſo from pleaſures which are permitted, is a good exerciſe to meete with ſuch as are forbidden. I leaue here to declare howe much France was diſhonored when as the Polakes made their entrie into Paris accompanied with the French gentlemen,An embaſſage from Pologne to K. Henry 3 who for the moſt parte were dome not able to ſpeake or vnderſtand Latine, and were rather brought vp to wear a rapiar be their ſyde, ryde a horſe, danſe, and playe at fenſe, then to haue skill in languages, and artes, with which the verie Barbarians in old time were adorned, honoured, & became more valiant in the warres.Alexander. As Alexander and ſundry other great Captaines and Princes haue confeſſed. Yea, him ſelfe grew extreme angry that Ariſtotle had publiſhed his Metaphiſicks, becauſe, (he ſaid) he had rather a deſire to paſſe all others in learning and knowledge, then in armes and force. And wee before haue noted, that he attributed all his victories, to what hee had learned of Philoſophie. The Emperour Antonin the Philoſopher, went himſelfe to ſeeke out learned men in their owne houſes, ſaying, that it verie well became a man, yea, though he were olde,

to learne what hee was ignorant of. The which Cato and other of our lawyers haue affirmed. And Paulus Iouius writeth of Charles the fifth,
                     Charles 5. that his ſchoolemaſter Adrian, who ſince was Pope, did with verie greate cauſe often times foretell him, that hee woulde greatly repent that in his youth hee had not learned the Latine tongue. For it is verie requiſite that youth be brought vp in that parte of learning which is called humanitie; becauſe that without the diſcipline thereof, the worlde ſhoulde liue but brutiſhly. And that it bee accuſtomed to make account of lawes and ſuperiours, and to keepe a ſtraight diſcipline in the manner of life, which it chooſeth,Youth sheweth by his bloſſomes what fruite it vvill beare in age. be it in warre, and defence of their countrie. And a man followeth all his life longe his firſt addreſsinge in his youth. As if a tree bloſſome not in the ſpring, it will hardly beare fruit in the Autumne. The which ought to ſtirre parents to chaſtiſe their children, and to make them to bee diligently taught, and not to pamper them.Apes. As Plinie writeth of Apes which choak their little ones in imbraſing them too harde. And wee ought greatly to weigh the ſaying of Origen, that the ſinnes which the euill nurtured, and vnchaſtiſed children commit, ſhalbee layde to the fathers charge,1. Sam. 4.18. as it is ſayde in Samuel of Ely. And if it be written of Xenocrates,
                  Xenocrates. that his auditours of diſſolute became temperate and modeſt, what fruite are wee to thinke that youth will beare, through the ſweeteneſſe, and benignitie of the Muſes? That is through the knowledge of learning, which as Plutarque writeth in the life of Sertorius, cauſeth them to tame and ſweeten their nature which before was wylde and ſauage, holdinge the meane by the compaſſe of reaſon, and reiectinge the extreame.
               
                  LicurgusAnd Lycurgus the lawgiuer ſayde, that hee neuer vſed to ſet downe his lawes in writinge, becauſe ſuch as had beene well nouriſhed, woulde approoue, and followe whatſoeuer were moſte expedient for the time. Which was the cauſe of the lawes ſo muche commended by Diodorus, that children ſhoulde bee brought vp in learninge, at the publicke expenſe.
               
                  The effects of good education.To bee ſhorte, good bringing vp of youth, maketh it to bee true, conſtant and ioyfull. For hauing a good conſcience, true comforte, and reſolution, which ſweeteneth all the bitterneſſe of this life, and knowinge the cauſes why God hath alwayes beene accuſtomed to puniſh his, maketh them carrie all thinges cheerefully, not doubtinge, but that hee loueth, and hath a fatherly care ouer them. So doe they repoſe themſelues vppon

the aſſurance of this good will, and endeuour to obey him, and dye with a good hope, acquitinge them ſelues of their duetie. Sundrie haue greatly commended the lawes of the Lydes,
                  Lavves of the Lydes.
                   becauſe they depriued ſuch children as were not vertuous from their enheritaunce; which cauſed them to correcte their naughtie inclinations, and to ſhunne vice: as alſo they had certaine officers in ſundrye prouinces, which tooke care of youth, and puniſhed the parentes which did not well bringe vp their children. And for as much as it is a great happineſſe vnto a countrey, when the Prince hath beene well inſtructed: Plato in his Alcibiades,
                  The children of the kings of Perſia.
                   and Xenophon doe write, that out of the whole realme of Perſia, were foure moſte ſufficient men choſen to bringe vp the Kinges children: the one in learninge: the ſeconde, to teache them all their life to bee true: the thirde, to inſtruct them to commaunde their paſsions, and not to addicte themſelues to pleaſures; the fourth, to make them hardie, and couragious. Wee ought to make our profite of the lamentation, which the Prophet Baruche made, in that the young ſought after wiſedome vppon the earth,
                  
                     Baruc. 2.23. 
                  and became expounders of fables, and knewe not the waye of wiſedome, which was the cauſe of their deſtruction.
                  
                     Pſal. 119.9.
               
               
                  Dauid alſo founde no meanes for a young man to redreſſe his waye, but in takinge heede thereto, according to Gods worde. The Apoſtle admoniſhed Timothie, to flye from the luſtes of youth:
                  1. Cor. 9.24. and to humble the fleſhe to the ſpirite, to the ende no aduauntage bee giuen vnto the enimie, which will bee an euill token for the reſt of the courſe which is to bee runne all our life longe. And Saint Peter commaundeth young men to bee wiſe, modeſt and humble. Saint Paul ioyneth ſhamefaſtneſſe and grauitie, of which hee deſireth Titus to bee the patrone.
                     Eccleſ. 2
                        •
                     .23 And Eccleſiaſti, cus willeth them to giue no eare vnto the enchauntriſe for feare-of beeing ſurpriſed. And as wee haue before mentioned, offices and riches which are lefte vnto children, are ſometime the verie cauſe of their deſtruction, except the knowledge and feare of God bee imprinted within them. For this cauſe Eccleſiaſtes writeth: Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, whiles the euill dayes come not. And Ieremiah in his Lamentations ſayeth:
                     Ier. 3.2
                        •
                     . 
                  It is good for a man that he beare the yoke in his youth, becauſe young men become vnruely, except they be helde ſhort.
               God alſo ſayd of Abraham: I know that hee wil command his ſonnes,

and his houſholde after him, that they keepe the way of the Lord to do rightuouſnes,
                  
                     Deut. 4.10. 
                  and iudgement. And in Deuteromie: I will cauſe them heare my wordes, that they may learne to feare mee all the dayes that they ſhal liue vpon the earth, and that they may teache their children. And euery Chriſtian is commaunded to followe al things that are honeſt towards al men, and to auoide all apparances of euil, referring all to the glorie of God, and betimes to accuſtome himſelfe thereunto, to the end that more eaſily he may broke the ſtormes of this life, and without any trouble wade out of all buſineſſe. And to this ende is euery man to beſeeche at Gods handes, that hee will lighten him through his word,Great happines dependeth of 
                        •…
                     od education. and bend his hart therein to obey him. From this good education, proceedeth great happines, obedience to God, their King, and ſuperiors, choyſe of vertuous men, without money, rewardes, or offices, and euery man perfourmeth his duetie the better in that vocation to which he is called, and followeth other leſſons and reformations, noted at large before.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XLIX. Of certaine points which might be added to this diſcourſe.
               
                  THis matter which we haue vndertaken to diſcourſe of,An argument ample and fertile. is ſo frutefull and ample, that I were able to heap ſundrie Chapters one vppon another, containing ſummarily what the office of Kings, Prelates, Clergie, Captaines, ſoldiars, merchants, and artificers, maiſters, ſeruants, fathers, children, Iudges, counſellers, & practiſers at the law is, therein to diſcouer the abuſe and periurie, which is vſed in this time. There were alſo verie great meanes to dilate at large, of the inconuenience which ſophiſtrie bringeth, the which the lawiers terme cauilling,Sophiſtrie. when from trueth, through ſome alteration, the diſputation is brought to that which is moſt euidently falſe. In old time it was terribly deteſted; for it corrupted all artes and diſciplines, and bread ſundrie hereſies, and falſe opinions. I were able likewiſe to ſet downe, howe many coſin themſelues, which in mariage reſpect more the wealth and beautie,Mariage. then modeſtie, & good education of a mayde: and are not ſo much husbandes vnto their wiues, as ſlaues vnto their wealth, for which they abandon that commaundement and authoritie, which God and all lawes haue

aforded vnto them ouer their wiues, ouer whome they ought to rule, not as the lorde ouer his ſeruant, but as our Lorde and ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt doeth ouer his Church, and the ſoule ouer the bodie, through a mutuall loue, and reciprocrate affection wherewith he is tyed vnto it. And Salomon calleth the contract of marriage, the contract of God, as more excellent than any other. Lycurgus, Solon, and the twelue lawes ordained, that maydens ſhould be marryed without dower, for the cauſes before ſpecified. And ſome haue written of the Aegiptians,
                  Alexā. l. 2. c. 2
                   that if any receiued money with his wife, he remained as a ſlaue vnto her. And in Plautus he which was caſt in the teeth, that he had nothing with his wife, aunſwered, that if euerie one would do like him, there would be better agreement and amitie among the citizens, and their wiues woulde honour them much more, and be leſſe chargeable vnto them.Strabo l. 4:
                   
                  Strabo commended the lawes of the Maſſiliens, which forbad him which was richeſt, to giue with his daughter aboue one hundred crownes, and ten for her apparel and iewels. And it were verie requiſite that the good lawes in France made to this ende mought be better obſerued. And likewiſe as a matter depending hereunto, there were miniſtred verie great occaſion of reprehending and deteſting ſuch as they terme tyers of pointes, which oppoſe themſelues againſt that holie contract, and ordinance of God, and his commaundement, and are the cauſe of diuorces, enmities, whoredomes,
                     Tiers of points. and other euils, combating with the Maieſtie of God, and damning themſelues through a ſecret alliance which they make with Sathan. It were not alſo much out of the way, to ſhewe what a pernitious lye they incurre, which from the byrth of their daughter bring her vp ſo delicate, that ſhee is leſſe fit to performe the part of a good houſwife, and is alwayes more ſickely, ſeruing rather as a picture or dead image, then fit to holde that place which ſhee ought. And to declare withall the great iniurie which weomen offer vnto their children, in denying that milke vnto them with which they were nouriſhed within their wombe, with great paine and greefe, drying vp that holy fountaine of their breaſtes, giuen of God, to that ende, banniſhing their children into the handes of a ſtrange nource, often times a whore, drunke, pockie, and euill conditioned, of which the ſaide children ſauour, all their life long, as wee ſee by experience too much. Lampidius writeth that Titus was ſubiect to ſundrie diſeaſes, by reaſon of his Nurce. And Dion, that Caligula was the more cruell, by the nature of his Nurce,

and that ſhee rubbed the end of her teat with bloud. And that Tiberius & ſundrie other were giuen to wine,Tiberius. hauing bin weaned, with ſops ſteped in wine. The which we ſee in lambs nouriſhed by goats, & in ſeeds & fruits which hold of the earth. I leaue al other reaſons recited by Aulus Gellius. And for as much as an Embaſſadour ſent from a Prince,Ambaſſadors is as his eye, his eare, & his tongue, & bindeth him by what he promiſeth, it had not bin impertinent, to haue diſcourſed, how in choiſe to be made of him, his honeſtie, age, experience, integritie, learning, dexteritie, & grauitie ought to be conſidered: becauſe by his carryage of himſelf, & traine, ſtrangers do oftē time iudge of the whole nation, as if he had bin choſen out of the moſte excellent. And it were verie conuenient to ſend with him ſome nū
                  ber of yong gētlemē wel brought vp, to make them capable of the like charges, & to learn the paſſages, faſhions, alliances & maners of the countrie, & to fyle & polliſh their own brayne, with ſtrangers. I coulde alſo deſcribe the inconueniences which ariſe by Maſques, which diſguiſe both the bodie & minde,Maſques. & cauſeth great impudencie, the verie cauſe of ſo manylyes, & vncomly ſpeaches, & of the execution of ſo great wickednes. S. Ciprian entreating of the apparell of virgins, alleageth to this purpoſe the exāple of Iudges, who whē he ſaw Thamar, iudged her a whore, for ſhe had couered her face. And God in Zephaniah threateneth,
                     Gen. 38.15 
                  that he will viſit the Princes, and the Kings children, and all ſuch as are clothed with ſtrange apparel. And it was forbidden to men to weare weomens garments, & to weomen to wear mens. And an account muſt be rendred of euery idle word. And as S. Paul alleaged of Menander: euil wordes corrupt good manners. The which moued ſundry wel gouerned common wealths to forbid maſques vpon great paines, & in England, of death. It had bin no ways impertinent to haue ſhewed how much Princes haue abuſed themſelues, rather in taking care, & giuing themſelues to conquer cities & countries,A greater matter to preſerue vvhat is gotten thē to get. & make great buildings, then to preſerue & wel gouerne what they haue alreadie gotten, and to maintaine thoſe houſes, which haue beene left vnto them verie commodious. As Augustus the Emperour greatly wondered, to ſee that Alexander did not eſteeme it ſo great a matter and honour to gouerne wel an Empire, alreadie conquered & left, as to conquer a greate countrye, and preferre neceſſarie and profitable expenſes before voluptuous. According to the diſpoſition of the law likewiſe, the legacie, or gifte that is appointed for to be employed about a newe buylding, ought to be conuerted to the repairing and amending of the

olde, in the latter lawe D. de operibus publ. l. decuriones de adminiſtr. re. ad ciu. pert. I mought alſo ſpeake, howe Idolatrie & the gods of the Pagan, firſt began, and how they were left, according vnto the propheſie of Ieremie, that The gods which haue not made the heauens and the earth ſhall periſh. I coulde alſo blame the condition of huckſters, & ſellers by retayl, in that as Cicero writeth, they gain nothing except they lye, which was before confirmed by Eccleſiasticus.
                  
                     Eccleſ. 3.16. Miſſeres. I mought alſo amplifie, howe deepely they lye, which liue wickedly, diſhonor and periure themſelues, that they may leaue their heires riche, which often times are ſuch as loue them not. The diſſoluteneſſe which is too much ſpread throughout France, woulde haue required a diſcourſe vpon the law, which was made to forbid Tauernes,Tauerns and play. and playing at dyce and cardes, conſidering the inconueniences which daily happen thereby, and that in Turkie all playe is puniſhed by infamie, & great penalties, as Cuſpinien writeth. One might alſo ſhew how much they deceiue themſelues, which couet to come to extreme old age, becauſe that the long life is not the better, but the more vertuous. And as it is written in the book of wiſdom: the honorable age is not that which is of long time, neither that which is meaſured by the number of yeres, but wiſedome is the gray haire, & an vndefiled life is the old age. And many haue eſteemed them moſt happy which haue changed this miſerable life, with an immortal,
                     
                        •
                     eſire of olde age before ſuch time as the diſcōmodities & weariſomnes of old age hath crept vpon them. And beſides the aſſured teſtimonie which we haue out of the holye ſcriptures Aristotle wrote that when Silenus was taken he ſaide,Silenus the condition of dead men was better then of the liuing. And Pliny after that he had in the beginning of his ſeuenth booke,pliny ſhewed at large the miſeries of mē, concluded that nature gaue nothing better then a ſhort life. Notwithſtanding, to the faithful, no eſtate of liuing cōmeth amiſſe, ſince they wholy refer themſelues to the wil of God, & taketh euery thing in good part, as a bleſsing proceedinge from his hand. We mought alſo ſhew how pernitiouſly, they lye, which clippe, waſhe and delaye coyne, as the Poet Dante called Philip the fayre, a falſefier of coyne, becauſe by reaſon of his affayres hee was conſtrayned to delaye his ſiluer. And very wiſely did the Emperour Tacitus forbid the mingling of mettalles in his coyne, where there ought to be a correſpondance and proportion betweene the gold and ſiluer or other metall: in which now a dayes ſundry pernitious faults are committed. Conſequently, I could deſcribe the vanitie of alquemie, which hath empoueriſhed thoſe

which haue vſed it, and turned the golde which they haue put therto into ſmoke, whereof we dayly ſee but too many examples: the which gaue occaſion to Domitian, to cauſe all the bookes to be burned, which he was able to finde out. I could alſo ſet forth the fault which they commit,Dreames. who put too much truſt in dreames, according as Eccleſiaſticus hath written, that Dreames haue deceiued many, and they haue fayled which haue put their truſt therein. And Lucian in the citie of ſleepe which he deſcribeth, in which dreams do dwell, ſaith that they are all coſenners and lyers. It were alſo a very large matter to write of,To demaund councell. to ſhewe howe, albeit that blinde men chooſe ſome one to leade them, yet an infinite number of perſons, which haue their iudgement and wit blinded, and goe groping at all their buſineſſe, & wandering, without knowing the way which they ought to holde, doe not for all that ſeeke ether councell or guide, and are meruelouſly polluted with the ſame fault which they finde in an other, and in their owne ignoraunce become Cenſors ouer other mens manners.Superſtition. It were not likewiſe vnprofitable to declare howe daungerous a matter ſuperſtition is, the which is ſo fruitefull that of one error or lye, it engendreth a great number, and thorough a kinde of ſleight, ſimplicitie, or falſe apparence, it cleane chooketh the truth, and is for this cauſe termed in the holy ſcripture, whoredome,Saints. and adulterie, violating the promiſe which we haue before made vnto God. We mought likewiſe extoll the ſaintes in all ages, which haue taken paines to maintayne the truth agaynſt lying, and to make a regiſter of all vertues and abuſes which are committed. I could likewiſe enlarge ſundrye Chapters, in ſhewing howe daungerouſly they doe lye, who after ſo many examples, and experiences, ruynes, defacinges, deſolations and miſchiefes happened in Fraunce, deſire for all that, that men woulde yet the fifth time caſt themſelues hedlong into a ciuill warre, couering their paſsion with a cloake of religion,Ciuill vvarres. which is ſetled in the vnderſtanding the which can not be gayned, but thorough a perſwaſion founded vpon the holy and canonicall ſcriptures, and not by violence or conſtraynt, as Saint Auguſtine in ſundrie places, and other auncient fathers haue maintayned. And the warre which is not neceſſarily vndertaken, is an enimie to religion, iuſtice, order, reformation, and good manners: and as the Emperour Iuſtinian writeth, it carrieth great greefe to euerie good man, it is brutiſh, diſſolute, and without all ho, eſpeciall, the ciuil, which is miſerable, and moſte pernitious, as well in regarde of the victorers, as of the vanquiſhed, as

                  Cicero affirmeth in ſundry places: and in his Philippiques he adiudgeth him which deſireth it to be a moſt deteſtable citizen. It were not alſo a matter much different from that which we now diſcourſe of, if I ſhould ſet downe the opinion of Plinie, which affirmeth that there are no lyes more dearely ſolde,
                  L. 29. Phiſitians. 
                  nor more daungerous then thoſe of the Phiſicians, who learne to the perill of the patient and murther without being puniſhed: and that there was neuer anye vocation founde, in which there was more daunger or coſininge: albeit that their ignoraunce and error, whatſoeuer he ſayde, Pliny ſayd,
                     Pliny his error. ought by the very law to be puniſhed. lib. 7. c. ſeq. ad legem aquil. l. illicitas. ſicuti de offic. praep. l. ſi quis, Celſus locaſti l. quod nerua depoſiti. Sundry haue iuſtly complained, that the greateſt parte of Phiſitians haue no skill at all in ſuche ſimples, and minerall matters as they haue neede of, but truſte vnto Apothecaries as vnskilfull as them ſelues, which giue a qui for quo,
                  Simples. Apothecaries and engender diſeaſes, the which ought to giue occaſion to haue them rigorouſly and exactly looked vnto, and to haue their drugues and ſpices, to be often ouer looked, by ſuch as are skilfull therein. And if the ſaid Phiſitians and Apothecaries, were well practiſed (as it is very requiſite) in the knowledge of ſuch ſimples, as God hath aboundantly beſtowed thorough out this realm, and which are proper to our nature, we ſhould haue no need to fetch drougues from the infidels and Barbarians, in a contrary climate to our owne. We mought alſo take occaſion here with great profite to declare, how farre they ſwarue from the truth,The aſſembly of a councell or eſtats. which miſlike the aſſemblinge of a generall or nationall councell, or of the generall eſtates of a realme, the onelye meanes inuented by oure anceſtours, to meete with the corruptions and diſorders, which crept as well into the Church as into place of iuſtice, and al other vocations, and to heare the complaintes of euery one, to apply remedy thereto, and make neceſſary prouiſion for the ſame, to the ende the euill which grewe might be cut off, and good ordinaunces reuiued and kept, and corrupt doctrine and maners reformed, which is a ſoueraine medicine for kinges and all other ſorte of people. I coulde alſo declare how pernitious a matter diſpaire is,Deſpaire. and how contrary to the truth, and handle the meanes which keepeth vs from it: and alſo how much the lying of ſuch as are too ſuſpitious is to be deteſted, which often tymes engendereth curioſitye, backbitinge,Suſpition. vnquietneſſe, factions, ielouſies, and other miſchiefes. And further how vncertaine a proofe that is which is drawne out by torture,Torture. becauſe

that as Publius Mimus ſayde, ſmart will conſtraine euen the very innocentes to lye. And Viues wryteth vppon Saint Auguſtine his booke, of the Citye of God, that if a man bee able to endure torture he will not tell truth, if he can not he will ſurely lye. The examples are in Marcellin lib. 4. and 29. and in Valerius lib. 3. c. 3. & lib. 8. c. 4. The which ſundry Doctours vppon the law haue followed, and very many Iudges haue had experience of. It had not alſo beene very vnprofitable, to haue diſcourſed which opinion of the two were more true,
                     The gouernment of vveomen.
                     
                        Bartolus his opinion not to be follovved.
                   either theirs which alowe weomens gouernement in reſpect of their wiſedome, and quickneſſe of ſpirite, and of the lawes which confirme the ſame in ſundry prouinces, (wherein I will by no meanes alow the opinion of Bartolus, and other Doctours, which deny that they are any wayes able to make lawes, vnder the colour for ſooth that a lawe is defined to bee a counſell of wiſe men, hauing manye examples in Plutarque lib. 6. of the vertue of weomen, and elſe where to the contrary) or theirs which exclude them cleane thereof, and of all other ciuill affayres, for their infirmitie of counſell and weakeneſſe of iudgement, leauing them wholy in the perpetuall power of their husbandes, parentes, and curators, as Cicero wrote of the Romanes. I coulde alſo haue added a long chapter fit for this tyme, to confute the impietie of the Atheiſtes,Atheiſts. and to ſhew euen by the verye auncient philoſophers writinges, that there is but one God, who thorough his bountye and wiſedome is the Creator and guider of the worlde, and of whatſoeuer is contayned therein, that in the worlde he hath created man the image of the Creator, accordinge to his owne vnderſtandinge, and the image of his creatures accordinge to his lyfe, ſence, and moouing, mortall in what he holdeth of the likeneſſe of the creature, immortall in as much as he carryeth the image of his Creator in his ſoule: and that God will crowne and recompence good workes to the good and chaſtice the vitious and infidels with paynes eternall. The which almoſt all contemners of religion and Epicures haue beene conſtrayned to confeſſe, and in their owne conſcience haue ſtoode conuicted thereof before their death. It had not beene much out of the waye, nor verye vnapt for this time,Alliance of the Zuizers.
                   wherein there hath beene a freſhe renewinge of the alliance, with the Zuizers, to ſet downe what were the moſt expedient, for as much as they are more nearelye bounde, by the latter then by the precedent alliances. And by the hiſtories of the later warres,

men hath ſufficiently knowne, the valor, ſuccour, and militarie diſcipline which they haue obſerued: and contrarywiſe, ſeene the excesſiue expence, difficulties, and penſions that hath beene beſtowed as well on publike, as particular, to bringe about the ſayde alliance: that by the treatie of perpetuall peace they are bound to ſuccour the kinge in his neede, and neuer ought to ſerue his enemies: that now the diſcipline is not ſuch as in time paſt it hath beene, that thorough the great penſions, preſentes, gold, and ſiluer of France, delicacie, and riches, they are much changed, and there is no doubt, but without makinge anye alliance, a man may now haue as many as he liſt to ſerue his turne, ſo as the crowne be in the hand, and the treaſory well furniſhed. And not without cauſe did king Lewis 12. as well as other, find it ſtrange to ſupport the inſolencie of ſuch people, and to become as it were tributaries vnto them: albeit that then he had much more occaſion to ſeeke them, then now, and they were far better then they are, hauing now more need of the helpe amity, & ſupport of the king of France, then he hath of them. And the more fauour, and giftes a man beſtoweth of them, the more do they couet, and leſſe thanke do they cun him. And oftentimes thoſe which receiue the greateſt penſions are they which moſte ſtubbornly oppoſe them ſelues, to what the kings embaſſadors ſhall demaunde, and their couetouſneſſe can be no more filled,VVherein mans felicity conſiſteth. then one that hath the dropſie can be kept from drinke. I coulde alſo amplifie a long chapter, how many men lye and are abuſed, as touching the felicitie of man: and ſhew that it cannot be founde in riches, which vaniſhe away, and are eaſily loſt with ſorow, and as Salomon ſayth are gotten with trauaile, and poſſeſſed with feare and care. And that in glorye there is nothing but vanitye, and it eaſily vaniſheth awaye,Riches as we haue before declared. As touching pleaſure Salomon ſayth it endeth in heauineſſe.Glry o
                        •
                      Pleaſure And an auncient writer compared it to a liue bodye on a beire.God is the true & onely felicity. It is not founde likewiſe in anye part of this brittle and wretched lyfe: but in the truſt, mercy, puiſſance, and bounty of God, and remisſion of our ſinnes, as Dauid ſetteth it 32. Pſalme: and Saint Paule to the Romanes, in the feare and loue of God and of his worde, and to put oure whole confidence in him: and in that which our Sauiour reciteth in the 6. of Sainct Mathew. It had not likewiſe beene vnfruitfull, to haue ſhewed,

how hurtfull impatience, and murmuring are, and how neceſſarye to be eſchewed, followinge the inſtruction of Salomon, Prouerb.
                  Murmuringe. 14. & 19. and of Sainct Paule 1. Corrinth. 10. & 2. Phil. the example of Achitophel is in the 2. of Samuel cap. 17. I referre other greater reaſons of the aboue ſayde articles vntill an other ſeaſon. I coulde alſo haue diſcourſed at large of ſundry other opinions which are in controuerſie, were it not for feare of beeing too long, and ouer tedious.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Concluſion.
            
               CHAP. L.
               
                  TO the end then that we may reſt beloued of God, and of good men, and haue a good conſcience, a peaceable life, a guide in all affaires with hope of eternall life,Admonishment to follovve the truth and shunne lying and heape of blyſſe, we muſt walke wiſely, and be founde true in all our thoughtes, wordes, and actions: and ſo to accuſtome our ſelues thereto, that we giue no place to any lye, though it be the lighteſt which may be made. Nowe for feare leaſt we ſhould fall hereunto, to our great greife, let vs be time thinke of what we would doe or ſay, before we put it in execution, beſeeching God with Dauid, that he will addreſſe vs in his trueth, and that it may alwayes remayne in our heart and mouth, that he will make vs to vnderſtande, howe ſhort and vncertaine the courſe of this our life is, to the ende that wee may retyre our heartes from the vanities and falſe apparances of this worlde, and ſpende that little time which we haue to liue, in learning of his wiſedome, that is to ſaye, to beleeue and aſſure our ſelues vpon his promiſes, to obey whatſoeuer it pleaſeth him to commaunde vs, and carefully to eſchewe, whatſoeuer he hath forbidden. And as this contagion of lying, hath well gayned place in many, thorough cuſtome, and is growen by little and litle, ſo let vs exerciſe our ſelues to followe truth though in tryfles, and euery day before we ſleepe, examine, and trie what we haue gotten by being true and vertuous: and according to Seneca his counſell, in all our actions howe ſecrete ſoeuer they be, let vs imagine that God, his ſaintes, and Angels, be preſent, or ſome man of great aucthoritie and grauitie: to the ende our countenances, wordes, and actions may be the better gouerned.
                     Deut. 3. Bleſſings promiſed to ſuch as follovve the truth and curſes to ſuch as follovvelying. And of ſuch as ſhall liue in this truth ſhunning lying, we may ſay as Moyſes propheſied and pronounced to the children of Iſrael, to whom al chriſtians haue ſucceeded, that they ſhall be bleſſed in the citie, and bleſſed alſo in the fielde, bleſſed ſhalbe the fruite of their bodye, and the fruite of their grounde, and the fruit of their cattell: God ſhall make an alliance with them, he ſhall make them increaſe and multiply in abundance, of whatſoeuer is neceſsarie: But if contrariwiſe they followe lying and liue diſorderly, feare and trembling feauers, burning agewes and all ſorts of curſes there ſet downe

ſhall fall vpon them. There is no queſtion to be made which way is to be followed, that wee may attayne to all felicitie, and the inheritance promiſed to ſuch as are ſanctified of God, and to thoſe are thinges which neyther eye hath ſeene, nor eare hath heard, nor came into mans heart which God hath prepared for them which loue him. Saint Paul wrote to the Romaines, that the wrath of God is reuealed from heauen against all vngodlineſſe, and vnrighteouſneſſe of men, which withholde the truth in vnrighteouſneſſe. And to them which by continuance in well doing ſeeke glory, honour, and immortalitie, to giue euerlaſting life, but to them that are contentious and diſobey the truth, and obey vnrighteouſneſſe ſhal be indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguiſh ſhall be vppon the ſoule of euery man, that doth euill, but to euery man that doth good ſhalbe glory, and honour, and peace. And ſeeing the chaſtiſements, miſeries, and afflictions, & ſo many tragicall euents ſent from God to ſo many people, Chriſtians but in name, which are ſet before our eyes for an example, to reconcile vs to God, we haue great occaſion humbly to beſeech by feruent prayers and groanes, that he will bende our heartes to his obedience, and ſo make other mens plagues and viſitations to profit vs, that we may not drawe through our vnthankfulneſſe more greeuous paynes vppon vs and ours, moſt humbly thanking him, for that amidſt ſo great darkeneſſe, error and ignorance as couereth the worlde, it pleaſeth him to caſt ſome beames of his grace, and truth vpon vs, beſeeching him that he wil warme, quicken, and illuminate vs more and more attending the day of our deliuerie out of this world already vanquiſhed by him.
            
            Τω θεω δωξα.
            Τελος
            
         
      
   