
      
         
            
            
            A CLOSET for LADIES and GENTLEVVOMEN, OR, The Art of preſeruing, Conſeruing, and Candying. With the manner howe to make diuers kinds Syrups: and all kind of banqueting ſtuffes. Alſo diuers ſoueraigne Medicines and Salues, for ſundry Diſeaſes.
            
            AT LONDON Printed for Arthur Iohnſon, dwelling neere the great North dore of Pauls. 1608.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ An eſpeciall note of CONFECTIONARY.
            
               To preſerue Pippyns red.
               
                  TAke your beſt coloured Pippins and pare them, then take a percer and bore a hole through them, then make ſyrupe for them as much as wil couer them, and ſo let them boyle in a broad preſeruing pan: put into them a pece of Cynamon ſticke, and ſo let them boyle cloſe couered verie leaſurely, turning them very often, for if you turne them not very often, they will pot, and the one ſide will not bee like the other, and let them

thus boyle, vntil they begin to gelly, then take them vp, and pot them, and you may keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To Preſerue Pippins white.
               TAke faire large Pippins, and after Candlemas pare them, and bore a hole through them, as you did for the red ones, then make a weake Syrope for them, and ſo let them boyle till they be tender, then take them vp, and boyle your ſyrope a little higher, then put them vp in a Gally pot, and let them ſtand all night, and the next morning the Syrope will be ſomething weaker, then boyle the Syrope againe to his full thickeneſſe, and ſo pot them, and you may keepe them all the yeare. If you pleaſe to haue them taſte a pleaſant taſte more then the naturall Pippin, put in one graine of muske, and one droppe of the Chymicall oyle of Cynnamon, and that will

make them taſte a more pleaſant taſte.
            
            
               To preſerue Pippins greene.
               TAke Pippins when they be ſmall and greene of the tree, and pare three or four of the worſt, and cut them all to pieces, then boyle them in a quart of faire water till they be pap, then let the liquor come from them as you do from your quodiniacke into a baſon, then put into thē one poūd of ſugar clarified, and put into this as many greene Pippins vnpared as that liquor will couer, and ſo let them boyle ſafely, and when you ſee they be boyled as tender as a quodling, then take them vp, and pill of the outtermoſt white skinne, and then your Pippins will be greene, then boyle them in your Syrope againe till the Syrope be thicke: and ſo you may keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               
               To preſerue Apricockes.
               TAke a pound of Apricockes, and a pound of ſugar, and claryfie your ſugar with a pint of water, and when your ſugar is made perfect, put it into a Preſeruing-pan, & put your Apricockes into it and ſo let them boyle gently, and when they bee boyled ynough and your Syrope thicke, pot them and ſo keepe them. In like maner may you preſerue a Pear-plum.
            
            
               To preſerue Mirabolans or Malacadonians.
               TAke your Malacadonians and ſtone them, and per boyle them in water, then pill of the outward skin of them, they will boyle as long as a peece of beefe, & therefore you need not feare the breaking of them, and when they be boyled tender make Syrope for them, and preſerue them

as you doe any other thing, and ſo you may keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To preſerue Pomcitrons.
               TAke your Pomcitrons one pound and a halfe, and cut them ſome 
                     •
                   halfes, ſome in quarters and take the meate out of them, and boyle them tender in faire water, then take two pounds of ſugar being clarified, and make Syrope for them, ahd let them boyle in ſyrope a quarter of an houre very gently, then take them vp, and let your Syrope boyle til it be thicke, and then put in your Pomcitrons, and you may keepe them al they yere. If you pleaſe you may pare ſome of them, forſome delight the skin, and ſome pared.
            
            
               To preſerue Cherries.
               TAke of the beſt and fayreſt Cherries ſome two pound, and with a paire of ſheeres clippe of the ſtalkes

by the midſt, then waſh them cleane, and beware you bruiſe them not, then take of fine barbarie ſugar, and ſet it ouer the fire with a quart of faire water in the brodeſt veſſell you can get, and let it ſeeth til it be ſomewhat thicke, then put in your Cherries, and ſtirre them together with a ſiluer ſpoone and ſo let them boyle, alwayes ſcumming, and turning them very gently, that the one ſide may be like the other, vntill they be ynough, the which to know, you muſt take vp ſome of the ſyrope with one Cherrie, and ſo let it coole, and if it will ſcarce run out it is ynough, and thus being cold, you may put them vp, and keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To preſerue red Roſe leaues.
               TAke of the leaues of the faireſt buds halfe a pound, ſift them clean from ſeeds, then take a quart of faire water, and put it in a earthen pipkin,

and ſet it ouer the fire vntill it bee ſcalding hot, and then take a good many of other red Roſe leaues, and put them into the ſcalding water, vntill they begin to looke white, and then ſtraine them, and thus do vntill the water looke very red: then take a pound of refined ſugar, and beat it fine, and put it into the liquor with halfe a pound of Roſe leaues, and let them ſeeth together till they bee ynough, the which to know is by taking ſome of them vp in a ſpoone, as you doe your Cherries, and ſo when as they be thorow cold, put them vp, and keepe them very cloſe.
            
            
               To preſerue Oranges and Lymonds.
               TAke your Oranges and Lymonds large and well coloured, and take a raſpe of ſteele, and raſpe the outward rind from them, then lay them in water three dayes and three nightes, then boyle them tender

and ſhift them in the boyling to take away their bitterneſſe, and when they bee boyled tenderly, take two pound of ſugar clarified with a pint of water, and when your ſyrope is made, and betwixt hot and cold, put in your Lymonds and Oranges, and there let them bee infuſed all night, the next morning let them boyle two or three walmes in your Syrope, let them not boyle too long in the ſugar, becauſe the rinds will be tough, take your Lymonds out and boyle your Syrope thicker, and ſo when it is colde, put them vp and keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To preſerue Quinces.
               TAke your Quinces two pound, & core them, & then perboyle them, & pil off the outtermoſt white skin, and then weigh them, and put them into claryfied ſugar one pound, and then boyle them cloſly couered vpon

a very gentle fire, putting vnto them a ſticke or two of good Cynnamon, cut into ſmall pieces, and ſo ſtirre them continually that they may be well coloured on euery ſide: and when the ſyrop is come to the height of a perfect gelly, take them off the fire, and ſo keepe them, for the higher your ſyrope is, the better will your Quinces keepe.
            
            
               To preſerue Peaches.
               TAke a pound of your fayreſt and beſt coloured Peaches, and with a wet linnen cloth wipe of the white hoare of them, then perboyle them in halfe a pint of white wine, and a pine and a halfe of running water, and being perboyled, pill off the white skin of them, and then weigh them; take to your pound of Peaches, three quarters of a pound of refined ſugar, and diſſolue it in a quarter of a pint of white wine, and boyle it almoſt to

the height of a Syrope, and then put in your Peaches, and let them boyle in the Syrope a quarter of an houre or more if neede ſhould require, and then put them vp, and keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To preſerue Eringus Rootes.
               TAke your Eringus Rootes fayre, and not knottie one pound, and waſh them cleane, and when they be waſhed, ſet them on the fire, and boyle them very tender, pill off the outermoſt skinne of them, but ſee you breake them not, and as you pare them put them into cold water, and let them remaine there till all be finiſhed, and then you muſt take to euery pound of Rootes, three quarters of a pound of clarified ſugar, and boyle it almoſt vnto the height of a ſyrope, and then put in your rootes, but looke that they boyle very gently together, with as little ſtirring as

may bee for feare of breaking, vntill they be ynough: and when they bee cold, put them vp, and ſo keepe them.
            
            
               To preſerue Barberies.
               TAke your Barberies very faire and well coloured, and picke out euery ſtone of them, and then weigh them, and to euery ounce of Barberies, you muſt take three ounces of hard ſugar, and with halfe an ounce of the pulpe of Barberies, and one ounce of red Roſe water, you muſt diſolue your ſuger: and then boyle it to a ſyrope, being ſo boyled, put in your Barberies, and let them boyle a quarter of an houre, and then take them vp, and as ſoone as they begin to waxe coole, put them vp, and they will keepe their colour all the yeare.
            
            
               To preſerue Gooſ-berries.
               TAke of your large Berries, but not thoroughly ripe, and picke off all the ſtaulkes from them,

and waſh them cleane, take a pound of them, and ſet them on the fire, till they bee hot, and then take them off, and let the liquor run from them, then take ten ounces of hard ſugar, and foure ounces of ſuger Candie, and clarify it with a pint of water and the white of an egge, and boyle it to a thicke Syrope, and then put in your Gooſ-berries, and let them boyle one walme or two, and ſo betwixt hot and cold, put them vp, & keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To preſerue Damſins.
               TAke of your Damſins large and well coloured, but not thorough ripe, for then they will breake, and picke them cleane and wipe them one by one, then weigh them, and to euery pound of damſins, you muſt take a pound of Barbery ſugar white & good, & diſſolued in halfe a pint or more of water, and boyle it almoſt to

the height of a Syrope, and then put in your Damſins, keeping them with continuall ſcumming, and ſtirring, and that with a ſiluer ſpoone, and ſo let them boyle vntill they be ynough vpon a gentle fire, and when they be ynough, take them vp, & keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To preſerue Raſpiſes.
               TAke of your fayreſt and well coloured Raſpiſes, and picke of their ſtaulkes very cleane, then waſh them, but in any caſe ſee that you bruiſe them not: then weigh them, and to euery pound of Raſpiſes you muſt take ſixe ounces of hard ſugar, and ſixe ounces of Sugar-candy, & clarifie it with halfe a pint of faire water, and foure ounces of iuyce of Raſpiſes, being clarified, boyle it to a weake Syrope, and then put in your Raſpiſes, ſtirring them vp and down, and ſo let them boyle vntill they bee

ynough: That is, vſing them as your Cherries, and ſo may you keep them all the yeare.
            
            
               To preſerue Enula Campana rootes.
               TAke of your Enula Campana rootes, & waſh them, ſcrape them verie cleane, and cut them thin vnto the pith, the length of your little fingar, and as you cut them, put them into water, and let them lie in water thirtie dayes, ſhifting them twiſe euery day to take away their bitternes, weigh them, and to euery pound of rootes, you muſt take xij. ounces of clarified ſugar, firſt boyling your rootes as tender as a Chickin, and then put them into your clarified ſugar, and let them boyle vpon a gentle fire, vntill they be ynough: and ſo let them ſtand off the fire a good while, and betwixt hot and cold put them vp to your vſe.
            
            
               
               To preſerue Saterion Rootes.
               TAke your Saterion Rootes, and picke out the faire ones, & keepe them by themſelues, then waſh them, and boyle them vpon a gentle fire, as tender as a quodling, then take them off, and pare off the blackeſt skinne of them, and put them as you pare them into faire water, and ſo let them remaine one night and then weigh them, and to euery pound of rootes, you muſt take xj. ounces of clarified ſugar, and boyle it almoſt to the height of a ſyrope, and then put in your rootes, but take heede they boile not too long, for then they Will grow hard and tough, and therefore when they bee boyled ynough, take them off, and ſet them a cooling, and ſo keepe them according to the reſt.
               Heere endeth the Preſeruatiues.
            
            
               
               To make Manus Chriſti.
               TAke halfe a pound of refined Suger, and ſome Roſe water, and boyle them together, till it come to ſugar againe, then ſtirre it about while it be ſomewhat cold, then take your leafe gould, and mingle with it, then caſt it according to art, That is, in round gobbets, and ſo keepe them.
            
            
               To Candy Ginger.
               TAke very faire and large Ginger, and pare it, and then lay it in water a day and a night, then take your double refined ſuger, and boyle it to the height of Suger againe, then when your ſuger beginneth to bee cold, take your Ginger, and ſtirre it well about while your ſuger is hard to the panne, then take it out race by race, and lay it by die fier for foure

howers, then take a pot and warme it, and put the Ginger in it, then tye it very cloſe, & euery ſecond morning ſtirre it about roundly, and it will be rocke Candied in a very ſhort ſpace.
            
            
               To Candy Roſe leaues as naturally as if they grew vpon the Tree.
               TAke of the fayreſt Roſe leaues, red or dammaske, and on a Sun-ſhine day ſprinkle them with Roſe water, and lay them one by one vpon faire paper, then take ſome double refined ſuger, and beat it very fine, and put it in a fine lawne ſearce, when you haue layd abroad all the Roſe leaues in the hotteſt of the ſunne, ſearce ſuger thinly all ouer them, then anon the Sun will candy the ſuger, then turne the leaues, and ſearce ſuger on the other ſide, and turne them often in the Sun, ſometimes ſprinkling Roſe water, & ſome times ſearſing ſuger on them, vntill they be ynough, and come to

your liking: and being thus done, you may keepe them.
            
            
               To Candy Marigolds in wedges the Spaniſh faſhion.
               TAke of the faire yealow Marigold flowers, two ounces, and ſhred them, and dry them before the fire, then take foure ounces of ſuger, and boyle it to the height of Manus Chriſti, then poure it vpon a wet Preplate, and betwixt hot and cold, cut it into wedges, then lay them on a ſheete of white paper, and put them in a ſtone.
            
            
               To Candy all manner of flowers in their naturall colours.
               TAke the flowers with the ſtaulkes, and waſh them ouer with a little Roſe water, wherein Gum-arabecke is diſſolued, then take fine ſearſed ſuger, and duſt ouer them, and ſet them

a drying on the bottome of a ſiue in an ouen, and they will gliſter as if it were Suger-candy.
            
            
               To Candy all ſorts of flowers, fruits, and ſpices, the cleare rocke Candy.
               TAke two pound of Barbarie Suger, great grained, clarified with the whites of two egges, and boyle it almoſt as hie as for Mantus Chriſti, thē put it into a Pipkin, That is, not very rough, then put in your flowers, fruits and ſpices, and ſo put your Pipkin into a ſtill, and make a ſmall fire of ſmall coales vnder it, and in the ſpace of twelue dayes, it will be rocke candied.
            
            
               To Candie Eringus rootes.
               TAke your Eringus ready to be preſerued, and weigh them, and to euery pound of your rootes, you muſt take of the pureſt ſuger you can get,

two pound, and clarifie it with the whites of egges exceeding well, that it may be as cleere as Chriſtall: for then it will be very commendable: it being clarified, you muſt boyle it to the height of Manus Chriſti, & then dippe in your rootes, two or three at once, till they be all candied, and ſo put them in a Stow, and keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To Candie Elecampane.
               TAke of your faireſt Enula Campana rootes, and take them cleane from the Syrupe, and waſh the ſuger off them, and drye them againe with a linnen cloth, then weigh them, and to euery pound of rootes you muſt take a pound and three quarters of ſuger, and clarifie it well, and boyle it to the height of Manus Chriſti, and when it is ſo boyled, dippe in your rootes, three or foure at once, and they will candie very well, and ſo

ſtone them, and keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To Candy Violet flowers.
               TAke of your Violet flowers which are good and new, and wel coloured, and weigh them, to euery ounce of your Violet flowers, you muſt take foure ounces of refined ſuger, which is very white and faire grained, and diſſolue it in two ounces of faire running water, and ſo boyle it til it come to ſuger againe, but you muſt ſcum it often, leaſt it be not cleare ynough, and when it is boyled to ſuger againe, then take it off, and let it coole, and then put in your Violet flowers, ſtirring them together till the ſuger grow hard to the pan: this done, put them into a boxe, and keepe them in a ſtoaue.
            
            
               
               To Candy Gooſ-berries.
               TAke of your faireſt Berries, but they muſt not bee two ripe, for then they will not bee ſo good, and with a linnen cloth wipe them verie cleane, and picke off all the ſtaulkes from them, and weigh them, and to euery ounce of Berries, you muſt take two ounces of ſuger, and halfe an ounce of Suger-candy, and diſſolue them in an ounce or two of Roſe water, & ſo boyle them vp to the height of Manus Chriſti, and when it is come to his perfect height, let it coole and put in your Berries, for if you put them in hot, they will ſhrinke, and ſo ſtirre them round with a wooden ſpatter, till they bee candied: and thus put them vp and keepe them.
            
            
               To Candy Roſemarie flowers.
               TAke of your Roſemarie flowers, readie pickt, and weigh them, to euery

ounce of flowers, you muſt take two ounces of hard ſuger, and one ounce of Suger-candy, and diſſolue them in Roſemarie flower water, and boyle them till they come to ſuger againe; which done, put in your Roſemarie flowers, when as your ſuger is almoſt cold, and ſo ſtirre them together, vntill they be ynough, and then take them out, and put them in a boxe, and keepe them to your vſe in your ſtoaue.
            
            
               To Candy Borrage flowers.
               TAke your flowers, & picke them very cleane, & weigh them, & vſe them in euery reſpect as you did your roſemary flowers, ſaue this, that who they be candied, you muſt ſet them in a ſtill, & ſo keepe them in a ſheete of white paper, putting euery day a chafindiſh of coales into your Still, and it will be candied very excellently, and that in a ſhort ſpare.
               Here endeth the ſorts of Candying.
            
            
               
               To make Paſt of Pippins the GENVA faſhion, ſome with leaues, ſome like Plums with ſtaulkes, and ſtones in them.
               
               TAke your Pippins, and pare them, and cut them in quarters, then boyle them in faire water till they be tender, then ſtraine them, and drie the pulpe vpon a Chafindiſh of coales, then weigh it, & take as much ſuger as it weigheth, and boyle it to Manus Chriſti, and put them together, then faſhion them vpon a Pie-plate, and put it into an Ouen, being very ſleightly heat, the next morning you may turn it, and put them off the plates vpon ſheetes of paper vpon a hurdle, and ſo put them into an Ouen of like heat, and there let them remaine foure or

fiue dayes, putting euery day a Chafindiſh of coales into the Ouen, and when they be thorow dry, you may boxe them, and keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To make Paſt of Eglantine of the colour of thrred Corall.
               TAke your Eglantine Berries otherwiſe called Hips, and ſtampe them in a morter, with Gum-tragacant and Roſe water, then ſtrayne it thorough a ſtrayner, then take halfe a pound of refined ſuger, beaten and ſearſed, and worke it vp into Paſt with this ſtrayning, then print it with your moulds, then ſtoaue it, and then guild them.
            
            
               To make Paſt Royall white.
               TAke a pound of refined ſuger beaten and ſearſed, and put into an Alabaſter morter, with an ounce of Gum-tragacant, ſteeped in Roſe water,

and if you ſee your Paſt bee too weake, put in more ſuger, if too drie, more gumme, with a droppe or two of oyle of Cynamon, ſo that you neuer deceiue your ſelfe to ſtand vpon quantities, beat it into perfect Paſt, and then you may print it with your moulds, and when it is drie, guild it, and ſo keepe them.
            
            
               To make Paſt royall in ſpiſes.
               TAke of Cynamon and Ginger, of each a like quantitie, being finely ſearſed, mingle it with your ſearſed ſuger, and Gum-tragacant ſteeped in Roſe water, and worke it into Paſt, as you did your Paſt royall white, and then you may turne it vpon ſtickes made of peeces of arrowes, and make them hollow like Cynamon ſtickes: in like ſort you may make it taſt of wh
                     ••
                   ſpices you pleaſe.
            
            
               
               To make Paſt of Genua the true way.
               TAke two pound of the Pulpe of Quinces, and as much of peaches, and ſtraine it, and drie it in a pewter platter vpon a Chafindiſh of coles, then weigh it, and take as much ſuger as it weigheth, and boyle it to the height of Manus Chriſti, and then put them together, and ſo faſhion it vpon a Pie-plate, and dry it in an Ouen with a Chafindiſh of coales, vntill it be thro rough drie, and then if it pleaſe you, you may ſpot them with Gold.
            
            
               To make Paſt of Violets.
               YOu muſt take of your Violets, which are ready picked, & bruiſe them in an Alabaſter or marble morter and wring the iuyce from them into a porringer, and put as much

hard ſuger in fine powder as that iuyce will couer, drie it, and then powder it againe, and then take as much Gum-tragacant ſteeped in roſe water, as wil bring this ſuger into a perfect paſt, when it is perfect, take it vp and print it with your moulds, and ſo drie it in your Stoaue, and not by the fire for feare of daunger, and when it is drie, guild it. It is a fine banqueting conceit.
            
            
               To make Paſt of Gooſ-berries.
               TAke of your Gooſ-berries, and cut them one by one, and wring the iuyce from them, till you haue gotten ſo much as you think wil ſerue your turne, boyle your iuyce a little, that it may be the thicker, then take as much double refined ſuger, as your iuyce will ſharpen, and dry it as you did for your Violets, and being drie, beat it very fine, and take as much Gum-tragacant ſteeped in Red roſe water

as will ſerue, and beate it into perfect paſt in an Alabaſter morter, and then take it vp, and print it with your moulds, vſing it in euery reſpect as your paſt of Violets: This is excellent good for one that hath a weake ſtomacke.
            
         
         
            
            Here beginneth Banqueting conceits, as Marmalades, Quodiniackes, and ſuch like.
            
               To Make Muskadine Comfits.
               TAke halfe a pound of Muske ſuger beaten and ſearſed, then take Gum-tragacant, ſteeped in Roſe water, and two graines of Muske, and ſo beat them in an Alabaſter morter, till it come to perfect Paſt, then driue it verie thinne with a rowling pinne, and then cut it into ſmall pieces like Diamonds, ſome cut

with a rowle ſpoone on the ſides: being thus cut, ſtoue them, and ſo keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To make Diacitonium ſimplex of Quinces.
               TAke of your Quinces, and pare them, and cut them in pieces, and boyle a pound of theſe pieces in a quart of faire water, till they be very ſoft: then let the liquor runne from them, then take a pound of Suger-candy, and beate it fine, and put it into that liquor, and let it ſeeth till you ſee it ſtand like Gelly, then take it from the fire, and put therein foure droppes of oyle of Cynnamon and Nutmegs, and then put in fiue and twentie leaues of fine gold and ſtirre it together, and ſo put it in fine Chriſtall Glaſſes, and keepe it all the yeare.
            
            
               
               To make fine Chriſt all Gelly.
               TAke a knuckle of veale, and foure Calues feete, and ſet them on the fire with a Gallon of faire water, and when the fleſh is boyled tender, take it out, then let the liquor ſtand ſtill vntill it be cold, then take away the top and the bottome of that liquor, and put the reſt into a cleane Pipkin, and put into it one pound of clarified ſuger, foure or fiue droppes of oyle of Cynnamon and Nutmegs, a graine of Muske, and ſo let it boyle a quarter of an houre leaſurely on the ſire, then let it run through a gelly bagge into a baſon with the whites of two egges beaten, & when it is cold, you may cutte it into lumpes with a ſpoone, and ſo ſerue three or foure lumpes vpon a plate.
            
            
               
               To make white leach of creame.
               TAke a pint of ſweete creame, and ſixe ſpoone-fuls of Roſe water, and two graines of Muske, two drops of oyle of Mace, or one piece of large Mace, and ſo let it boyle with foure ounces of Iſin-glaſſe: then let it run downe through a gelly bagge, when it is cold, ſlice it like brawne, and ſo ſerue it out: this is the beſt way to make leach.
            
            
               To make a Walnut, that when you cracke it, you ſhall find Biſkets, and Carrawayes in it, or a prettie Pofey written.
               TAke a piece of your Paſt royall white, being beaten with Gum-tragacant, and mixed with a little fine ſearſed Cynnamon, which will bring your paſt into a Wolnut

ſhell colour, then driue it thinne, and cut it into two pieces, and put the one piece into the one half of your mould, and the other into the other, then put what you pleaſe into the nut, and cloſe the mould together, & ſo make three or foure Walnuts.
            
            
               To make Quodiniacke of plums.
               TAke two pound of plummes, and put them into a poſnet with a pound and halfe of braſill ſuger, clarified with a pint of faire water, and let it boyle till the plummes breake, then take it off, and let your liquid ſubſtance run through a ſtrayner, and then put it againe into the poſnet, and ſo let it boyle till it come to his thickneſſe, and then print it with you: moulds on what faſhion you pleaſe.
            
            
               To make Biskatello.
               TAke two ounces of very fine ſuger, beaten and ſearſed, and put

into it halfe a ſpoon-full of Amidum, That is, white ſtarch, a graine of Muske, then beat it into perfect paſt with Gum-tragacant ſteeped in Roſe water, then make it into little prettie loaues, the faſhion of manchets, and ſo put a wafer in the bottome of euery one of them, and bake them in a baking-pan, but take heede your pan be not hot, and ſo ſpecke them with gould, and ſo boxe them. It is a very fine banqueting conceit.
            
            
               To make a ſpeciall ſweet water to perfume clothes in the foulding, being waſhed.
               TAke a quart of Dammaske roſe water, and put it into a glaſſe, put vnto it a handful of Lauender flowers, two ounces of Orris, a dram of Muske, the weight of foure pence of Amber-greece, as much ciuet, foure drops of oyle of cloues, ſtoppe this cloſe and ſet it in the Sun

a fortnight: put one ſpoonfull of this water into a baſon of common water, and put it into glaſſe, & ſo ſprinkle your clothes therewith in your folding, the drugs left in the bottome, (when the water is ſpent) will make as much more, if you keepe them, and put freſh Roſe water to it.
            
            
               To make Moſſe powder.
               TAke two pound of Moſſe of a ſweete Apple-tree, gathered betweene the two Lady dayes, and infuſe it in a quart of Dammaske Roſe water foure and twentie houres, then take it out and drie it in an Ouen vpon a ſiues bottome, and beat it to powder, put vnto it one ounce of Lignum-aloes, beaten and ſearſed, two ounces of Orris, a dramme of muske, halfe a dram of Amber-greece a quarter of a dram of ciuet, put all theſe into a hot morter and peſtell, and beat them together, then ſearſe

them through a courſe hairen ſearſe, and put it into a bagge, and lay it amongſt your clothes.
            
            
               Tr make Aromaticum Lozenges.
               TAke of fine ſuger, halfe a pound, boyle it with red Roſe water, vntill it come to the height of Lozenges, and in the cooling put in of the ſpices of Aromaticum roſarum foure drams, with a little Confectio Alchermes, and ſo make them into Lozenges, guilding them firſt, and then cut them ſquare with a knife for that purpoſe, and when you guild them, if your guilding will not ſticke on, wet them gently with a little Roſe water, but not too much in any caſe.
            
            
               To make a Marchpane, to yee it, and garniſh it after the Art of Comfit making.
               TAke two pound of ſmall Almonds blanched, and beaten into perfect

Paſt, with a pound of ſuger finely ſearſed, putting in now and then a ſpoonfull or two of Roſe water, to keepe it from oyling, and when it is beaten to perfect Paſt, rowle it thin, and cut it round by a charger, then ſet an edge on it, as you doe on a tart, then drie it in an Ouen, or a backing pan, then yee it with Roſe water and ſuger, made as thicke as batter for fritters, when it is iced garniſh it with conceits, and ſticke long comfits in it, and ſo guild it, and ſure it.
            
            
               To make all ſorts of banqueting conceits of Marchpane ſtuffe, ſome like Pyes, Birds, Baskets, and ſuch like, and ſome to print with moulds.
               TAke a pound of Almond paſt, made for the Marchpane, and drye it on a Chafindiſh of coales, till you ſee it waxe white, then you may print ſome with

mouldds, and make ſome with hands, and ſo guild them, then ſtoue them and you may keepe them all the yere. They bee excellent good to pleaſe children.
            
            
               To make all kinde of Birds and Beaſts to ſtand on their legges in caſt worke.
               TAke Barbary ſuger, clarifie it, and boyle it to the height of Manus Chriſti, then poure it into your mouldes, they being ſeaſoned as for your Quodiniacke: let them ſtand a quarter of an houre and they will be colde, and then you may take them out and guild them.
            
            
               To caſt all manner of frutage hollow in turnd worke, and put them in their colours, as Oranges, Lymonds, and ſuch like.
               TAke your Suger, being boyled to the height of Manus Chriſti, and

put it into your Alabaſter mouldes, being made of three pieces, turne it round about in your hand while it is hot, and when it is colde, take it out and put them in their naturall colors.
            
            
               To make Prince bisket bread.
               TAke a pound of very fine flower, as much ſuger throughly ſearſed, one ounce of anniſſeeds cleane pickt, take eight egges and a ſpoonefull of Muskadine, and beat all into batter as thicke as for fritters, beat it thus in a bowle one houre, then put it into your coffins of plate, or frames of wood, and ſet in an Ouen, and let it remaine there one houre, you may ſlice ſome of them when they bee a day old, and drie them againe vpon a hurdle of wicker, you may alſo take one of your loaues, and waſh it ouer with the yolke of an egge, beaten with a little Roſe water, and while it is greene, caſt biskets and carrawaies

on it and a little white candy, and it will ſhew as if it did haile on it, then ſpot it with golde and giue to whom you pleaſe.
            
            
               To make the vſuall bisket ſolde at Comfitmakers.
               TAke a peeke of flower and foure ounces of corriander ſeede, one ounce of anniſeed, take three egges, three ſpoonefulls of ale yeaſt, and as much warme water as will make it as thicke as paſt for Manchets, make it in a long roule, and bake it in an Ouen one houre, and when it is a day olde pare it, and ſlice it, ſuger it with ſearſed ſuger, and put it againe into the Ouen, and when it is drie, take it out, and new ſuger it againe, and ſo box it and keepe it.
            
            
               
               To make an eſpeciall ſweet Powder for ſweet bagges.
               TAke of the pureſt orris one pound, of red and dammaske roſe leaues, of each two ounces, of Cloues three drammes, corriander feed one dram, Ciprus and Callamus, of each halfe an ounce, Benzoin and Storax, of each three drammes, beat them all ſaue the Benzoin and the Storax, and pouder them by themſelues, & mixe it with the reſt of the powder, then take of Muske and Ciuet, of each twenty graines, Amber-greece ten graines, mixe theſe with a little of the foreſaid powder with a warme peſtle, and ſo by little and little you may mixe it with all the reſt, and ſo with Roſe leaues dried you may put it vp into your ſweete bagges, and ſo keepe them ſeauen yeares.
            
            
               
               To make an excellent Marmelate which was giuen Queene Mary for a New-yeares gift.
               TAke a pound and halfe of Suger, boyle it with a pintoſ faire water till it come to the height of Manus Chriſti, then take three or foure ſmall Quinces, one good Orang pill, both very well preſerued and finely beaten, & three ounces of Almonds blanched and beaten by themſelues, Eringus roots preſerued, two ounces and a halfe, ſtirre theſe with the ſuger till it will not ſticke, and then at the laſt put in of Muske and Amber, diſſolued in roſe water, of each foure graines, of Cynamon, Ginger, Cloues and Mace, of each three drammes, of oyle of Cynnamon two droppes, this being done, put it into your Marme late boxes, and ſo preſent it to whom you pleaſe.
            
            
               
               To make another ſort of Marmelate very comfortable and reſtoratiue for any Lord or Lady whatſoeuer.
               TAke of the pureſt greene Ginger, ſixe drammes, of Eringus and Saterion rootes, of each an ounce and a halfe, beate theſe very finely, and draw them with a ſiluer ſpoone thorow a haire ſearſe, take of nut kirnells and almonds blaunched, of each an ounce, Cockes ſtones halfe an ounce, all ſteeped in hony twelue houres, and then boyled in milke, and beaten and mixed with the reſt, then pouder the ſeedes of redde nettles, of rocket of each one dramme, Plantane ſeeds halfe a dramme, of the belly and backe of a fiſh called Scincus marinus three drammes, of Diaſaterion foure ounces, of Cantarides adde a dram, beate theſe very finely, and with the other powder mixe it, and ſo with a

pound of fine ſuger diſſolued in roſe water, and boyled to ſuger againe, mingle the powder and all the reſt of the things, putting in of leafe golde ſixe leaues, of pearle prepared two drammes, oyle of Cynnamon fixe drops, and being thus done and well dryed, put it vp in your Marmelate boxes, and guild it, and ſo vſe it at your pleaſure.
            
            
               To make a blaunch for any Ladies face.
               TAke of white Tarter two drams, Camphire one dramme, Coperas halfe a dramme, the whites of foure egges, iuyce of two Lymonds, oyle of tarter foure ounces, Plantane water as much, white Mercuri a pennyworth, bitter almonds two ounces, all muſt be powred and mixed with the oyle and water, and then boyled vpon a gentle fire, and ſtraine it and ſo keepe it: The partie muſt rub her face with a ſcarlet cloth, and

then ouer night waſh her with it, and in the morning waſh it off with bran and white wine.
            
            
               To make printed Quodiniacke of Quinces a rubye colour.
               TAke two pound of Quinces, pared & cut in ſmal pieces, and put them into a poſnet with three pints of faire water, and ſo let them boyle till they be tender, then put into them a pound of ſuger, and let it boyle till the fruit fall to the bottome of the pan, let the liquor runne through a ſtrayner into a baſon, and put it into a faire poſnet, and let it boyle till it come to his colour and thickneſſe, then print it with your moulds, you ſhall know when it is ready to print by rowling a little vpon the backe of a ſpoone, and if you ſee it will ſtand and not runne downe print it, in like ſort you may make your Quodiniacke of Pippins, your Pippins will hold all the yeare.
            
            
               
               To make Quodiniackes of Raſpiſes or Engliſh Coriants.
               Take Raſpiſes ripe and well coloured and put them in a diſh, and put them iiiij ſpoonfulls of roſe water, & mix them together with the backe of a ſpoone, then wring the lyquid ſubſtance through a linnen cloth, ſeaſon it by your mouth with ſuger till it be ſweete ynough, then boyle it on a chafindiſh of coales in a diſh till it be reddy to print: then print it in your moulds and box it, and ſo keepe them.
            
            
               Here endeth the conceits of Banqueting.
               Your mouldes muſt lie in water one night before you vſe them: and an houre before you print with them, take them out of the water.
            
         
         
            
            CORDIAL VVaters.
            
               Aqua Coelestis.
               TAke of Cynnamon ſix ounces, Cloues one dram, Nutmegs one dram and a halfe; of Ginger two drammes and halfe, of Gallingale one dram and halfe, Cubebs two drammes, Callamus rootes one dram, all bruſen and kepe in a paper, then take of Bettony and ſage flowers of each a handfull, Maxioram, Penneryall, of each halfe a handfull bruſed likewiſe, then take of theſe pouders, of Aromaticum

Roſarum three drammes, Diambrae Diamargariton frigidum, Diamoſcum dulce, of each a dram and halfe, you muſt put all theſe into a gallon of ſpirit of wine, and ſteepe them three dayes and three nights ſhaking them well euery day, and then diſtill it in your Limbeck, and when it is deſtilled, you muſt hang halfe an ouce of yellow Sanders and twentie graines of Muske and amber in it.
            
            
               To make Cynnamon water.
               TAke one pound of the beſt Cynnamon you can get, bruſe it well, and put it into a gallon of the beſt ſacke, and infuſe it three daies and three nights, and then diſtill it as your Aqua coeleſtis.
            
            
               To make Doctor Steeuens water.
               Take of Roſe leaues one dram, Borage, Bugloſſe, violets and roſmarie

flowers, of each a dram and halfe, Spiknard a dramme, Cinnamon two ounces, Ginger one ounce, Cloues & Nutmegs of each halfe an ounce, Cirdamons a dram and halfe, Gallingale two drams, Cubebs a dram, Pepper three drams, Aniſeeds Carraway ſeeds and Fennill of each an ounce, Lignum Alloes halfe a dram, Corall and Pearle in fine pouder of each one dram, bruſe theſe and put them in a pottle of Aquavitae and a quart of Sack, vſing it in euery reſpect as your Aqua coeleſtis.
            
            
               To make Baume water.
               TAke Baume drie three ounces, time, Peneryall of each an ounce Cynnamon foure ounces, a dramme of Cardomons, Grames halfe an ounce, ſweet Fennil ſeeds one ounce, Nutmegs & Ginger, of each a dram, Galingale one ounce, Caliamus and Cyprus, Cubebs and Pepper, of each two drammes, of Caper rootes

half a dram, of Diptamus one dram, bruiſe theſe things, and put them to a pottle of ſacke, & ſteepe them xxiiij. houres, and then vſe it as the former waters.
            
            
               Angellica water.
               TAke Cardus dry a handful, Angelica roots three ounces, of Mirh one dram, Nutmegs halfe an ounce, Cynamon, ginger, of each foure ounce, Saffron one dram & halfe, Cardamons, Cubebs, Galingale & Pepper, of each a quarter of an ounce, Mace two drams, Graines one dram, Lignum Aloes, Spicknard, Iuncus odoratus of each a dram, Sage, Borage, Bugloſſe, Violets, and Roſemary flowers, of each halfe a handfull: bruiſe theſe and ſteepe them in a pottle of ſacke xij. hours, & diſtil it as the reſt.
            
            
               Roſa Solis.
               TAke Liqueriſh eight ounces, Aniſeed, Caraway, of each an ounce, Rayſons ſtoned, Dates, of each three ounces, Nutmegs, ginger, Cynamon,

Mace, of each halfe an ounce, Gallingale a quarter of an ounce, Cubebs one dram, Figs two ounces, Suger foure ounces, bruſe theſe and deſtill it with a gallon of Aqua vitae as the reſt: but when it is diſtilled, you muſt coulour it with the herbe Roſa Solis, or elſe Alkanet roote.
            
            
               Wormwoode water.
               Take of Wormwoode two ounces and halfe, Sage, Betony, and Rue, of each halfe a handfull, Roſemary tops a handfull, Cinnamon 3. ounces, Nutmegs halfe an ounce, Cloues and Mace, of each halfe a dram, Ginger, an ounce, Gallingall, Cubebs, and Spicknard, of each a dram and halfe, of Scordium halfe a handfull, bruſe theſe and put them into a pottle of Sacke and a pinte of Aqua vitae, and ſteep them foure and twentie houres, and diſtill them as the the reſt.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ Here beginneth Conſarues.
            
            
               To make Marmelade of Quinces.
               TAke your Quinces and boyle them tender, then pare them and cut them to the coare, then draw the pulpe, That is, the Quince through a haire ſearſe and weigh it, to euery pound of pulpe, take a pound of clarified ſuger, and boyle them together till they come to a perfect colour, putting to them in the boyling a little oyle of Cynamon, and when it is boyled ynough that it will not ſticke to the panne, put it into your Marmelade boxes. But your conſerue muſt not be boyled ſo high in

any caſe, for then it will not bee ſo good.
            
            
               To make conſerue of red and damaske Roſes.
               TAke of the pureſt and beſt coloured buddes you can get, and clip off the whites from them and to euery pound of leaues you muſt take three pound of Barbarie ſugar, and beat them together till they be very fine, and then with a wodden ſpatter take it vp, and ſet it on the fire till it be through hot, and then preſently put it vp, and it will be of an excellent colour.
            
            
               To make Conſerue of Violets.
               TAke of your Violet flowers, and picke off all the blew flowers, and keepe them and weigh them, and take to euery ounce of flowers three ounces of refined ſuger, and beat them in a alabaſter morter till they be very fine, and then take them vp and put them into an earthen Pipkin, and ſet

them vpon the fire vntill ſuch time as they be thorough hotte, and then take them off, and put them vp and keep them.
            
            
               To make pectorall rowles for the Cough.
               TAke liquoriſh pouder finely ſearſed one ounce, of the ſpices of Diatragacanthum frigidum ij. drams, of Gum-arabecke and Tragarant in fine powder, of each a drum, white ſtarch halfe a dram, Aniſeeds in fine pouder one ounce mingle with the reſt, then take of ſuger ſixe ounces, of Pennits an ounce and halfe, Suger-candy one ounce powdred & mingled with the former powder, then take Gum-tragacant ſteeped in Roſe water and bear it into paſt, and ſo make it into long rowles and ſo drie them, and keepe them.
            
            
               To make Conſerue of Borage flowers.
               TAke of your Borage flowers well colored and picke the blacks from

them, then weigh them, to euery ounce of flowers you muſt take three ounces of ſuger, and beat them together in an Alabaſter morter with a wooden peſtle vntill they be verie fine, ſo that you cannot diſcerne any ſuger in Iumps, then take them out and put the conſerue into a pipkin, and heat it through hot, and hauing thus done put them vp & keepe them all the yeare.
            
            
               To make conſerue of Roſemary flowers.
               TAke your Roſemary flowers, freſh and good and picke them from the greene tuske, weigh them, and take to euery ounce of flowers three ounces of Suger-candy, and beate them very fine, vſing them in euery reſpect as you did your other Conſerues.
            
            
               To make Conſerue of Bugloſſe flowers.
               TAke your bugloſſe flowers, and picke them as you did your borage

flowers, and then weigh them, and to euery ounce of flowers you muſt take two ounces of hard ſugar and an ounce of ſugar Candie, and beate them together till they be exceeding fine, and then ſet them one the fire to diſſolue the ſugar, and when it is diſſolued and the conſerue hot, put it vp and keepe it all the yeare.
            
            
               To make a Pomaunder.
               TAke of Beazou in one dram and halfe, of ſtorax, halfe a dram of Lignum aloes in fine powder halfe a ſcruple, of Labdanum halfe an ounce, powder all theſe very fine and ſearſe them through laune, and then take of muske a dram, Amber greeſe ten graines, Ciuet ten graines, and diſſolue them in a hot morter with a little roſe water and ſo make them into a pomander putting into it ſix graines of Ciuet.
            
            
               
               To make Conſaure of Barberies.
               TAke of your Barberies which are very red and ripe and picke them from the ſtalks and then waſh them and put vnto them a prettie deale of faire water and ſet them on the fire in an earthen pan and ſo ſcald them, and being throughly ſcalded pulpe them thorough a fine ſearce, and to euery pound of pulpe take a pound of pouder ſuger and boyle them til it be ynough that is, till it wil cut like marmelade.
            
            
               To make Conſarue Cichorie flowers.
               TAke of your Cichory flower new gathered; for if you let them lie but one hower or two at the moſt they will looſe their coulour and doe you very little ſeruice, therefore ware them preſently, and to euery ounce of flowers you muſt take three ounces of dubble refined ſuger and beate them together in a morter of Alabaſter and a wooden peſtle vntil

ſuch time as they be thoroughly beaten, for the better the flowers and ſuger be beaten, the better will your Conſerue be, let this alwayes be for a generall rule, and being very well brayed, you muſt take them vp, and put it into a chafer cleane ſcoured, and ſet it on the fire til it be throughly hot, and then take it off, and put it vp 
                     •
                  nd keepe it all the yeare.
            
            
               To keepe Cowecumbers in pickle all the yeare.
               TAke foure gallons of Conduit water and put vnto it three quarts of bay ſalt, two handfuls of Sage, one handfull of ſweete Marioram, and foure handfulls of Dill, let theſe boyle til it come to three gallons, and then take it off, and when it is almoſt cold, put in a hundreth of Cowcumbers into that liquor, into a butter barrel & keepe them al the yeare, but looke that alwaies the herbs lie vpon

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
them, and thus done, it will be a moſt excellent ſallet with oyle, vineger, and pepper.
            
            
               An exceeding fine pill vſed for the goute.
               TAke of Aloes two ounces, Maſtick three drammes, Agricke halfe an ounce, Ginger halfe a dramme, let theſe be poudred very fine, then take of the extraction of Rhubarbe three drammes, and with white wine let them be incorporated into a maſſe of pills, adding vnto them a droppe of oyle of cloues, and as much or Nutmegges.
            
            
               A Medecine for the Goute.
               TAke of the ſlippes of ſtarres to the number of foure, and then take to euery ſtippe foure ſnayles, and put them into an earthen pot, & ſprinckle foure or fiue handfuls of ſalt vpon

them, and then put to them Sage, Rue, Wormewood, and Hyſſope, of each foure handfuls, and ſo diſtill them, and when you haue diſtilled them, put to them a quart of wine Vineger, wherein an ounce of white Mercury is diſſolued, and ſo bath the place infected with the goute, and it will eaſe them preſently.
            
            
               To make Syproupe of Pomcitrons
               TAke of Pomicitrons, and cut them in halfes and iuyce them, but beware you writing them not too hard, leaſt it be ſlimie, and then take to euery pint of iuyce three quarters of a pound of refined ſuger, and boyle it in an earthen pipkin, till it come to the height of a Syrupe, and take heed in any caſe that you boyle it not on too hot a fire, leaſt it burne, and then when it is boyled ynough, put it vp, and keepe it all the yeare.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
            
               
               To make Syrupe of Violets.
               TAke your Violets, and pick the flowers, and weigh them, and then put them into a quart of water, and ſteepe them vpon hot embers, vntill ſuch time as the flowers be turned white, and the water as blew as any violet, then take to that quart of infuſion and take foure pound of clarified Suger, & boyle it till it come to a ſyrupe, ſcumming them and boyling them vpon a gentle fire, leaſt it turne his colour, and being boyled, put the Syrupe vp and keepe it.
            
            
               To make Syrupe of Liquoriſh.
               TAke your Liquoriſh eight ounces, and ſcrape it verie cleane, and briuſe it verie well, and mayden haire one ounce, Any feede, and Fennell ſeede of each halfe an ounce, ſteepe theſe in foure pintes of raine water halfe a day, and then boyle it to a

quart, then take a pound and a halfe of clarified ſuger, and boyle it with that liquor, till it come to a Syrupe, and then put it vp and keepe it.
            
            
               To make Syrupe of Hore-hound.
               TAke of Hor-hound two handfuls, of Coults foote a handful, of time, peneriall, and Calamint of each two drams, of Liquoriſh one ounce and a halfe, of figges and rayſons of the ſunne of each two ounces, Pionye kernels a quarter of an ounce, Aniſeeds, and Fennell ſeeds, of each a quarter of an ounce, boyle theſe in a gallon of faire water, till it come to a pottell or three pintes, and then ſtraine it, and take three pound of Suger, and three egges, and clarifie that liquor, and ſo boyle it to a Syrupe, and ſo keepe it all the yeare.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
            
               
               To make Syrape of Mayden haire.
               TAke of Maiden heare ſixe ounces, of Liquoriſh one ounce ſcraped and ſliced, ſteepe theſe foure and twentie houres in foure pintes of Conduit water, and then boyle them to quart, and then take two pound of clarified Suger, and boyle it with that liquor vpon a gentle fire, vpon Charcoales, vntill it come to a Syrupe, ſcumming it very often, that it may be the clearer, for the clearer it is the better it is, and being boyled ynough, put it vp.
            
            
               To make Syrupe of Hyſſop.
               TAke of Hyſſop one handfull, of Figges, Rayſins, Dates of each an ounce, of Calamint halfe a handfull, of French barley one ounce, boyle theſe in three pintes of water to a quart, and then ſtraine it, and then

clarifie it with the whites of two egs, and two pound of Suger, and ſo boyle them to a Syrupe, and being boyled ynough, keepe them all the ye are.
            
            
               To keepe Cherries all the yeare to haue them at Chriſtmaſſe.
               TAke of your faireſt Cherries you can get, but be ſure that they bee not bruiſed, and take them and rub them with a linnen clothe, and put them into a Barrell of hay, and lay them in rancks, firſt laying hay in the bottome, and then Cherries, and then hay againe, and then ſtoppe them vp cloſe, that no ayre may come neere them, and lay them vnder a fetherbed, where one lyeth continually, for the warmer they are, the better, yet neere no fire, and thus doing, you may haue Cherries at any time of the yere.
            
            
               
               To make a Syrupe of Mulberries.
               TAke your Mulberries which are very ripe, preſſe out the iuyce from them, thorough a linnen cloth betweene two ſtickes, and then to euery pint of iuyce, take a pound of ſuger and boyle it to the height of a Syrup, and then keepe it all the yeare long, and if it waxe any thing thinner a moneth after you put it vp, boyle it againe, and then put it vp.
            
            
               To make Syrupe of Lymonds.
               TAke your Lymonds, and cut them in halfes, and betwixt your fingers iuyce them, and the liquor that runnes from them wil be very cleare, then take to a pint of iuyce, a pound and a quarter of hard ſuger, which is very white and boyle it to a Syrupe, and it will keepe excellent well.
            
            
               
               To make Syrupe of Roſes ſollitiue.
               TAke of Dammaske Roſes, and pull them, then take a gallon of water, and when the water is hot, put a good many Damaske Roſe leaues, and take them out when they looke white, and doe ſo ten times, and then the water will looke red, and then to euery pinte of that liquor, put a white of an egge▪ and a pound of ſuger, and clarifie it, and boyle it to a Syrupe, and keepe it all the yeare, the thicker the Syrupe is the better it will keepe.
            
            
               To make Syrupe of drie Roſes.
               TAke of red Roſes dried foure ounces, & infuſe them in a quart of faire water vpon hot embers, till the roſes haue loſt their colour, then take a pound and a halfe of Suger, and clarifie your Liquor and Suger

with two egges, and then boyle it to the height of a Syrupe: but take heed in any caſe that you ſet not your Syrupe vpon too hot a fire, for then it will looſe his colour, and bee worth naught.
            
         
         
            
               
               
                  A Medicine to giue a woman in trauel, to make her haue throwes.
               TAke Coral, amber, date ſtones, Pearle, Piony ſeedes, Saffron, Commine, beate all theſe in powder, and put it into Malmeſey, and take Vnicornes home, and put it into a ſpoone with a little Malmeſey, and giue it to her, and preſently let her drinke a draught of the Malmeſey with the powders aforeſaid, warming of it a little.
            
            
               
               A Medicine for the falling downe of the matriſſe to the bearing place.
               TAke Chicke-weede, and ſeeth it in an earthen pot, then lay of it vpon a peece of ſcarlet, as hot as the partie may ſuffer it, let her take it to the priuie place, and as one plaſter coooleth, ſo lay another, and vſe it.
            
            
               Another for to be taken to the Nauell, and to the backe right againſt the Nauell for the ſame.
               TAke a redde Onyon, and roaſt it very tender, then take of Allyſander ſeedes, and bruiſe them in a wooden diſh, and mingle the Onyon and the bruiſed ſeedes together, and lay it vpon a peece of linnen cloth, ſo lay it to the Nauell a little warme, rowle that on, and let it lie on xxiiij.

houres, then change it, and take a new one till it be whole.
               It is good for the Midwife to hold muske belowe, tyed in a little Lawne to draw downe the Child.
               Take Torch-wort, and lay a leafe of it to the Crowne of a womans head warme, to ſtay other flowers.
            
            
               A Medicine for a woman after burden, if neede be to bring it downe.
               TAke Sowtherwood, and waſh it cleane, and ſtampe it, and ſtraine it in ſtrong Ale, and giue it her to drinke warme.
            
            
               To ſtop the Whites in women.
               FRy Hemlock in freſh ſwines greaſe, lay it as hotte as ſhee may ſuffe it to the ſecret place.
            
            
               
               For a Teter.
               TAke Oates and ſeeth them in water, and where the Teter is, hold ouer the reeke thereof as hot as may be, laying a cloth ouer it to keepe in the reeke, ſo that the cloth doe not touch the Teter, vſe this fiue times morning and euening.
            
            
               To make a Seare-cloth for an Ache that is nextly come.
               TAke Boares greaſe, Camphire, and waxe, and boyle them altogether, and ſo make a Seare-cloth thereof, and lay it to the griefe.
            
            
               For a Felon or an Andcome.
               TAke Hearbe-grace, ruſtie Bacon, ſower leauen, and Snayles that be with ſhel on their backes, taking them out of their ſhels, and beate all theſe together, & lay it to the greefe.
            
            
               
               For to heale any, if they be ſcalded with hot liquor.
               TAke Alehoſe and Auens, Sheepe ſuet, and Sheeps dunge, and Gooſe dung, and when you haue waſhed the hearbes, breake them altogether a little, and ſo frie them together, and then ſtraine it, & make plaſters thereof, and lay it to the griefe, warme it a little when you lay it too, laying new plaſters to it twiſe a day, you may take the iuyce of Houſeleeke, and Sallet oyle, and water, and beat them together, and waſh the greaſe before you vſe this plaſter.
            
            
               A Medicine for the Whites.
               TAke a quart of new milke of a red Cow, x. ſpoonfuls of red Roſe water, a Pomgarnet pill beaten, and a little Cynamon beaten, and ſeeth it halfe away, & ſweeten it with ſuger, and drinke a draught morning and euening, & two Whites of egs beaten.
            
            
               
               A Medicine for them that are giuen to bleeding.
               MAke a poſſet, & take of the curd, and take Liuer-wort, and beat it, and put the iuyce thereof into the Poſſet drinke, and drinke it morning and euening warme.
            
            
               For the heate in the Kidneys.
               TAke Houſeleeke and Plantine, and not waſh them, but wipe them with a cloth, and beate them and ſtraine them, and put to the iuyce thereof red Roſe water, and wine Vineger and womans m
                     •
                  lke, and take the hearbs and put them into clothes, and tye the clothes with thread like a couple of balles, and you muſt (when you doe vſe it) haue one to doe it for you in the morning when you are in your bed, and the partie muſt take the balles, and dippe them in this liquor,

and ſo bath your Kidneys, and as ſoone as one of the balles is hot with doing of them, take the other, and ſo vſe it an houre euerie morning.
            
            
               A Medicine for the Stone.
               TAke Pelitorie of the wall, Smaladge, Holihockes, Mallowes, Tanſie, & Saxifrage, of each a handfull, chop them ſmall, and quilt them in a little linnen bag, then take three pints of creame, halfe a pint of Malmſey, a quarter of a pint of running water, and let them on the fire, and when it doth ſeeth, then put in the bag of hearbes into the potte, and when the bagge is thoroughly hotte, wring it betweene two trenchers ouer the pot to ſaue the liquor, then lay the bag to the greefe, as hotte as you may ſuffer it, and as ſoone as it cooleth, make it hot againe in the ſame liquor, and ſo apply it to the greefe.
            
            
               
               For the Woormes.
               TAke a handfull of Baſill mintes, a handfull of Lauender Cotten, as much of Wormewood, Peach leaues as much, Fertherfue a handfull, of vnſet Leeks a handfull, and boyle them together in three ſpoonfuls of of wine Vineger, and of his owne water as much, and quilt them in a bagge, and ſo lay it warme betweene his Nauell and his ſtomacke,
            
            
               To heale a ſore Breaſt that comes with the infection of the milke.
               TAke Mallowes and Saffron, and ſeeth them in milke, and when it hath ſodden a good while put in ſome crummes of leauen bread, and boyle them well together, and a little before you take it vp, put ſome Salet oyle into it, you muſt let it boyle till it comes to a Poultis, and ſo lay it

warme to your breaſt, and if you perceiue this that will not helpe your breaſt without it be broke, you muſt roſt a Lillie roote, and lay it to your breaſt, where you will haue it breake, and when it is broken, you muſt tent it with leauen and milk ſodden thick together, and make a plaſter thereof, and lay it to the place where it is broken, you muſt dreſſe it twiſe a day, laying the Poultis all about your breſt, ſauing the place that the plaſter lyes on, you muſt dreſſe it both with new Poultis, and a new plaſter twiſe euerie day, vntil it beginneth to heale, and then once a day is ſufficient.
            
            
               To ſtench bleeding at the Noſe.
               TAke Bolerminake, and the white of an egge, and Vineger, and beate them together, and make Plaſters thereof, and lay them to your Temples.
            
            
               
               To ſtench Bleeding of a wound.
               TAke of vnſet Hyſſope, and bruiſe it a little, and take the powder of the bone that is to be found in a Capers head, and ſtrew the ſame powder on the Hyſſope, and lay it to the wounde.
            
            
               Another for to ſtanch the bleeding of a wound.
               TAke Hogges dunge hot from the Hogge, with Suger, and lay it to the wound.
            
            
               For the weakeneſſe in the backe.
               TAke Clarie and Dates, & the pith of an Oxe, and chop them together, & then put them to your creame and egges, and grated bread, and Frie them together, and ſtraw Suger on it, and eate it in the Morning faſting,

and you muſt put ſome white Saunders in it alſo when you temper it together.
            
            
               For the Wormes.
               TAke Mares milke, and drinke it as hot as you can haue it from the Mare, in the morning faſting.
            
            
               To know whether a Child hath the Wormes, or no.
               TAke a peece of white Leather, and pecke it full of holes with your knife, and rub it with Worme-word, and ſpread hony on it, and ſtarwe the powder of Aleſackatrina, and lay it on the Childs Nauell, when he goeth to bed, and if hee haue the wormes, the plaſter will ſticke faſt, and if he haue them not, it will fall off.
            
            
               
               For one that is bruiſed with a fall.
               TAke ſtone Pitch, and beat it, and drinke it with whit wine, or Sack, or Malmeſey, and if you haue none, then take ſome other liquor, then melt Parmacitie, & anoynt the place where the bruiſe is.
            
            
               For the winde Collicke.
               TAke Parſley ſeed, & bruiſe them, and ſeeth them in Sack, and drink it warne when you haue your paine.
            
            
               For the Gout that is newly come.
               TAke Rhubarbe, and grate it, and mingle it with Conſerue of redde Roſes, and eate thereof query morning faſting a prettie quantitie.
            
            
               
               A Water to waſh a ſore.
               TAke of Plantane, and Woodbind leaues, and white Roſes, and ſtill them together, and when the water is ſtilled, put a quantity of Camphire into it, and ſo let it lye in the water continually.
            
            
               For the ſhrinking of the Synewes.
               TAke the marrow of a Horſe bone, and the crops of Elders, and as much of Sage, and chop them together, and boyle them in the marrow, and then ſtraine out the hearbes, and put to the liquor one ſpoonefull of hony, two ſpoonfuls of Aqua compoſita, and a quantity of Pepper, & boile it againe, and keepe it for your vſe.
            
            
               For the Pyles.
               TAke a quantitie of Ragwort, and a quantitie of ground Iuie, and

the marrow of the hinder Legge of a Bullocke, and beate the marrow and the herbes together, and boyle them on a ſoft fire, and ſtraine them, and keepe it for your vſe.
            
            
               A Salue to take dead fleſh out of a ſore.
               TAke a ſpoonefull of Vineger, and a ſpoonefull of hony, and aquantitie of Verdigreaſe, and as much Allom, and boyle all theſe together, and keepe it for your Vſe.
            
            
               For the ſtaying of the Fluxe.
               TAke a new layd egge, and take off a little of the toppe of it, and poure out a little of the white, and fill vp the egge with Aqua compoſita, and ſtirre it together, and roſt it and ſup vp the egge in the morning faſting, till you be well vſe this.
            
            
               
               Another for the ſame.
               MAke Riſe pottage with Almond milke, you muſt not blaunch the Almonds, and make little Balles of Virgines wax, make them leſſe than Peaſe, and when you doe eate of the pottage, take three or foure of the Balles, and put them in euery ſpoonfull as you doe eate it.
            
            
               For the Gowte.
               TAke an earthen pot, and put into it a quart of Aquacompoſita, and take two handfulls of Hen-bane, and breake it, and put it into it, and ſet the pot in the earth all the month of May, and it will come to an oyle, and at the end of May, you muſt take it vp, and keepe it for your vſe, you muſt couer the pot verie cloſe when you ſet it in the ground; and when you annoint the greeſe therewith, you muſt doe it againſt the fire.
            
            
               
               For the Pyles.
               TAke Martylmaſſe Beefe, and drie it, and beat it to powder, and then put it into a Chaſindiſh of coales, and ſet it in a Chaire and ſit ouer it.
            
            
               For an Ague.
               IF it be for a childe, take two ſpoonfulls of good ale, and ſeeth it, and ſcum it, and one ſpoonfull of the Syrupe of roſes, and let him drinke it luke warme: If for an old body, then take three ſpoonfulls of good ale, and two ſpoonfulls of the Syrupe of roſes.
            
            
               To make a freſh Cheeſe.
               TAke a quantitie of new milke, and ſet it on the fire, and let it boyle, and take halfe a dozen yolkes of egs, and beat them and ſtirre them in the milke on the fire, then take it off the fire, and keepe it ſtirred, vntill it

be luke warme, and then put runnet into it, and ſtirre it, and let it ſtand vntill it be gathered together & take vp the curd, and put into it Cinamon and Ginger, and ſtir it about, & make diſhes of it, as you thinke good.
            
            
               A Medicine for a Peſtilent Ague, or to driue any thing from the heart.
               MAke a poſſet with white wine, and take away the curd, & take horſe dung of a ſtone Horſe, as hotte as you can get it from the horſe, and ſtraine it with the Poſſet drinke, and put a little Me
                     •
                  h
                     •
                  idate, and Cardus Benedictus water, and Vnicornes horne, and if you haue no Vnicornes horne, then put Iuorie, or Sea-horſe tooth, and giue it to the ſicke to drink faſting in the Morning, warming it, and you muſt put the Vnicornes horne into the ſpoone, and take it with ſome of the Poſſet Drinke,

and ſo drinke the Poſſet preſently after it, and vſe this two or three mornings.
            
            
               A Medicine for the ſoreneſſe in the throat that commeth with the Rhume.
               TAke halfe a pint of Hony-ſuckle water, and two Iewes eares, of Plantane, & Sinckefield halfe a handful, and a few columbine leaues, theſe muſt bee ſodde with as much white Suger-candy, as will bring the liquor to a Syrupe, you muſt put in a little Howell, Cynnamon, and ſo take it in the morning, and in the euening, and at ſuch times as your throat is drye.
            
            
               Another for the falling of the Eualow, or other paine in the throat.
               TAke a handfull of redde Sage, a ſpoonefull of Dill ſeede, a piece of

leauen, boyle theſe in a little newe milke, vntill it be thicke, then lay it on foure fine clothes, & lay one cloth to the nape of the neck, and another to the throat, and to each temple one, and bind the clothes, and doe this as often as neede ſhall require, for it hath bene proued.
            
            
               A ſalue for a greene wound.
               TAke a pound of Roſin, halfe a pound of wax, foure ounces of old Swines greaſe, one ounce of Verdigreaſe, boyle them altogether vpon a ſoft fire, and ſtraine them.
            
            
               A Water to beale all ſores in legges and Vlcers.
               TAke a pound of roch-allom, foure ounces of greene Coperas, beate them ſomewhat ſmall, and put them in a pan on the fire, euer ſtirring them vntill they bee molten and dryed againe

readie to be powdred, and beat them againe in fine powder, and keep them to your vſe. When you will make your water, ſet a pottell of faire Conduit water ouer the fire, vntill it boyleth faſt, then take it away, and aſſoone as it leaueth boyling, caſt abroad your powder vpon the water, the which will make it to boyle, as long as your water riſeth, ſo long caſt your water in, and when it leueth riſing and is black in the bottome, then it is perfect, then if you ſee a dangerous ſore Legge, firſt caſt you powder preſently thereon, and lay thereto three or foure fold of linnen cloth wet in the water, and rowle it vp, doe ſo till the vlcer be cleane.
            
            
               A very good water for a ſore mouth.
               TAke of Conduit water a pint, one handfull of Hyſſope, of whit wine, and of Almonds a pound, of Roſes three ounces, ſeeth them altogether

till the hearbs be tender, then take it from the fire and ſtraine it, and keepe it, and keepe it for your vſe, you muſt alwaies waſh your meat, and rubbe it after meate, and in the morning.
            
            
               A Caſtile to breake any ſwelling that is readie to breake.
               TAke of Commine, of Hyſſope, and of quick lime a like quantitie, bray them together in a morter, till it bee verie fine, when you would open an impoſtume, lay it as bigge as an hayſell Nutte vpon the next place, and binde it very hard, and let it remaine there foure houres, then take it off, for it will make the place dead, and then you may let out the matter without griefe to the patient.
            
            
               A Catitus Plaſter.
               TAke of Litrage of gould powdred verie fine, cōmon oyle, hogs greaſe

a pound, white Coperas foure ounces, put them all together in a braſen panne, and ſeeth it ouer a verie ſoft fire of coales, and trie it continually vntill it come to a bodye, and in the boyling you muſt caſt into it one ounce of good Roſe water or two, and now and then a ſpoonefull, and whē it is come to a good body take it off the fire, and ſtirre it till it be cold and readie to be made vp in a rowle, and then make it vp.
            
            
               To make Populier.
               TAke of Populer buddes a pecke, of Hogges greaſe foure pound, ſeeth them both together a quarter of an houre, & then take it off, & ſtraine it, if it be two thin, put in a little waxe.
            
            
               Baſilicon.
               TAke Pitch, Roſin, Waxe, ſheepe ſuet, common oyle, a like quantitie,

beat theſe ſmall, and put them in a braſen panne, and melt them all together, then take them of the fire, and ſtraine them through a courſe linnen colth, for the pitch will not be molten, this is good for all manner of ſores, and when you will put in a tent, mix it with the yolke of an egge.
            
            
               Maturacum poultnis.
               TAke Onyons, garlicke, dowe, Lillie roots a like quantitie, roſt them all in a wet cloth vnder aſhes, and then put them in a morter, and beat them ſmall, this is good for all impoſtumes to breake them out.
            
            
               A Medicine to heale old ſores.
               TAke Plantine, bramble tops, Orpin, Betonie, Egremonie of each one handfull, ſtraine them, and put thereto Roſin, and waxe of each a quarter of a pound, freſh Hogs greaſe, and ſheepe ſuet, of each foure ounces,

boyle them all together, till the iuyce be confirmed, then ſtraine it, & keepe it to raiſe fleſh, and heale old ſores.
            
            
               A Plaſter to heale old ſores, after they be made cleane, and filled with fleſh.
               TAke Sallet oyle halfe a pint, Lead a quarter of a pound, boyle theſe vntill they be blacke, and keepe them for your vſe.
            
            
               To clenſe a ſore, and take away the dead fleſh.
               TAke Woodbinde flowers, white Roſes, Plantine, and ſtill them together, and when it is ſtilled, then ſix pennſworth of Camphire, and put it into a quart of the water, and ſet it in the Sunne for ten or twelue dayes, and ſo waſh the ſore withall.
            
            
               
               A Medicine for a ſore abroate.
               TAke a pint of milke, halfe a handfull of Collumbine leaues, halfe a handfull of Gaſell, and halfe a ſcore leaues of Sinkefield, two Iewes eares, and ſo the partie muſt vſe it euening and morning, and gargaſe it in his throate,
            
            
               A Medicine that wil heale any wound or ſore, and keepeth it without proud fleſh or dead fleſh.
               TAke halfe a pound of wax, a quarter of a pound of Sheepe ſuet, a quarter of a pound Roſin, and a quarter of a pound of Turpentine, halfe a pint of Sallet oyle, two handfull of Bugle which groweth in the wood, a handfull of Smallage, a handfull of Mallowes, a handfull of Valerin, a handfull of Grunſell, and a handfull of balme, ſtampe and ſtraine the

hearbes, and put the iuyce into the foreſaid things, being a while boyled, then ſeeth them together a quarter of an houre, then take it from the fire, and let it ſtand till it be cold, then take away the Smallage from the bottome, then take ſome of your Balme water, and put into it ſo much as wil make it greene, and let it boyle together a halfe quarter of an houre, and ſo take it to your vſe.
            
            
               A Gliſter.
               TAke Camamile, Betonie, Dil, Pellitorie of the wall, Hyſſope, Rue, of each a handfull, boyle theſe in the broth of a ſheeps head, til the broth be very ſlippery, then take a pinte of the broth ſtrayned, and put two of the Pilles of Diabes, for each a crowne waight and a halfe, Diaca tholice, Diaphenicon, of each halfe an ounce, oyle of Camomile, oyle of Dill, of each an ounce, a little ſalt, and a Gliſter:

if you will haue it breake wind, put into the aforeſaid Common ſeed, fenell ſeed, Anniſeedes, of each bruiſed two good handfuls, and boyle all together, and ſtraine it, and make it as aforeſayd, and put in the Gliſter.
            
            
               To take away the heate of a burne or out of a Scalde.
               TAke egges and roſt them hard as a ſtone, then take out the yolks of them, then take a frying panne and put in the yolks of the hard egges, and ſo let it frye til it cone to an oyle, then ſtraine it and anoynt the burne withall then take a bladder and anoynt it with ſallet oyle, and lay it to the burne.
            
            
               To make another Gliſter.
               TAke running water and ij. handful of Carmon, a handfull of Mallowes, a handfull of Wormewood, a

handfull of Marcury, an ounce, of Commine, two ounces, of Fennell ſeedes two ounces, of Aniſeeds, and beat all your ſeedes, and ſet your hearbs a boyling and ſtraine them.
            
            
               A Medicine for one that is broken.
               TAke a quantitie of Comfrie, a quantitie of Knehome, a quantity of knotted graſſe, a quantity of Riberuorum, and a quantitie of Polipodie, and ſtampe them altogether, and ſtraine them in ale, and then giue the Patient the ſame to drinke colde, and truſſe him vp with ſome bolſter, and let his dyet be but competent, eſchewing all ſlipperie meats, as butter, and ſuch like, prouided alwayes, that the Patient keepe his bed ſixe or ſeauen dayes, lying vpon his backe, and ſometimes hold his belly with his hand.
            
            
               
               To make a Poultis for ſwelling
               TAke the crome of manchet, and ſeeth it in milke till it bee thicke, then put in a piece of new butter, about the quantitie of a wale nut or ſomewhat more.
            
            
               For the Rhewme.
               TAke a little quantitie of Maſticke, and as much of Pellitorie of ſpaine cut in ſmall peeces, ſew them in a litle bag of linnen cloth, keepe the bag in your mouth till the Pellitory and the Maſtick be conſumed, and ſpit in the meane time as much as you can.
            
            
               For the toothache and the rhume.
               TAke a quantitie of Gum ot Iuie, put it in a little bag of linnen, then wet your bag in Aqua vitae or vineger, & keepe it in your mouth till the Gum of Iuy be conſumed, holde the

bag ouer or vpon the hollow tooth.
            
            
               A water for the eyes.
               TAke a pint of white wine, then heat a ſtone called Lapis Calaminaris redde hot nine or tenne times in the fire, and quench it eurey time in the wine, the laſt time you quench your ſtone ſtirre it about in the wine, then keepe your water in a cleane glaſſe, and let it ſtand, vſe to put in your eye one drop or two morning and euening.
            
            
               For the eyes.
               TAke Roſemary, Houſleek, reedle Fennill, and roſt an egge, and take out the yolke, beat theſe herbs together and ſtraine them.
            
            
               For paine in the head.
               TAke of the beſt ſallet oyle you can get, & the flowers of wilde primroſes

and put them into the oyle, and then ſet it on the fire, and let it boyle halfe an houre very ſoftly, then put it in a glaſſe and ſet it in the ſunne three weekes, and then rub your temples euening and morning. E. C.
            
            
               A Gargas for to purge the head.
               TAke a pint and a halfe pint of wine vineger, Muſterd ſeedes, Ginger, Cloues, Nutmegs , Pellitory rootes, about the quantitie of one ounce, when they are beaten, put it into the liquor, and ſtir them together for the ſpace of a weeke, then gargas it euery morning before you vſe the oyle to your head.
            
            
               For a pinne and web.
               TAke the oyle compacted of the bone of the Gooſes wing, & rub it in the palme of your hand that no ſhiuers of the bone do ſticke in it and

put it in with the poynt of a pinne, for the bigneſſe of a pinnes head is ynough at once.
            
            
               For a ſwelling.
               TAke Barrows greaſe, & Sutherenwood, and Aqua vitae, and boyle it together, and when you haue boyled it, ſtraine it in a panne.
            
            
               For a bone ach.
               TAke two or three handfuls of Camamill, a quarter of a pound of Sheepes ſuet chopt ſmall, and a piece of ſtonie pitch of the quantitie of a Wall nut, and a piece of leauened bread in it crumbled very ſmal, boile it in your owne water, vntil it be very thicke that you may ſpred it vpon a cloth like a plaſter, and lay it on the place where the ach is for xxiiij. howers, and ſo dreſſe it three times, if you doe, it will take away the ach.
            
            
               
               A medicine to heale an old ſore or a new.
               TAke a quarter of a pound of Roſen, and melt it in a pan till it haue left cracking, and then take halfe as much waxe and a little Turpentine and ſheepes ſuet choped ſmall, and a ſpoonefull of oyle oliue, and boyle them al together, and when you haue done ſo, ſtraine them in a paile of water, and make it vp euen as you will occupie it, and drawe your plaſters thin, and dreſſe it three times a day, that is to ſay, at morning, noone, and euening, till it bee almoſt whole, then dreſſe it but twice a day, morning and euening, but if there be any coare that doth hinder the healing of it, take a little Mercurie, and put it in two ſpoonefulls of water, and when the Mercurie is melted in the water and congealed together, take a fether & drop in two or three drops, and lay a plaſter vpon the wound, and it will bring forth the core.
            
            
               
               For an Andcom.
               TAke halfe a dozen knottes of a yong Oke, and put them in a firepan, and burne them to a red cole, and take Bores greaſe, and fine fuet, and two or three cornes of ſalt and ſtamp them very fine, and ſo make a plaſter of it, and if it doe draw and heale too faſt, lay lint vnderneth the ſalue, and you muſt dreſſe it twice in the Winter dayes, and thrice in the Summer dayes.
            
            
               The Copie of Doctor Stephens water.
               TAke a gallon of the beſt Gaſcoine wine, then take Ginger, Gallingall, Cynnamon, Nutmeegs, Graines, Cloues, Aniſeeds, Fennell ſeeds, Garaway ſeeds, of euery of them a dram weight, then take wilde Time, Hiſope, Lauender, Sage, mynts, red Roſes, garden Time, Pellitorie of the

wale, and Roſmarie, of euery of them one good handful, & bray the hearbs very ſmall, and ſtamppe the ſpices all together very ſmall, put all together into the wine, and cloſe it faſt twelue houres and ſtirre it diuers times, then ſtill it in a Limbecke, and keepe the firſt water for it is the beſt, and then keepe the ſecond for it is good, but not ſo good as the firſt. E. C.
               A dram weight of the ſeede of Colembyn, bruſed with halfe a peny weight of Safron drunken with wine, is good for the Ianders, then goe to bed and prouoke ſweat, the flowers diſtilled is good for the ſame purpoſe, and againſt ſwondings.
            
            
               Pymypinell.
               THis herbe is good againſt the peſtilence, to bee taken faſting in a morning, and good againſt the ſtone, the rootes ſodden condited in ſuger,

may profit them that haue cold ſtomacks, and are troubled with two much fleame, the Collicke and ſtone, this roote any way taken is good againſt poyſon.
               Mouſeare is hot and drie, ſome vſe to giue the iuyce of this common Mouſeare to hinder the colde of a quartan Ague, ſome vſe togather the roots in May, and drie it and giue it to them that bee broken, it is good for the bloody flix, the great ſcouring of the Mother, for wormes both outward and inward, common flixes, for vomitting of choller, and ſpitting of blood and bruſting, and ſpecially, for breaking of the braine panne.
               The Iuyce of Coſte-mary drunken, killeth both ſmall and great wormes in the belly, it is good for a colde Mother, it ſtrengthneth the ſtomacke whether it be drunken or laid to, and ſtayeth vomiting, the herbe of his

nature, whether it be ſtrawed, or elſe perfume be made thereof, driueth away Serpents, and it is good againſt their poyſons, and it helpeth and ſtrengthneth the head.
            
            
               To take out the heat of a burne.
               TAke the fatte of hogges guts, and Sheepes tirdles and boyle them, and put them in a pot, and this will heale the partie, and take out the fire, and will keepe good a hole yeare, this hath beene prooued.
            
            
               To take the heat out of the face.
               TAke running water and elder flowers, Plantane, white Dayſie rootes, and herbe Robert, put them in the running water, and waſh your face morning and euening therewith.
            
            
               
               A Medicine for a canker in ones mouth, prooued.
               TAke running water, a handfull of wood binde leaues, a handfull of Bramble leaues, a handfull of Collumbind leaues, a little Roſemary, and boyle them together vntill halfe the water be waſted, then put two or three ſpoonfuls of hony, and a piece of roch Allom, three or foure ſpoonfuls of wine vineger, and waſh your mouth with the ſodden hearbs therof three or foure times euery day.
            
            
               The Diet drinke.
               FIrſt buy a diet pot of the common ſorte, ſuch a one as will coſt eight pence or tenne pence, then put into it halfe a pound of Liquorish ſcraped and bruiſed, halfe a pound of Aniſeedes bruiſed, three quarters of a pound of Lignum vitae bought at

the Turners, and one ounce of the barke of the ſame wood, which is to be bought at the Apothecaries, halfe a pound of Rayſons of the Sunne, the ſtones taken out, a good handfull of Scabias, an ounce of Chiny, two ounces of Salyprilla, a quantity of white wine, then fill vp your potte with faire water, ſauing a pint, then couer your potte with his couer, and cloſe it round about the brimme with paſt, then ſet it on a ſoft fire of coales, and let it boyle three houres till the fourth part bee waſted▪ then ſtrayne it, and let it ſettle, and then put the cleereſt into bottles, and drinke it Morning and Euening a good draught, and ſo vſe fourteene or fifteene dayes.
               If you put a little of the wood into the fire, and there fry out of it like oyle, then you ſhall be ſure it is good.
            
            
               
               For the head ach.
               TAke two handfuls of Veruine, Betonie, Camamill rootes, Letcie, Checmete, of each ſort two handfuls, dride Roſes, put them to powder of Nutmegs, boyle this in white wine, take out the hearbs then and frie them in oyle oliue, and ſtraine them in a cloth, and make an oyntment therof, and therwith anoint the head.
            
            
               To make the rhume medicine.
               TAke fiue quarts of Hyſſop water, it muſt bee ſtilled when the Hyſop beareth flowers, and one pound of Engliſh Liquoriſh cleane ſcraped, and cut in litle pieces, bruiſe them & then put it to the water, and boyle them till halfe bee conſumed away, then ſtraine it in ſhallow pans, & ſet it in the ſun & ſtir it now and then, and ſomtimes ſet it ouer the fire, vntil you

ſee it wax blacke, but do not boyle it, and it will wax ſtife with ſtanding in the Sunne, that you may make it in little cakes.
            
            
               A ſalue for a cut.
               TAke ſixe ounces of Deere ſuet, foure ounces of Wax, foure ounces of Roſin, and ſtampe and ſtraine Velerian, and take the iuyce as much as you think wil make the ſaule looke greene, and boyle them together till it come to a ſalue.
            
            
               A medicine for the ſtopping of the liuer, very good for them that haue the Ianders.
               TAke Parſley rootes, Fenell roots, Aſperigon roots, Kneeham roots, Succory rootes, of each the weight of halfe a crowne in ſiluer, of Docke roots, the weight of xij. pence, a little Liquoriſh, halfe a handful of Rayſons of the ſun ſtoned, boyle this in three

pintes of water vnto a quart, and make Almond milke with the liquor, and take two partes of ſweete Almonds, and one parte of bitter, ſweeten it with Suger, or els with ſyrupe of Sucory, and drink a draught three morninges togethere, faſting three houres after it, vſe this euery moneth: you may put in Batly husked, Saxifrage, Maiden-haire, & Liuerwoort.
            
            
               For the Wormes
               THe powder of Coralina to the weight of three pence in ſiluer, giuen in the water of Couchgraſſe.
            
            
               A Medicine for a quartan or a tertian Ague.
               TAke the herbes and rootes called Harts-horne, Plantan, and Orpine, and beat them with a little white wine and a little bay ſalt, and ſo lay it on a cloth vpon your wriſt,

but bee ſure it lie on the pluces on both armes changing it euery twentie foure houres, but be ſure that you lay it two houres before the fit cōmeth, and hang nine rootes of the Hartshorne about your necke in a ſilke bag, ſo that it may lie vpon the hollow of your ſtomacke, and let it hang till your Ague be gone, you muſt not waſh neither herbes nor rootes, and you may take the roots whē you cannot get the herbs, and vſe them ſo.
            
            
               For the Canker in the mouth or rawneſſe, or in the lower parte of the woe.
               TAke red Fennell, red Sage, Hyſop, Hearbe-grace, Roſmary, Honyſuckell leaues, Fetherfewe, and Dayſie leaues, of euery one a like quantitie, in all two handfulls, boyle theſe in a quarte of running water to a pinte and ſtraine it and let it ſtand vntill it be cleere, and put therein a ſpoonfull of Engliſh hony, & as much roch allom beaten as the bigneſſe of a beane,

and boyle it together, you muſt take off the skumme as it doth ariſe when it is boyled, put it into a glaſſe and keepe it for your vſe, you muſt warme it when you take it.
            
            
               A good medicine for an Andicome, or a Boch, or a ſore breaſt or Carbunckell, to ripe or breake them.
               TAke a quantitie of Herb-grace, a quantitie of leuened bread well crummed, halfe a ſpoonfull of ſallet oyle or Capons greace, and boyle theſe in good ale grounds, and keepe it with ſtirring vntill it be thicke, and when you doe vſe it, laye it vpon a cloth warme to the griefe: this Medicine will reſolue a breaſt without breaking of it, without it need breaking, you muſt change it euery day once.
            
            
               
               A good ſalue to heale it when it is broken.
               TAke a quantie of Barroes greace, a quantity of Roſin, of each a like quantitie, you moſt ſcrape the waxe and beat the Roſin, and boyle them together till they be melted, then take Lapis calaminaris and Roch alom as much as a beane of each, and beat them together, then take a ſpoonfull of engliſh hony and put them together and boyle them againe, and when it is well boyled, poure it into cold water, and make it vp in rowles, and keepe it for your vſe.
            
            
               A medicine for a bruſe.
               TAke a quantitie of ſtone pitch and as much gray ſope, and beat the pitch finely to powder, and boyle them together with ſtirring vntil it be boyled, then take it off the fire and

let it coole, and then ſpred it vpon a cloth and lay it to the griefe, it muſt not be through colde, for then it will not ſpred, and if one doe not heale it, then lay on another cloth ſpred with the ſame.
            
            
               An Oyntment for an Ague ſore, or other ſores, and for ſwellings.
               TAke a Bryome roote, and cut off the outſide thin, ſome doe call it wilde Vine, ſlice it and lay it all night in a pinte of ſallet oyle, and then boile it and and ſtraine it keepe it for your vſe, for this is good to annoynt any Ague ſore, or any other ſwelling.
               Then take halfe a pint of Sallet oyle, and as much red leade as you can buy for two pence and boyle them together, and keepe it ſtirring vntill it looke blacke, and then take as many clothes as you thinke will drinke vp the oyle and the leade, and then coole it and keepe it for your vſe

This oyle and lead is good for Ague ſores and other ſores Remember to annoynt the ſores with the oyntment aforeſayd firſt, and then lay on the ſeare-cloth, doing this twice a day vntill the ſore be hole. And for ſwelling, you muſt vſe the Bryome rootes and the oyle onely, without the oyle and the leade.
            
            
               An approoued good medicine for the Tooth ache.
               TAke Roſe water either red or Damaske, take yellow wax a quantitie, and freſh butter of either an equall quantitie, and mingle them together in a diſh vpon the coles, and then take a linnen cloth and dip it therein, and lay it vnto that ſide of your iawe where you are greened, as hot as you can ſuffer it, the hotter the better.
            
            
               A midicine for the bloodie flixe.
               TAke two toſts of cheat bread and toſt them & two egs and roſt them

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
hard, and take the yolkes of them and the liuer of a chick, and beat all this together ſmall, then put all this into a pinte of charne milke, then take halfe an ounce of Cynnamon and beat it ſmall, and put it in the medicine, and then take of it euening and morning faſting, for ſo it moſt auayleth you, but if your ſtomacke bee weak, then put in ſome ſuger to ſweeten it.
            
            
               For the pin and web in the eye.
               TAke the iuyce of Parſley and halfe as much Hony, and with a fether drop it in the eye, and after it you muſt put in ſome powder of white Suger Candye: you muſt dreſſe it thus very often.
            
            
               For to take the Ague out of any place where it doth fall.
               TAke Succory a pretty quantitie of it, and mingle it with ſome Bores

greace, and ſpred it vpon a cloth, and warme it againſt the fire, and lay it to the place.
            
            
               A medicine for a greene wound.
               TAke a quantitie of Venice Turpentine, and waſh it in faire water vntill it be white, then take a Plaſter therof, and lay it to the wound vntill it be drawne, then take the yolke of a new layde egge, and adde thereunto a ſmall quantitie of fine wheate flower, and a little freſh butter, and mingle them together, and lay a plaſter thereof vnto the wound after it is drawne with the Turpentine.
            
            
               Another medicine to be taken inwardly for a greene wound to be taken in Ale or Beere, it is likewiſe good for the ſhutting of a bone broken or cut, either for man or beaſt.
               TAke iuyce of an herb called Bonwort, to the quantitie of iij. or iiij.

ſpoonfulls or more, according to the ſtomacke of the partie that is hurt, take the ſame quantitie, and drinke it either in the milke or as before it is written, three or foure ſeuerall mornings faſting, or oftener as you will, and it will free the partie, when the hearbe is not to be gotten, then you may vſe the roote, and it will auaile as much.
               If the wound be but little, either this drinke or the Medicine before written will helpe it, but if it be great, you muſt vſe both together.
            
            
               For to heale wounds and ſores.
               TAke Roſin and Frankinſence, of each foure ounces, of white waxe and Olibinum, of each three ounces, of Harts ſuet, of Maſtick, of each an ounce, Venice Turpentine, halfe an ounce, white Wine a pint, melt the Roſin, the Frankenſence, and the Harts ſuet together, then ſtraine it in

a pan, and put thereto all the white wax, the Olibinum, and the Maſticke made into powder, and the white wine, boyle all together till the wine be conſumed, then take it from the fire and ſtirre it till it be almoſt cold, then put in the Turpentine and make it in a rowle, and keepe it in parchment or lether,
            
            
               Another.
               Take Callamint, Penniriall, of each a like quantitie, Nigella romana ſeede a little bruiſed, a French crownes weight, boyle all theſe in poſſet drinke made of white Wine and ale, a good draught euening and morning you muſt drinke.
            
            
               A medicine for the head burning that long time hath beene.
               TAke a quantitie of the gaule of a Hare, and as much of hony, mingle it together a good while till it turne redde, and with it annoint the forehead,

and all the aking ſhall be taken away, this is a precious oyntment.
            
            
               For to ſet in a bone, or heale a broken bone in man or beaſt.
               TAke the iuyce of Comfrey rootes, and wilde Dayſie roots, and boile them with Turpentine and yellow waxe, and make a flat plaſter thereof, and lay it to the griefe, and ſet ſplinters about it, and rowle it to keepe it ſtiffe once in fiue dayes till it be hole: and you muſt drinke the iuyce of the roots nine dayes in ſome liquor, either to man or beaſt when you vſe the plaſter.
            
            
               For the Pyles.
               TAke newe milke and chicken it with otmeale finely fifted through a fiue, & let it ſeeth till you make it vp like ſuppoſitaries, & then take it vp & cut off the outſide of a race of ginger,

and grate it and mingle it together, and ſome of it make into a Plaſter, and the reſt make like ſuppoſitaries, and put them vp as you do ſuppoſitaries, and then lay a plaſter on the place, and vſe this vntill you be hole.
            
            
               A medicine for a Rupture in old or yong.
               TAke Knotwort, Ribworte, and Comfrey, of each a like quantitie, waſh them and drie them, and ſet them in the ouen when the bread is drawn ſo that they may drie, then beat them to pouder, them ſ
                     ••
                  rce them finely through a ſearce 
                     •••
                  ſiue, and looke what quantitie you take of the herbs when they be dried, take halfe ſo much Aniſeede, & beat them with the pouder of the hearbs and ſearce them, & thus hauing made the pouder ready, whē you wil vſe it, take as much of the pouder as you can lay or take vpon a good broad ſix-pence, and xiiij mornings together giue it

to the partie to drinke with a little malmeſey faſting, & anoynt the place firſt with oyle of ſpike mingled with any other thing, and alſo take ſuch hearbes as you make your powder of, and ſeeth them in faire running water, till they be tender, wringing the water out of them, & apply them to the place as hot as the partie can ſuffer it, and let not the truſſe be too ſtraight, leſt it force the place do rent further, take the hearbes to make the powder with, in May when the chiefe ſtrength is in them, the Knotwoort beareth a little wachet flower: This hath beene prooued on children ſo borne, and on olde folkes that haue beene foure and twentie yeares broken, and doth helpe al ſorts that with good vſage doe not abuſe themſelues through the grace of God.
            
            
               
               A medicine to be vſed during all the time of the Plague, good agaiaſt infection.
               TAke a pint of white wine vineger, and halfe a pinte of Iene, Tickell, and a quantitie of Bole Armonacke, otherwiſe called Bolles verus, and ſtirre all this together, and take three ſpoonfuls in the morning, faſting, and faſt an houre after it, and take three ſpoonfuls an houre after ſupper.
            
            
               Another medicine for paine in the head.
               SEeth leaues of Agrimony with hony, and giue them to drinke, and draw it through a cloth, and keepe it in a box, and therewith anoynt your head, and waſh your head in the water that Celondine is ſodden in.
            
            
               
               For aking of the head.
               SEeth Pulioll in Ayſill, and then put in thy noſe.
               Take Rue and Fennell, and ſeeth them together in water, and waſh therewith the head.
            
            
               For a Fellon of the head that ſwelleth the head of a man: and that before written is for the ſame.
               TAke the greaſe of an Hart, and hony, and barly meale, and ote treſt, and moicell, and ſtampe them together, and after ſhaue thy head, and then make a plaſter, and lay it to thy head as hotte as you may ſuffer, and let it lie vntill it be whole.
            
            
               For all Ebilles of the head.
               TAke Rew, and ſtampe it with ſtrong Ayſill, mingle it and waſh the head therewith.
            
            
               
               For the Carbuckle or the Poſtume in the head.
               TAke wormewood, Origanum, Mayron, byeuen, porcod, & ſeeth them in ſweet wine, and after that wring out the iuyce, and lay it to the eares of the ſicke with two ſponges, as hotte as he may ſuffer it, and vſe this two or three times, and he ſhall be whole.
            
            
               For the Mygrims, Poſtume, Dropſie, Feuer, and all maner of akings in the head.
               TAke a penny waight of the roote of Pellitory of Spaine, ſixe pennie waight of Spicardy, & grind them together, & ſeeth them in good vineger, and take a ſaucer full of honie, and fiue of muſtard, and when the liquor that is boyled, is cold, doe thereto the hony & the muſtard, & ſtir them wel together, & let the ſick vſe therof,

halfe a ſpoonefull at once, and hold it ſtill in his mouth, the ſpace of two creedes ſaying, and then ſpitte it out into a veſſell, and do ſo ten or twelue times, a good while after he hath eaten at noone, and a little before euen ten or twelue times, and when he goeth to bed, take and waſh cleane his mouth, and drinke a draught and go to bed: vſe this Medicine three daies and he ſhall be whole.
            
            
               For the head-ache,
               TAke and ſeethe veruine and betonie, filles and wormewood, and waſh the parties head with the water thrice in the weeke, and take the herbes and make a plaſter, and lay it vpon the vpper part of the head, on this wife.
               TAke the hearbes aforeſaid when they are well ſodden, and wring out the iuyce of them, and then ſtamp

them in a morter, and temper them with the water wherewith they were ſodden, and doe thereto the branne of wheate, for to hold the iuyce of the hearbes that it goe not out, and make a garland of linnen that may go about the head and binde the plaſter vnder it, as hotte as the ſicke may ſuffer it: doe this three times, and hee ſhall be whole.
            
            
               Another.
               CLoues comfort the ſtomacke, liuer, and heart, they helpe diſgeſtion, and ſtoppe the bellie, they quicken the eye-ſight, and ſcowre away the cloudes and hawes of the eyes, they are good againſt all cold diſeaſes, and they are hotte in the third degree: the oyle of Cloues is verie good for a cold ſtomacke, and for any other places that hath neede of warming, as a rumaticke braine.
            
            
               Another.
               TAke of litrage of lead ſoure ounces, of vineger, of common oyle a

like quantitie, put the lytrage in a morter, and put a little of the vineger, and a little of the oyle, and beat them together, and ſo put in by a little and a little all your oyle and vineger, you muſt beat them two houres together, it muſt be as thicke as your greene ſalue.
            
            
               Another.
               TAke Camphorie, harts-eaſe, priuit, plantan, of each of them one handfull bruiſe theſe in a morter, and put thereto of Harts ſuet, of fine ſallet oyle, of each dimme a lib, mingle them well together, and let them ſtand foure and twenty houres, then put them into a panne or braſſe pot, and put thereto of waxe and roſin broken in ſmall pieces, of each dim a lib, let theſe boyle all together ouer a fire of coales, vntill the iuyce of the hearbes be conſumed, and the oyntment greene, then ſtraine it through a canuaſe cloth into ſome pot that you will keepe it in, and when it beginneth

to be colde, then put thereunto foure ounces of venis turpentine, and ſtirre all together vntill it be through cold, and keepe it cloſe couered.
            
            
               Another.
               THe wine of eyebright is made for the eyes, by putting the herbes into the muſte, vntill it be perfit wine, whoſe vſe make the eyes of olde men looke yong, for it is hot and drie, and the powder of it beaten with the yolke of an egge it worketh the ſame effect: the powder receiued in wine, if the wine be too ſtrong, put in fenell water or ſugar.
            
            
               A medicine againſt the ſtone in the backe or bladder, or for the weakeneſſe of the backe, which is called the running of the raynes.
               TAke venis Turpentine, and waſh it in roſe water, either redde or damaske, vntill it looke white, then diuide it into ſmall balles, as you may

eaſily ſwallow to the full quantitie of thret haſell nuts or there about, then rowle them in ſugar, to make them the more eſie to be taken, then ſwallow them in the morning faſting, and faſt foure hours after them: take theſe three or foure ſeuerall mornings together, and in your water you ſhall finde much grauell.
            
            
               To take away the pocke-holes, or any ſpot in the face.
               TAke white roſe water, and wette a fine cloth therein, and ſet it al night to freeze, and then lay it vpon your face till it be drie, alſo take three poppies, the reddeſt you can get, and quarter them, taking out the garbitch, then ſtill them in a quarte of new milke of a red Cowe, and with the water thereof waſh your face.
            
            
               
               To make Snow.
               TAke the whites of fiue or ſixe egs, a handfull of fine ſugar, and as much roſe water, and put them in a pottle of cream of the thikeſt that you can get, beat them all together, as the ſnow riſeth, take it off with a ſpoone, you muſt beat it with a ſticke clouen in foure, then muſt you take a loafe of bread and cut away the cruſt, and ſet it vpright in a platter, then ſet a faire roſemarie branch in the loafe, and caſt your ſnow vpon it with a ſpoone.
            
            
               A medicine for the Piles.
               TAke the hearbe called Torchworte, is groweth hie, bearing a yellow flower, blowing out of the ſtalke, the leaues looke boare. Take the iuyce & boile it with freſh butter a little while, & keepe it cloſe, and vſe

it euening and morning: If a cowes vdder be ſtung or bitte with a ſnake or ſuch ltke: Take Lauender, and waſh it cleane, and ſeeth it in chamber-lye a good while, and waſh it euening and morning warm, you may put a little freſh butter in it, and milke out the milke when you doe it.
            
            
               A medicine for a cold, or burne, or a ſore, approued.
               TAke water-ſucke leaues, otherwiſe called Hogwort leaues, alliehouſe daiſies, rootes and leaues and all, and a little Roſemary, and waſh them and ſtampe them, and boyle them in creame vntill it is butter, then ſtraine them, and apply it warme to the burne, pricke the water-ſucke leaues, and lay them vpon it, dreſſing it twice a day, or three times if need: To heale a ſore, put Turpentine, Roſin & wax in it, dreſſing it with linte.
            
            
               
               For the ſtich.
               TAke ſtich-wort, bay leaues, holly without prickles, of each a like quantitie, the iuyce, graines beaten, drinke it in ale warme.
            
            
               For the ſwelling.
               TAke the grounds of good Ale, glouers ſhreddes, and white bread crumbes, and ſage, boyle them, lay it to warme, it will ſwage the ſwelling and the ache: it hath beene proued.
            
            
               For the tooth-ache.
               TAke organny that groweth cloſe to the ground, that taſteth like aqua-vitae, bruiſe it, lay it to the tooth: Burſa paſtoris will doe the like.
            
            
               
               For a bite, or Fellon, or ſore leg.
               SEeth a pint of ale to two ſpoonfuls like a ſyrope, pricke a piece of leather with a pin, it wil heale it without breaking: if it be broken, take linte to the whole with ſome ſalue, let it lie foure & twenty houres, lay it to cold.
            
            
               For the ſcrathes of a horſes leg.
               TAke vineger, muſtard ſeede, gunpowder, boyle them, waſh it hotte three or foure times, proued.
            
            
               For the Gowt.
               TAke Mallowes, and ſengren, beate them and boyle them in water, then ſtraine them, put oate-meale groats ſoked in vineger and ſheepes ſuet vntryed, then boyle it to a polteſſe, proued.
            
            
               
               For the Ague.
               TAke a red onyon cutte ſmall, ſixe and fiftie graines of pepper beaten ſmall, bind it to the wriſt halfe an houre before the ſit, proued.
            
            
               For the Gowt.
               TAke a fat whelpe of a hound, ſcald him like a pigge, garbage him in the ſide, take then red nettles ſtamped with two ounces of brimſtone, and foure ounces of turpentine, foure yolkes of egges, ſtuffe the belly and ſow it vp, roſt it with a ſoft fire, ſaue the dripping, oynt the place, it is good for ſinewes, and crampe, it will driue it away: for the like effect, oyle netles, white wine, boyle them, apply them hotte.
            
            
               For the Ciatica.
               TAke the gail of a Bull, a quart of wort, boile it to a pint, thē put in a

pinte of vineger, frankyncenſe one ounce in powder, of hony halfe a pound, of commin halfe a pound in powder, boyle it thicke, ſpread it on leather, lay it to hot two or three dayes, lay a linnen cloth betweene the skin and the plaiſter, the plaiſter will ſerue many times. proued.
            
            
               For the tooth-ach.
               ALlom as big as a walnut, garlicke an handfull, twentie beanes, an handfull of bay ſalt, pepper, beate it together, lay it to the wreſtes twentie foure houres or more.
            
            
               For to ſtoppe the bleding of a wound.
               THe wooll of an incke-horne, ſanguis draconis, & boll armonycke, and the whites of egs layd on towe.
            
            
               
               For a Conſumption, either for old folke, yong folke or children.
               TAke longwort, liuerwort, hartes tongue, of each an handfull, red mints, red ſag, mother of time, of each an handfull, parſley and fenell rootes, the piths out of each halfe an handfull, liquoriſh on ounce, anniſe ſeedes on ounce, ſceeney two ounces, turbet on ounce, tappe dates two ounces, ſynamon on ounce, nutmegs two ounces, white ſuger candy ſoure ounces, rubarb on ounce ſliced, ſtamppe your ſpices and your ſeedes, & beate your other poite cary ſtuffe, & ſhred your herbs fine, boile it in iij. quarts of reniſh wine to a pottell, ſtrain it, drink foure times a day a quarter of a pinte at a draught warm put in a peniworth of aqua-vitae, & as much ſafron beaten fine: after it is boyled, if the patient be laxatiue, leaue out your rubarb, ſceeney & turbith, & boile it in

wort, it is beſt in wort for children: for aged folkes that be weake, boyle in the ſtone of a Bore, or a ramme, or a horſe is beſt, on ſtone is enough for one time, you may take one to purge, and another not to purge, the ſecond receipt is enough, purge firſt.
            
            
               To make one make water.
               TAke the ſtones and kernels of peaches and medlers, beat them fine, ſift them through a ſearce, put in ſugar, drinke it in white wine.
            
            
               To make a Scare
               TAke a pound of ſtone pitch, as much roſin as a great walnut, and twice ſo much cleane waxe, a ſpoonfull of freſh Swines greace, boyle all together til it be well mixt, then coole it in water, then oyle your handes with hogges greaſe, and labour it in your hands an houre and more, till it will cleaue to your hands.
            
            
               
               For the ſame, and the leſt for all manner of aches.
               TAke Roſin dim. li. of perroſon a quarter of a pound, as much gum maſticke, a quarter of a li. of Deere ſuet, two ounces of turpentine, one ounce of cloues, and mace, of ſaffron two ounces, and the licoure muſt be oyle of roſes.
            
            
               For a great ach, a ſoueragine medicine.
               TAke ſparmacitie eight peniworth, ot oyle two d. of blacke ſope halfe a pound, of butter without ſalt, as much as a great walnut, boyle it on a chafindiſh of coales halfe an houre, ſtirring it well from the the bottome, ſpread it on leather, as broad and as long as your griefe, lay it too foure or fiue dayes.
            
            
               
               To make a good oyntment or ſalue for any ſore.
               TAke a good handfull of Sage, as much of Plantane, as much of brown wort, as much of hony ſuckles as much of turſame, as much velerion, boyle all theſe in May butter, till it be browne, then ſtraine it, and put in a quantitie of virgine waxe, then boyle it againe.
            
            
               A good Receipt for all manner of ſores, olde or new, named the gift of God, praiſe be to him.
               TAke Bectonie, veruin, pimpernell, bugle, ſmallage, plantane, Scabeas water▪ agrimony, of each a like, ſtamp them together, boyle them together in a gallon of white wine to the third part, then ſtraine them, and put to them a quantitie of sheepes ſuet, and halfe a pound of waxe, di. li. of roſin,

di. li. pitch, one li. of olibanum, and boyle it againe.
            
            
               For bagges in the Fundament.
               TAke the yolke of an hard egge roſted, the oyle of roſes, and marygold leaues, beat it together, lay it to hotte.
            
            
               To kill a Tetter.
               TAke greene Broome, boyle it in a quart of running water halfe away, bath it with it.
            
            
               For the Peſtilence.
               TAke the water of Beetony, and pimpernell, turmentill, of Scabeas, mixe it together, drinke it nine dayes faſting, and feare no peſtilence.
            
            
               
               For one that is taken within the body, or any place.
               TAke Roſe cakes, aqua-vitae, and roſe water, heate it on a chafindiſh of coales, lay it to the ſtomacke, they ſhall mend by Gods grace.
            
            
               For the Ague or cold.
               TAke greene Alderſtickes, take the inner rine a handfull, beare them, drinke it in ale faſting, faſt iij. houres, walking after it, then eate a caudle.
            
            
               Another for the Ague.
               TAke a ſpoonefull of iuyce of orenges, as much aqua-vitae, mingle it with a yolke of a new layde egge in the ſhell, ſuppe it vp faſting once or twice.
            
            
               King Henry the eight his perfume
               TAke ſixe ſpoonfulls of compound water, as much of roſe water, a

quarter of an ounce, of fine ſugar, two graines of muske, two graines of amber-greece, two of Ciuet, boyle it ſoftly together, all the houſe will ſmell of Cloues.
            
            
               For the Strangurion.
               TAke horehound one handfull and an halfe, red wine halfe a pinte, of oliue oyle fiue ſpoonfulls, boyle it together, put it in a linnen cloth to the ſmall of the backe, as hot as may be.
            
            
               To cleanſe a wound.
               TAke beere, wheate, ſtone flower, and hony, boyle it thicke, apply it to.
            
            
               For the Gowt.
               TAke wornwood, walwort, wheaten branne, Cow dung, and ſalt, boyle it in vineger, plaiſter it to the griefe.
            
            
               For a Bruiſe.
               TAke halfe a pinte of ſallet oyle, as much oyle of roſes, as much aqua-vitae,

and three or foure ſcoure ſnailes that beare ſhelles, ſtampe them ſmall, boyle them to oyle.
            
            
               To keepe one Laxatiue.
               TAke a new lade egge, put out the white, then put in new butter vnſalted, heat it, then eate it, vſe it often.
            
            
               Two remedies verie good againſt wormes in little children.
               TAke floure of wheate well boulted as much as will lye vpon three crounes of gould, and put it in a glaſſe and power into it well water ſo much as will ſteepe the ſayd ſloure, and make it looke as if it were milke and no thinner, then giue the childe drinke of it, and you ſhall ſee with his excrements the wormes come forth dead, which is a verie good remedy.
            
            
               
               The ſecond remedie againſt wormes.
               FOr children that be ſo little, that the medicine cannot be miniſtred at the mouth, you muſt take verie good aqua vitae wherewith you muſt waſh or wet the ſtomacke or breſt of the child, then power it vpon the ſaid place with the pouder of fine myrhe, and lay the child downe a little while with his breſt vpward, and you ſhall ſee incontinentlie the wormes with the childes dung come fourth dead.
            
            
               To heale children of the lunaticke diſeaſe which happeneth vnto them by reaſon of a worme with two heads that breedeth in their bodies, the which worme comming to the hart cauſeth ſuch a paſſion in the childe that oft times it killeth them.
               TAke the tender ſtalkes of a wilding Tree and dry them in the in the ſhadowe,

then ſtamp them well and ſift them, and take of the ſaid powder and rootes of Gention and of long Pyome of each of them a quarter of an ounce, and a quarter of an ounce of myrhe, all theſe well beaten to pouder, you muſt put in a diſh, or in ſome other veſſell, and moiſt them with a little water, then take of it with your two fingers, and wet the lippes and mouth of the childe, doe this three or foure times, and you ſhall ſee the worme come forth dead with the excrementes.
            
            
               A remedie for the falling ſickeneſſe.
               TAke Germander gathered in may when it is in the bloſſome dry it in the ſhadowe, and make it in pouder and when you will vſe it take the yolke of an egge or two, and ſtir and breake it with a ſpoonefull of the ſaid pouder, then ſeeth it, and giue it to the pacient to eate, doe this morning

and euening eight daies, abſtayning from wine, carnall Company of women, from all pulſe, beanes peaſe, fetches, tares, and ſuch other from Salates, ſalt fiſh, and from al other things which are hard of concoction and digeſtion a verie good and notable ſecret.
            
            
               A remedie to cure the bytinge of all venemouſe beaſts.
               AS ſone as the partie feeleth himſelfe bitten with any venemouſe beaſt, or as ſoone after as may bee, take greene leaues of a figge tree, and preſſe the milke of them three or foure times into the wound, and for this ſerueth alſo muſtarde ſeed mingled with vineger.
            
            
               To drawe an arrow head or other yron out of a wound.
               TAke the iuyce of valerian, in the which, wet a tent and put into the

wound laying the ſaid hearbe vpon it ſtamped, then make your binder as beſt fitteth, and by this meanes you ſhall drawe forth the Iron, and after heale the wound.
            
            
               For a knocke or falle, cauſing a bunch vpon the head.
               TAke an ounce of bay ſalte, raw hony three ounces, Comen three ounces, Turpintine two ounces, mingle all theſe well vpon the fire, then ſpread it vpon a lynnen cloth, and make thereof a playſter, and lay it hot to his head, the which will aſſwage the ſwelling & heale the hurte.
            
            
               A ſecret remedie againſt the pluriſie.
               OPen a white loafe new baked, in the middle, and ſpread it wel with good Treacle, on both partes, vpon the crummy ſides, and heate it at the fire, then lay one parte vpon the place of the diſeaſe, and the other parte on

the other ſide of his bodie directlie, and ſo bind them that they ſtir not, leauing them ſo a day and a night, or vntill the impoſtume breake, and then take away the bread and immediatlie the patient will ſpit forth the putrifaction of the impoſtume, and when he hath ſlept a little, let him eate, and by Gods helpe he ſhall ſhortly be well.
            
            
               A very good remedy for a wound with a ſword, ſtaffe, ſtone, or ſuch like.
               TAke Taxus Barbatus, ſtampe it and take the iuyce of it, and if the wound bleede, wipe it and make it cleane, waſhing it with white wine or water, then put the iuyce vpon the wound, and the hearbe vpon it out of the which you tooke the iuice, then binde vp the wound, and in one day you ſhall ſee a wonderfull effect.
            
            
               
               Againſt the diſeaſe or griefe of the flanks, and the collicke paſſion, experimented, and prooued diuers times.
               TAke halfe a glaſſe or leſe of the iuyce of Barberies, when they be very ripe and red, and put into it as much red Corrall as will lie vpon ij. groats well broken into powder, and giue the patient to drinke thereof.
            
            
               Another perfect remedy for the ſame diſeaſe, and to make a man piſſe within halfe an houre that hath not made water in three or foure dayes, and will breake the ſtone within ten or twelue dayes.
               TAke fine pouder of Virga Aurea, and put a ſpoonful of it into a new layde egge, ſoft roſted, and giue the patient thereof in the morning to his breakefaſt, and let him not eate in foure houres after, and then ſhall hee

make water in leſſe then halfe an houre, and let him vſe this for the ſpace of tenne or twelve dayes as aforeſaid, the patient ſhall voyde the ſtone without any paine or griefe.
            
            
               A remedy for ſpitting of blood, occaſioned by the breach of ſome vayne in the breaſt.
               TAke miſe dung beaten in powder as much as will lie vpon a groate, and put it into halfe a glaſſe full of iuyce of plantane with a little ſugar, and ſo giue the patient to drinke therof in the morning and euening continuing the ſame, he ſhall be found.
            
            
               Againſt the griefe of the lungs and ſpitting of blood, a remedy experimented and tryed.
               TAke an hearbe called farfara or Tusſilago of the Apothecaries Vngula cabellina, in Engliſh called

Colts foote, in French, pat de lion, incorporate it well with the larde of a hogge chopped, and a new layd egge, boyle all together in a panne, and giue the patient of it to eate nine mornings, this is alſo good to make one fatte.
            
            
               Againſt ſtincking of breath.
               TAke Roſemary leaues with the bloſſoms, if you can get them, and ſeeth them in white wine with a little myrhe and Cynamond, and you ſhall finde a marueilouſe effect, if you vſe it often in your mouth.
            
            
               Againſt the biting of a mad dogge, and the rage or madnes that followeth the partie bitten.
               TAke the bloſſomes or flowers of wilde thiſtles dryed in the ſhade and beaten into powder, halfe a nutſhell full, put into white wine and

drinke it, and in thrice taking it you ſhallbe whole, A thing tried and experimented.
            
            
               A medicine for wateriſh eyes.
               TAke a redde coleleaſe, and anoint the leafe with the white of an egge when you goe to bedde, lay the ſame to your eyes.
            
            
               A medicine for ſore eyes.
               TAke a litle ground Iuy, and ſtraine it & womans milke together, and let it be ſomewhat greene of the Iuy, and then drop a drop or two into the eyes.
            
            
               Another for the ſame.
               TAke Fannell water ſtilled, and liue hony, and mingle them together, and put a drop or two into the eye, theſe are approued.
            
            
               
               To make water for the eyes to kill the heat of any ſore.
               TAke redde ſage and boyle it in Smithes water, vntill the third part bee conſumed, then ſtraine out the ſage very hard, and put into it a quantitie of the liquor, a peny worth of Allome, and as much of white coperas, after you haue taken it from the fire, and annoynt your eyes therwith.
            
            
               Another for the ſame.
               TAke the leaues of redde brambles, and of plantan, and hony-ſuckles, and boyle all them in running water, from a quart to a pinte, and vſe it to the ſore.
            
            
               A medicine for the pinne and webbe in the eye.
               TAke the white of an egge, being hotte, take out the yolke cleane

and put thereto a good quantitie of ſugar-candy, then ſtraine it hard through a cloth and therewith make a water, and euery day two or three times droppe it into the eyes.
            
            
               A medicine to cleare the ſight.
               TAke red roſewater, cleane mirhe, as much as a nutte and breake it into powder, and binde it in a linnen cloth, and let it lie in the water xij. houres, then take of this water and put in your eyes, and it will cleare your ſight.
            
            
               For a pearle in the eye.
               TAke red Fennell, and the leaues and roots of white daſies, vſe them without any liquor, and put together three ſpoonfulls of either of them, then take one good ſpoonfull of clarified hony, and two or three ſpoonfuls of womans milke, and drop this

into your eye three or foure times a day, and if there bee any ſight in the eye this will cure it.
            
            
               For eyes that are blaſted.
               TAke a toſt made of broune bread, and lay it in redde wine that is not mingled, and let it lie vntill it be ſoked halfe an houre, then put it into a fine cloth, in two pieces for each eye one, and the fine cloth muſt be betweene the eye and the toſt, dreſſe it when you goe to bedde at night.
            
            
               To purge the head and eye ſight.
               TAke the iuyce of Hei-hoo, and put it into your noſtrels, & the fleame ſhall follow and the running water.
            
            
               For the eyes that be red and ſore.
               TAke Fennell, Verueine, Roſes, Salendine, and Rue, of each two

ounces, and diſtil it all together, and when neede is, then put a droppe or two into the ſore eye, for it is good for all manner of diſeaſes in the eye.
            
            
               Againſt the payne of the eyes.
               TAke the yolke of an egge roſted hard, and layd to with roſe oyle and ſaffron, the iuyce of Baſill put in.
            
            
               For to ſee well.
               TAke eye bright, red Fennell, of each halfe a handfull, of Rue one quarter of a handfull, cauſe theſe to be diſtilled, and waſh your eyes daily with the water.
            
            
               For the taking in the legge.
               TAke a peice of ſoure leauen, and as much barme, and as much blacke ſope, and temper them all together, and ſo ſpread it vpon a linnen

cloth and put it to your legge where the heat is, and change it twice a day, and by Gods helpe it will heale you in three or foure dresſings.
            
            
               A dyet drinke for the conſumption.
               TAke a gallon of running water, meaſured by ale meaſure, and put thereto an ounce of Cynamon, an ounce of cloues, and an ounce of mace, a dramme and a halfe of Acter rootes, and boyle it vntill it come to three quartes, let this be your onely drinke till you do mende.
            
            
               A medicine for the headache.
               TAke a handfull of Roſemary, and two handfull of Bettony, and a ſpoonefull of hony, and ſeeth them al in Malmeſey, and waſh your head therewith.
            
            
               
               Another for the head ach.
               TAke fiue nutmegges, and grate them, and ſeeth them in malmeſey till they be thicke, and make a plaſter thereof and lay it to your temples.
            
            
               For winde and ſhootings in your head.
               TAke Egremony and Cynamond, and bay them, and put them in ale and lay it to the temples of the head, and if the paine remoue, lay it where the paine remoueth.
            
            
               Another for the head ache.
               TAke a handfull of Camomill, a handfull of penneryall, a handful of ſage, a handfull of wheate branne, chop them altogether ſmal, and boile them in a pinte of ſharpe vineger till they be thicke, and thereof make a playſter and lay it to the temples of

the head as hotte as you may ſuffer it, and it ſhall (by Gods helpe) doe you good.
            
            
               Another for the ſame.
               TAke a piece of raw beefe, and lay on the nape of your necke, and ſhift it euery night when you goe to bedde, and vſe this as often as you ſee good, proued.
            
            
               Another for the ſame.
               TAke an ounce of oyle of Roſes, two ounces of white Vineger, iiij. ounces of plantane water, mixe theſe together, and wette a linnen cloth in it, and lay it to the temples.
            
            
               A medicine for Megram in the head.
               TAke Houſleeke, and Garden wormes, the greater part being Houſleeke, ſtampe them together and put thereto fine flower, and make a playſter in a fine cloth and lay it to the forehead and temples.
            
            
               
               Another for the ſame.
               TAke muſterd ſeede and temper it with vyneger and make an oyntment therefore, and lay it to the temples in a plaſter, and an other in the nape of the necke behind, where it is not ſore, and it will auoyd and ſhortlie be hoale.
            
            
               A medicine to keepe vp the pallat of ones mouth.
               TAke a peece of wheaten leuen, and Commen ſeede beaten in a morter, a quantitie of bay ſalt, and redde Roſe vyneger, and redde Roſe water, put them into a bag of cloth, and lay it to the mould of the head.
            
            
               To dry vp Rume in the head.
               TAke a quantity of dried roſe leues, the flower of Camamell, Baſſell,

Margerum all dried a quantitie of Cloues and mace, groſe bruiſed, a nutmeg, and a quantitie of dill ſeed, all quilt in a cap.
            
            
               A Poultis to coole any place either face, or any where els, that is red and full of heat pimples.
               TAke houſleeke, mallowes, purſaline, water roſes, called numium, beate all theſe, and take the iuyce of them, and put a little oyle of Roſes to them, and waſh the place with it, or ſtamp the hearbes till they be thicke like pappe, then ſeeth it with a little roſe oyle and waxe, and then you may lay it on as a plaſter.
            
            
               Againſt red pimples of the face.
               TAke an ounce of camphire, as much of brimſtone beaten, mirh, frankincenſe, of each foure drammes, of roſe water a pound, put al theſe in a

glaſſe, and ſet it in the ſunne ten daies and then lay it on the places.
            
            
               Another.
               TAke the diſtilled water of aſhe tree, tamaredes oft eaten, wine of ſtrauberries layd vpon the face.
            
            
               Another.
               TAke the diſtilled water of mulline, and a little champhire mixed together, and layd to the face.
            
            
               A medicine for them that are deafe ſo that they haue heard before.
               TAke iuyce of bittanie, womans milke, that hath a man child, mingle them together, and dip a peece of black wooll into it, and put a peece of it into your care for the ſpace of ten or a leuen dayes or more, if it happen that this will not take away the deafnes,

then take the milke of a cowe, and ſeeth it with oatemeale, and iuice of bittany and lay it plaiſter wiſe ouer the eares, night and day for a long time.
            
            
               To make an oyntment for a red face.
               TAke halfe an ounce of Camphire, and two drammes of Sulpher vinum, and an ounce of Deeres ſuet, melt the ſuet and the camphire together, then put in the Brimſtone, fine ground in a morter, when the other is almoſt cold, and ſet them no more ouer the fire after the Brimſtone is put in, Theſe being laid on all night, will take away the heate and the pimples.
            
            
               Another for the ſame.
               TAKe as much Mercury ſublimate as a Beane, and twiſe as much Allom, and put them in a quart of faire water, and boyle them together with

two or three cornes of bay ſalt, and bath your face there with often in a day with the ſame cold, and open the pimples with your fingars before you waſh.
            
            
               For a ſore mouth.
               TAke a quart of white wine, and a quart of water, and a pinte of wine vineger, and a good quantitie of red ſage, two penyworth of mercury, and halfe an ounce of roch Allom, and a quantitie of Roſemary, and a greater quantitie of woodbine leaues, and iij. ſpoonfulls of hony, ſeeth them together, and waſh your mouth therwith.
            
            
               A water for a Canker and ſore mouth.
               TAke roſemary crops, Sage, Singfield, woodbine leaues, Allom, liue hony, or pure hony boyled in ſpring water, halfe a handfull of each of the foreſaid hearbes boiled in three pints of water, til they be boiled a third part away, & keepe it in a glaſſe ſtopped,

and waſh your mouth with it.
            
            
               For a canker and ſ
                     •
                  arnes in the mouth.
               TAke two ounces of fine coperes beaten into pouder, halfe a pint of faire water, and let the ſame coperes be diſtilled or ſteeped, two dayes and two nights, then ſtraine the ſame ſoftly through a linnen cloth, then take a ſpoonefull thereof, and waſh your mouth & throat with it ſo
                     •
                  tly, blood warme, but dr
                     •
                  nke none of it, this medicine will not continue good aboue foureteen daies, therefore you muſt make it freſh as occaſion ſerues, you muſt take it morning and euenning.
            
            
               A medicine for the mother in a womans ſide that ryſeth.
               TAke Aqua-compoſita, and beate bay berries in powder, and put it into the aqua-compoſita, and put a

ſpoonful or two in a draught of beere or ale, and ſo drinke it.
            
            
               A medicine for the pricking of a nedle, or thorne in the ioynt.
               TAke faire boulted flower of wheate, and temper it with wine, white or redde, and a little oyle oliue and a few roſe leaues, and ſeeth them together till it be plaiſter thicke, and lay it to ſo hotte as you can ſuffer, It will draw foorth the nedle, and eaſe the Ache.
            
            
               A medicine for a Canker that eateth mans fleſh.
               TAke wheate branne of the ſmalleſt powder, the iuyce of ſmallege, the iuyce of woodbine, and burnt allam, beate into powder, and a little hony, mingle all theſe together and make a plaiſter of it, and lay it to the ſore, and it ſhall deſtroy the Canker.
            
            
               
               For a bruiſe.
               TAke Virgin waxe, and commen ſeede well beaten, mixe them together, and lay it to the bruiſe plaſter wiſe.
            
            
               For a white ſcalde.
               TAke ſallet oyle beaten with the whites of egges till they be thorowly wrought together, cut away the heare, and ſo annoynt the head and lay a bladder vpon it.
            
            
               A medicine againſt all ſtiches.
               TAke linſeede and boyle it in newe milke, and make a plaſter thereof and lay it to the place grieued.
            
            
               A medicine for a ſore breaſt.
               TAke groundſill and chop it ſmall, the grounds of ſmall beere, wheaten

branne, and ſheepes ſuet beaten in morter, and boile them altogether, and lay it plaſter wiſe to your breaſt.
            
            
               A medicine for ſwelled breſts.
               TAke white wine, wheat bran new bolted, roſe leaues, old and new, ſeeth them vntill they be thicke, then lay it to the breſt as hotte as ſhe may ſuffer it, from euen till morning, and ſhift it againe.
            
            
               To breake the fleame of the breſt.
               TAke butter without ſalt, and hony, of each a quantitie, faire bitter Almonds, blanch them, and beat them fine, and eate a little euery day.
            
            
               A very good medicine for any ache or ſore breſt, often approued.
               TAke Frankinſence, fine wrought Waxe, Bores greaſe, and Roſin,

of euery one of them a like quantitie, and ſeeth them together to a cake, ſpread it on a cloth as broad as the ſore or paine is, and lay it too foure and twenty houres, or twelue at the leaſt.
            
            
               An approued medicine for a ſore breſt.
               TAke a handfull of mallowes, ſeeth them very ſoft in faire water, and then let the water runne away from the mallowes, then choppe or ſhred them, then put them in a diſh with bores greaſe, and heate them very hot and lay it in a plaſter of linnen cloth to your breaſt, as hotte as you can ſuffer three or foure times a day heating it, this hath beene approued very good.
            
            
               A remedie for the paines of the breaſt.
               TAke hyſope, parſley, & ſage, ſtamp them together, and lay them to the breaſt, and they will be whole.
            
            
               
               Another for the ſloping of the breaſt.
               TAke Rewe, and ſeeth it with allegant, and drinke it three or foure times.
            
            
               A medicine for the bloody flixe.
               TAke as much fine linnen cloth, as wil make a ſuppoſitary, being rapped together button wiſe, then wet the ſame in the beſt aqua vitae, or aqua compoſita, and let the partie greeued conuey the ſame into his fundament, and it wil helpe them by the grace of God, within three or foure dreſſings, this is approued, and hath holppen many that haue beene brought low and thought paſt cure.
            
            
               Doctor Smithes medicine for the collicke and ſtone.
               TAke poſſet ale made of Renniſh wine, boyle Camamill, running time, parcelie, pellitorie of the wall,

with a good ſpoonefull of commen ſeedes, till the thrid part and more be conſumed, then ſtrain them with ſuger ſufficient, drinke a good draught warme, and vſe it as occaſion ſerueth.
            
            
               A medicine for the Chin-coffe for a child.
               TAke boares greaſe, and warme the ſoules of the feete to the fire, and chafe them with that, and go to bed and keepe it warme, and lappe cloths to it.
            
            
               To ſtay a Laxe.
               TAke halfe a quarter of a pound of almonds, and parch thē vpon two new tiles, beate them in a morter, and take a quarter of faire water, and ſet it on the fire, and put halfe a handfull of knot-graſſe, and halfe a handfull of plantine leaues, and let them ſeeth a good while, then take the

water, and ſtraine the foreſaid almonds therewith, and make an almond milke thereof, & put in a peece of ſuger then take date ſtones, and beate them to pouder, as ſmal as may be, and put ſome of that pouder into the almond milke, ſo drinke it luke warme.
            
            
               An excellent medicine for a child that cannot part with his water, or vrine.
               TAke three or foure hiue bees, kill them, then drie them vpon hot flat, being thorough drie, bruiſe them to ſmal pouder, then put the pouder into a quarte of ſmall ale, & giue the ſicke to drinke, and he ſhall haue preſent remedie.
            
            
               A medicine for the paine of ſwelling in the ſtomacke.
               TAke a good quantitie of roſemary, flowers, boyle them in whit wine,

and as hot as may be ſuffered, applie it to the ſtomacke.
            
            
               An approued medicine for the ſpleene.
               TAke a quarte of claret wine, a pint of oyle of oliffe, two good handfulls of camamill being ſhred ſmall and boyle the wine and camamill together from a quarte to a pinte, and annoynt the hardnes of the ſpleene, morning and euening therewith, and it will diſſolue.
            
            
               A medicine for a fellon or and come.
               TAke Ruſtie bacon, and Colewort leaues ſtamp them together, then take a peece of dogges leather, being pricked full of holes, and ſpread it vpon the lether, laying it to the ſoare twice a day, and when it beginneth to heale, but once a day.
            
            
               
               A medicine for the ytch of the body.
               TAke ſweete butter, vnwrought waxe, vineger, brimſtone, a little Roſe water, red cloues hole, boyle them together, till they be like a ſalue, then annoynt the fleſh, three ſundry nights by the fire therewith, and no more.
            
            
               A medicine for the Canker in the body.
               TAke bollarmoniacke, roch allom, and hony, then beate them to pouder, take twiſe as much of the allom, as of the bollarmoniacke, and ſtirre them together, till they come to a ſalue, and ſo annoynt the ſoare.
            
            
               A medicine for the heate or ache in the body, or legges or elſe where.
               TAke red docke rootes, and take out the ouer pith and ſeeth them

in running water, then draw the water from them, and beate it with thick creame, and ſo annoynt the place that is greeued, or with a cloth dipped in the ſame, and layd ouer the place.
            
            
               A medicine good to clenſe the body.
               TAke bawme and lay it in white wine, till it be well ſteeped, and then diſtill it, the water thereof is good for any diſeaſe that is in the body, but you muſt diſtill the wine and all together, drinking a ſpoonefull or two in the morning, prooued.
            
            
               A medicine for a fiſtula.
               TAke veruon, and dry it vpon a tile, and make pouder thereof, & make cleane the ſoare with a linnen cloth, and fill the hole full of the pouder.
            
            
               A remedie for one that vometeth to much.
               TAke coliander ſeedes, fine beaten in powder and drink it with minte water.
            
            
               
               To make a ſcare cloth for all manner of aches.
               TAke a pound of vnwrought waxe, halfe a pound of roſin, two ounces of frankinſence, a pounde and halfe of ſheepes ſuet and boyle them altogether, and ſtraine them in a faire baſon, and then put them in a chafindiſh of coales, and dip a lynnen cloth therein, and ſo lay it to the ſoare.
            
            
               A medicine for a ring worme or Tetter.
               TAke red docke rootes, and ſlitte them, and lay them in vineger, and ſo waſh the ring worme or tetter.
            
            
               A medicine for the ſtich.
               TAke wheat flower, & bake a cake and cut it in the midſt, then ſtrike the dowe ſides all ouer with tarre,

and lay it to the patient as hotte as may be, you muſt lay the one halfe of the cake to the one ſide of the patiēt, the other halfe to the other ſide.
            
            
               A Poultis for all manner of ſwelling.
               TAke a lapfull of wilde Mallowes, and ſeeth them in running water till they be tender, and then ſwing them, and choppe them ſmall, then take a penyworth of ſweet butter, and the crummes of white bread, and put the mallowes and all into a quart of milke, and ſeeth it till it be thicke, and ſtirre it well, then lay it to the griefe as warme as can be ſuffered.
            
            
               A medicine for the Cough.
               TAke muſterd ſeeds and put it into figs, and ſeeth it in ale & drinke it.
            
            
               A medicine for the Mother.
               TAke Roſin and beate it very fine, and put into ſallet oyle and white

wine and drinke it, and it will doe you good.
            
            
               A medicine for the bloodie flixe.
               TAke the pilles of Pomegranut, beate them, and drinke them with redde wine, Morning and Euening blood warme, and heat a bricke red hotte, and lay it vnder a cloſe ſtoole, and caſt roſemary and malmeſey on it, and let the patient ſit ouer it.
            
            
               A very good medicine for the Piles.
               TAke the hard rowe of redde herring, and roſt it hard, then take the ſeedes of nettles, and beat them together ſmall, then beate them with barrowes greace, and boyle them together, and anoynt the piles therewith, then take a chafindiſh of coales, and ſet it vnder a cloſe ſtoole, and caſt a little Frankinſence thereon, and let the patient ſit ouer it when they bee

anoynted with the foreſaid ointment.
            
            
               A medicine for a burne.
               TAke oyle of Roſes and womans milke, and put it into the open place, and it will heale it.
            
            
               Another for the ſame.
               TAke a linnen cloth cleane waſht, and burne it, and make a powder thereof, and take the oyle of egges, and anoint the ſore, then ſtraw the powder thereon.
            
            
               A medicine for the dropſie.
               TAke Anny ſeeds, cotiander ſeeds, ſpignard of ſpaine, vſe this in your meate and drinke eight dayes together, and it will doe you good.
            
            
               A medicine to drie a ſore.
               TAke a pot of ſmiths water, a quarterne of roch Allom, halfe a pinte

of oyle of oliues, and put thereto a handfull of ſage and boyle them together till they be halfe conſumed, then vſe it to the ſoare, and it will drie it.
            
            
               A medicine for an ache that commeth againſt raigne.
               TAke the hornes of a ſtag, cut them in ſmall peeces, and boyle them in water, till it bee conſumed from a gallon to a quart, then poure the water from the bones, and it will gellie when it is cold, and therewith annoynt the greeued place againſt the fire, euening and morning.
            
            
               A medicine for a burne or ſcald
               TAke mallowes & ſmaleg, and ſeeth them in water, & whē they be tender, take them forth, & wring out the water cleane, chop them ſmall and ſet them on a chafindiſh of coales & put

to it a little ſheepes ſuet, and make of it a ſalue, and lay it to the ſore place thicke, and lay a cloth vpon it, and tye it on.
            
            
               A ſalue for any olde ſore.
               TAke the inner rind of an oake that is not very olde, and burne it to a coale, then quench it and make therof a powder, and temper it with the yolke of an egge, and make thereof a ſalue.
            
            
               To make a drinke for a burning Ague.
               TAke a quart of running water, and halfe a pint of vineger, halfe a quarter of a pinte of Roſe water, a quarter of a pound of Suger, and one ſticke of Cynamond, and boyle them all together, let it coole, and giue the ſicke to drinke.
            
            
               
               A medicine for the heate of the Liuer.
               TAke wort of the firſt tappe, and drinke it euery morning next your heart for a moneth together, and it will helpe you.
            
            
               A medicine to make a yong Child goe to ſtoole.
               TAke May butter, and chafe the Nauell therewith againſt the fire, then take ſome blacke wooll that groweth betweene a blacke ſheepes legges, and dip it in the May butter, and drie it, then lay it to the Nauell, it is good for an olde man alſo that cannot take no inward medicine.
            
            
               An approued medicine for the Nauell when it commeth out with crying.
               TAke waxe which is vſed no other way, but to take the hony from it, and when you haue an occaſion,

melt ſome of the waxe in a Saucer, and dippe blacke wooll in it, and lay it to the Nauell, and it will helpe it.
            
            
               A medicine for the ſwelling of a Childs coddes.
               TAke redde roſe leaues, and bray them, and boyle them in red wine an houre, then wette a cloth in it, and lay it to the childs nauell, as hotte as you can ſuffer it.
            
            
               A medicine to ſtaunch the flixe.
               TAke a ſaucer full of the iuyce of Milfoyle, & as much of the iuyce of plantine, and wheate flower, and temper it with the iuyce of the herbs and ſo make a cake of it, and bake it and eate it hotte.
            
            
               For to ſlaunch blood at the noſe, or at a veyne that is cutte, proued.
               TAke feathers burned to powder, and lay it vpon the vayne that is

cutte, and alſo take a wette cloth and lay it round about the members, and wette the cloth three times, and lay it to cold euery time, and it ſhall ſtench whereſoeuer it be, proued.
            
            
               For to helpe a drunken Man or Woman for euer.
               GIue him a purgation, and after that giue him a ſwallow to drinke in powder for the ſpace of twelue dayes, and for a moneths ſpace giue him euery day to eate iiij. Almonds with foure leaues of wood beaten, you muſt eate them in the morning next your heart, proued.
            
            
               For ſcabbes.
               TAke ſnayles and pricke them, and take the water that commeth out of them, & anoint the ſcabs therwith, & take vine leaues and bind them to the ſcabs, & do it euery morning and

euening, & you ſhalbe whole, proued.
            
            
               To drie Scabbes.
               TAke gumme-arabecke and put it in roſe water till it be conſumed, and waſh them therewith, proued.
            
            
               For the palſey or ſhaking in the hands.
               TAke Sell and Eyſill, & ſeeth them together, and waſh thy handes therewith, and eat ſage with muſterd faſting.
            
            
               To reſtore a man to nature that is in a conſumption.
               TAke the oldeſt Cocke you can get, ſcald him and draw him, and cut him all in pieces in a glaſſen pot, and ſtoppe him as faſt as you can, and put amongſt theſe pieces cloues, mace, ſmall reaſons, and ſalt, & then put this glaſſe into a great potte, and let all theſe ſeeth together till they be a gelly, and then ſtraine it into a

cleane veſſell, and giue it to the ſicke firſt and laſt, blood warme.
            
            
               To reſtore the braine.
               TAke powder of Bittany, and vſe it in your pottage, it will reſtore the braine and deſtroy the ſtone.
            
            
               For a perrilous Cough.
               TAke Sage, Rue, and Commin, and ſtampe them with pepper, ſeeth them together with hony, and thereof make an electuary, and vſe thereof a ſpoonefull Euening and Morning, and by the helpe of God it ſhall doe you good.
            
            
               For them that cannot ſee, and haue red eyes.
               TAke white vineger, and rub vpon a whetſtone in a faire baſon, and take as much ſalt as powder, and grinde them well together in a baſon,

and temper them with wine, and let it ſtand a day and a night, and put it in a violl of glaſſe, you muſt take the thinneſt that ſtandeth aboue in the baſon, and put in your glaſſe, and when the patient goeth to bed, take a fether and wet therein, and anoint your eyes.
            
            
               To annoynt the face and to make it white.
               TAke freſh Bacon greaſe, and the whites of egges, and ſtampe them together, and a little powder of bayes and annoynt your face therwith, and it will make it white.
            
            
               For a fayre face, proued another way.
               TAke Plantane and white vineger, and ſtill them together, and waſh your face therewith fifteene dayes, morning and euening, and after this, drinke a draught of vineger in the morning once in three dayes.
            
            
               
               To make the face white and faire.
               TAke Roſemary and boyle it in white wine, and waſh thy face therewith, and you ſhall be faire, then take Erigan, and ſtampe it, and take the iuyce thereof, and put it all together, & waſh thy face therwith, prob.
            
            
               To helpe the face with red pimples.
               TAke Bay berries and plucke off the huskes and make fine powder thereof, and temper it with hony, and annoynt thy face therewith ſixe times, and it will helpe you.
            
            
               To draw broken bones foorth of the head.
               TAke Bittany, Verueine, and Rue, and ſtampe them all together very ſmall, and put thereto Rye meale, or wheate, and the white of an egge, and make a plaſter and lay it to the head.
            
            
               
               To quench ones thirſt.
               TAke the roote of Louege, waſh it cleane, and ſtampe it, and temper it with water, and drinke a good draught of it fiue nights together, and drinke not in two houres after it.
            
            
               For one that ſpeaketh in his ſleepe.
               TAke Southernwood, and temper it with Wine, and let the diſeaſed drinke thereof in the morning, and when he goeth to bedde.
            
            
               For a woman that hath too much of her flowers.
               TAke the foote of a hare, and burne it to powder, and drinke thereof with red wine, and Cynamond firſt and laſt nine dayes, and it will helpe her.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   