
      
         
            
            
            THE LORD
COKE HIS
SPEECH AND
Charge.
            With a Discouerie of the Abuses
and Corruption of Officers.
            
            LONDON
Printed for Christopher Pursett, dwelling in Holborne
next Staple Inne at the signe of
Marie Magdalens Head 1607.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
Honourable the Earle of Exceter,
Kinght of the most Honorable order of the
Garter: and one of the Lordes of his Majesties
most Honorable priuie Counsel.
R. P. wisheth all encrease of Honor
and endlesse happinesse.
            
               MAy it please your Hon.
The obseruation which
this world begets, may
teach experience truly
to report, that Loue and
Charity are for the most
part growne so cold, euen
in the hotest Sun-shine of our Profession,
as that despised Pouertie, though addicted
to the Religious exercise of endeuors cōmendable,
is in the best employment (vvhich
seemes vvith greatest Fauor to smile vpon his
Hope) so coldly recompenced, as that poore
vnpitied deiected miserable Pouertie knowes
neither Meanes nor Place how or vvhere to
warme it selfe.
            
               Vnhappie I, in this best time of greatest
happines, who being as I am a Poore dispised,
hated, scorned, and vnrespected Souldier
so vnfortunate as no commended meanes,
though many vsed, with confirmation both
of loue and Loyaltie, can bee of power from
dispayers Gulfe, to raise a Spirit drowned, in
worst of misery: but were I not indeered
vnto those by heauen made mine, who are
indeed, to me, thē life, more deare from whō
there is no way to run, vnlesse in me, selfe being
be disolued, I would assueredly by heauens
assistance in some honest War with vse
of Armes, giue to my life so long as I should
liue, a liuing maintenance: but novv Immured
in my natiue home, vnseperably Yoakt
vvith leane-fac't pouertie. I haue experience
to conclude that as it is most certaine Pax
Procreat Bellum, so is it no lesse true, that a
confirmed Peace, Non amat Fillios belli, vntill
she hath need of them.
            In this estate no knovving hovv to mēd
my selfe, Religious Lavve shall make my resolution
honest, & though Rerum conditionem
mutare non possum, yet I vvill haue povver
to say Hoc possum magnum sumere animam et
viro forti dignum, vvith patience therefore

shal my grieued thoghts ioyfully be throvvn
vpō my makers prouidēce by vvhose assistance
I vvill still resolue vvith a constant Bosōe
to persist in the prosecution of commended
deeds, for this I knovv Spes mea, Christo
viuens, Est viuere vt semper viuam.
            
            And thus, my Honorable Lord, hauing
breathed forth a sight vnto the grace of your
compassionate respect: I humbly craue your
Honor vvill vouchsafe, to patronize in this
little booke (by me collected) not my ovvne
but the vvords of that reuerend and learned
Iudge, the Lord Coke, vvho at his coming to
Norwich, did at the Assises therevpon the
bench, deliuer a charge so exelent as that it
vvorthyly deserues to be continued in perpetuall
memorie, vvhich being thus prodused
to a publique vievv, I hope it shall vnto
our Publickeweale remaine a vvorthy persedent,
vvherein Romes champions may vvith
shame decerne their long continued shamefull
practices, Puritans & Sismatickes learne
to konvve vvith vvhat Iniustice they disturbe
the happinesse of our most happie
peace, our Iustices, inferior officers, Iurors,
and Commons generally, may in this
booke find out commended documents and
instructiōs profitable as vvel directing hovv

to gouern as to be gouerned: all which particulars
the learned Iudge hath wisely hādled
with such plausible Oratorical wisdomes eloquence,
as that vvhen I heard him speake, I
thought the Poet had iust cause to say, Prospera
lux orritur linguis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   animis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fauete; Nam
dicenda bono sunt bona verba die. If therfore in
this following worke my Memorie hath giuen
a true instruction to my pen, I hope my
labour shalbe accoūted profitable, vvhen it
administers a Publique benefit.
            Thus Right Hon. Earle, what I haue hereinto
performed, together with my most vnvvorthy
selfe, I humbly referre vnto your
Honoured wisdomes consideration, remaining
as I will alwayes rest,
            
               Your Honors in all humblenesse
of Dutie,
R. P.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Lord Coke,
the Preface to his Charge
giuen at the Assises houlden
in Norwich, the fourth of
August. 1606.
            
               BEcause I perceiue the time
hath more swiftly passed then
I did expect: my strife and
labour with my selfe, hath bin
in my selfe to abreuiate what
I purpose to speak. And thogh
my speech shall principally bee directed to you of
the Iurie, which are sworne: yet for that I know
the scope and summe of my endeuours are solely
dedicated to Gods glory and my countries publicke
benefit, I hope that all my words shall extend
vnto the generall good of all these here present;
vnto whom they are spoken. For I do purpose
in my course, as it were with a finger to point

out those growing and groning euils, which doe
not only for the preset time disturb & hurt our
Publique Weale, but doe also striue, and that
with a most dāgerous force to deface, ruin, & vtterly
subuert the Honors of our auncient name,
& our now Great Brittaines Monarchie. But
before the substance of my intended speech receiues
his purposed begining, I think it not amisse
first to begin with my selfe, and of my selfe to
speake thus much.
            There was a certaine young Romane, whose
youth so directed his labours, with industrious
care to attaine to knowledge by the reading and
study of good letters, as that the Senat of Rome
amongst thēselues determined to make that yong
man a Iudge: therby with honored reputatiō to recōpence
the trauels of his youth, & to giue encouragemēt
vnto other Romane Citizens by their
good endeuors to attain vnto like estate & credit
in the gouernment of Romes Publique Weale.
            
            It happened that shortly after the determinatiō
by the Consuls & Senat agreed vpō, the yōg
man vpon whō the place of a Iudge should be cōferred,
cōming vnto the knowledge therof, fell presētly
into a deepe cōsideratiō with himselfe about
the force & Office of that worthy place wherunto

he should be called. And first cōsidered that in his
owne opiniō, he was most vnfit: sufficitōly to execute
the subctantiall and somtimes dangerous
(though most cōmended duties) properly belōging
to so great a dignity. For this yong Roman hauing
many Friends, Kinsfolkes, & Allies, some
of thē of such Rancke & Place, in the authority
of gouernmēt, as that their loue or hate could not
aptly draw vnto it selfe a light or triuial respect
(amongst whō) this yoūg man thoght that cōming
to be a Iudge; time might vnhappely produce sōe
such occation wherin his sentēce, in the place of
Iudgemēt might giue distaste, procure enimies,
loose Friēds & gaine suspect of hatefull partialitie.
From which corrupt & most impoysoned euill,
thogh this yong Roman did neuer so much
desire, to stand cleared, yet Iudging amongst
Friends, & Kinsfolks, he should assuredly (as he
thought) by some detractors, be therof suspected.
            The Romaine Cittizen hauing thus vnto
himselfe presented diuers obstricles and Objections,
which could not in his owne sence receiue
sufficient contradiction, he resolued by no
meanes to take vpō him the Place & person of a
Iudge: but did vse all his Friendes and greatest
power of meanees to perswade the Senate, to
alter their determination concerning him and to

bestow so great an Office on some other, that
might more worthily deserue the same.
            Whilest this young man continued in a discontented
passion, with purpose to desire some good
aduice, he goeth vnto a faithfull friend of his,
whom he acquainted with what the Senate purposed,
and how loath he was to vndertake so high
an Office as to be a Iudge. His friend vpon hearing
the cause, presently concluded, that hee had
great reason to shun the execution of such an Office,
in the discharge whereof, so much danger rested.
For (said he) Caue ne sis Iudex inter Amicos
because inter Amicos Inditare, Amōgst
friends to iudge, is a thing nothing more dāgerous.
And therfore he cōstātly aduised, that in any wise
he should refuse such honor, though offered vnto
him: and rather be contented with a meane and
priuat life, then in such a place to be imployed: in
which he should assuredly loose old friends, and
get new enemies.
            This yong man (though thus by his friend aduised,
and in himselfe resolued neuer to take vpō
him any such, as he accounted dangerous dignitie)
yet whē he vnderstood, that the Senat would
not be altered in their purpose, but that by them
the place was decreed vnto him, he then determined

with himselfe, to trie the counsell of some other
friend, whose Iudgement and Experience
might beare some generall note, in directing the
high affaires to the State belonging. And in this
purpose he went vnto a certain Nobleman, whose
prudent wisdome had oft bin vsed in businesse of
most w
                  •
               ighty consequence: vnto whom, when he
had laid open his mind, shewed his griefe, and signified
the Senats pleasure. The noble Gentleman
with pleasant, yet graue alacritie of spirit (seasoned
with the soundnesse of a learned and vnderstanding
wisedome) did most powerfully aduise,
that this young man should cheerfully accept
so worthy an Office, being so freely bestowed
vpon him. And that he should by no means seeme
to neglect the gracious clemencie of supreme authoritie:
Nor in any sort account it dangerous
amongst friends to iudge: for in the Office and
execution of Iudgement, he that is a Iudge (Desinet
esse Amicus) ceaseth to be a friend: for in
the manner of iudgement, no acquaintance, no
griefes, no friends, no remembrance of fore-passed
present, or hope of future friendship must direst
the thoughts of him that is a Iudge. All that on
iudgements seat is done, must be, because Iustice
commaunds the doing thereof, and that with no

other affection, but onely because it is just. And
therefore said this Noble Gentleman vnto his
friend, arme thy selfe, in the constancie of a conscionable
vprightnes, and be noe longer loath to
execute the Honorable Office of a Iudge, but in
thy loue to Romes Common-wealth, dedicate
thy laboures to her publique benifit.
            By the graue and sage aduice of that Honored
Lord, this yong man was perswaded contrarie
to his former purpose, with humble thankfulnes
to accept that Office, which the Senate without
any meanes of his, was pleased freelie to bestowe
vpon him: and yet generallie made shewe
as if he ment the contrarie. and soddainlie preparing
a sumptuous Feast, vnto which he enuited
all his Friends, Kinsfolke, and familiar acquintance,
seeming that in regard he did rather
choose to leaue his Countrie, then to take vpon
him the Office of a Iudge: he had prouided a Bā
               quet
or Feast, to Banquet with his Friendes before
his departure: and in some solemne maner
would take leaue of them all. Who being, as they
thought, to this end assembled: did sorrowfully
expect the occation of their griefe, by the departure
of their friend, which when the yong man
perceiued, he spake thus vnto them.
            
               It is true that I purpose as I must, to take
my leaue of you all, and to be a stranger to my
dearest friends, and nearest Allies: I must forget
all former friendships, and my most familiar
Acquaintance, I must accompt as greatest strā
               gers
vnto me; Thus must I depart from you, &
yet continue amongst you, for by the loue, power
& authoritie of the Senate, I am appointed
to be a Iudge, and in the seate of Iustice, I must
forget the remembrance of your former friendships
and acquaintance, and onely in the person
of a Iudge, with respect to keepe my conscience
cleare, I must with equitie & vprightnes, iustly
administer iustice vnto you all. And this is my
cause, by the loue & fauour of my greatest maister
King Iames, in whose royall and gratious
disposition I am, (Sinè precationè, vel precatio,
without price or request, freely called vnto
this great Office, by the fauour of my King)
Vnto whose seruice, my life, and all I haue is
humbly bound, by him, and by his gratious
Clemency, I am thus sent to bee a Iudge amongst
my Kinlfolkes and familiar friends, euen
in bosome of my natiue Countrie.
            I must therefore as the young Romaine did,
take leaue of all former Acquaintance, & do

that which is iust vnto all Estates and Degrees,
without partialitie. Which dutie (by
Gods permission and assistance) I will faithfully
performe, so long as God and my King shall
please: that in this place I be employed in the
vprightnesse and equitie of Iudgement, shall
all my performance entirely consist. The contrarie
whereof shall (as I hope) neither
be desired nor expected. And thus
much for my selfe.
         
         
            
            ¶Here followeth the words of his
Charge in Order.
            
               AS concerning the manner and
Method of my charge, I will for
order and memorie sake, extract
or draw forth all that I purpose
to speake, from fiue words in his
Maiesties Commission contained:
the words are these; Quis,
Quibus, Quid, Quomodo, and de Quibus. Quis, from
whom the Commission commeth; Quibus, to whom
it is directed; Quid, what it concerneth; Quomodo,
how it ought to be executed; and de Quibus, of whō,
and of what causes, wee are to enquire by vertue of
the Commission vnto vs graunted: and this last, De
Quibus is of all the rest the greatest.
            As touching the first word, Quis, whom, or from
whom our Commission commeth, that is, from the
Imperiall Maiestie of Great Brittaines Monarchie,
our dread Lord, and Soueraigne, King
Iames, the lawfull Heyre vnto our Kingdomes
Throne: whose Princely Scepter is his proper
owne, by a most royall and lineall discent. It is his

Commission, by whose powerfull authoritie we are
now and at all times commaunded to doe him seruice:
for the awfull sway of his Soueraigne gouernment
doth, ought, and must inioyne all his subiects
to a due subiection and obedience; for he is ouer vs
the Lords annointed, and in these his Realmes and
Dominions, in all Causes, & ouer all Persons, as well
Ecclesiasticall as Ciuile, next vnder Christ Iesus our
supreame Gouernour. Vnto his Highnesse then let
our liues submission bend; let our faiths loyaltie dedicate
it selfe vnto his vertues praise: and for the long
continuance of his Maiesties most happie, powerfull,
and victorious Rule, let all good subiects
pray.
            Now that I haue spoken from whom our Commission
commeth, the next word which doth direct
my worke is, Quibus, To whom it is directed, that is,
To vs his Maiesties Iustices of Assise, to whome by
vertue of the Kings Commission is giuen such power,
as that in the administration of Iustice wee doe
represent the person of our King: So as if in the time
of the Assises one shall strike another in the presence
of the Iudge, be it no more then a blow on the eare,
the Law prouideth, That the offendor shall loose his
hand, wherewith hee gaue the stroake, because
the offence was done as in the presence of the
Prince: For the Law hath so much care to protect
the person of a Iudge: As that if a Iustice of Assisc
shall happen by any in his Circuit to be slaine, the
Law adiudgeth it to bee Lese Crimen Maiestatis,
An offence done against the Maiestie of the King,

and is punishable, as in cause of Treason.
            To shew the worthinesse of our Place and Office,
you shall vnderstand, That the Kings Maiestie
at his Coronation is sworne to doe Iustice vnto all
his Subiects, which in his owne Person it is impossible
to performe. And therfore his Highnesse is constrayned
by his Ministers, Deputies, Iustices, and
Iudges, to administer Iustice vnto all his people.
Men therefore (in such place employed) ought with
wonderous care, and conscionable diligence to discharge
the trust in them reposed: for vnto them, and
into their hands, is (as it were) deliuered the Kinges
owne Oath; because, what he is sworne vnto, must
be by them in his behalfe performed. See then the
dignitie of Iustices and Iudges of Assises, Assignauimus
vos Iusticiaries nostros, We haue assigned you
our Iustices, that you may administer Iustice vnto
our Subiects. Thus by the Kings Commission the
Kings owne Oath is put into our hands: and at
this instant (in the place and person of a Iudge) my
Soueraignes Oath into my hand is put: I (though
his vnworthie Subiect) am by his gracious clemencie
Authorized (as in his owne Person) according
to his owne Oath, to administer Iustice vnto you
his Subiects: Which dutie (by Gods assistance) as
I haue vowed, I will faithfully performe: For if any
(with a Kings Oath trusted) shall bee so vilde, as
to falsifie their trust, such offence is more then Capitall.
            The Place of a Iudge then, the greater that it is,
so much the more should their care bee, to discharge

the same, vpon whom so weighty an Office and Honorable
Authoritie is bestowed.
            From whom our Commission commeth, and to
whom it is directed, hath bin briefely specified: I will
now proceed, and shew out of this word Quid, what
is in the Commission contained. Briefely therefore, it is
that bounded limit, in which solely doth consist the
strength of our authoritie; beyond which compasse
we are commaunded not to passe: For it appointeth
vnto vs the Iustices of Assises, what it is that wee
must execute, as well in causes betwixt partie and
partie, as also the King and partie depending. So as
wee are not onely to heare, judge, and determine,
such Causes of Controuersie, as shall by Writ
of Nisi prius bee tryed, but also to examine, acquit,
or condemue all such Prisoners, as shall for any offence
against his Maiestie bee brought before vs, to
receiue their Trayall. So that by vertue of our Commission
wee haue authoritie, as in the person of our
Soueraigne, to judge in causes, that doe concerne the
life and death of the Subiect.
            That our Commission then is very Large,
Ample, and Absolute, contayning in it selfe a
powerfull Authoritie, may by your selues bee judged.
And to the end, that Iustice may by vs receyue
the more full sound and perfect Execution,
Our Commission, when it hath largely described
vnto vs what wee may doe therein, it then
most sweetely doth Appoint, Limit, and Commaund.
            What manner of dooing wee must vse in those

thinges appointed to bee done, so that it dooth not
onely giue vnto vs authoritie, what to execute, but
dooth also lay downe vnto vs the manner how our
Authoritie must bee executed, and to the vnderstanding
hereof, my next word Quomodo doth direct
it selfe.
            Wee then, the Iustices of Assises and Gaole-Deliuerie,
are by his Maiestie appointed to administer
Iustice vnto his Subiects; but Quomodo,
how, not according to our owne Will, Conceit,
or Opinion, but Secundum Legem & Consuetudinem
Maneriae Anglicanae, According to the
Lawe, Custome, and Manner of England:
Which Lawe, Custome, and Manner must bee
executed with Knowledge, Iudgement, Vnderstanding,
and Equitie. For wee must know our
selues, and Place wherein wee are: Wee must
Knowe and Vnderstand each cause before vs
brought, and according to our Knowledge and
Vnderstanding, wee must vprightly Iudge, according
to Equitie, without (in the least sort) beeing
drawne, by respecting eyther Person or Profite,
to beare a Partiall Hand in the Execution of
Iudgement.
            Partialitie in a Iudge, is a Turpitude, which
doth soyle and stayne all the Actions done by
him. A Iudge that will bee Partiall, will receiue
a Bribe, and such an one cannot by any
meanes bee just, in his manner of Iudging.
Brybes, and Partiall dealying dooth defile the
Puritie of Iustice, with great suspected Euill:

For a Iudge, if but in some things he be knowne to
take a Bribe, or be approoued Partiall, he leaueth no
one Action done by him, free from the like suspect.
A Iudge that for a Bribe will speake, and but once
execute a Iustice purchased, all his words & Actions
for euer after may justly bee suspected, though neuer
so vprightly done or spoken.
            A Iudge must vprightly, with an equall and indifferent
eare and minde fully heare and vnderstand
each cause before hee judgeth; otherwise, it is not
possible that justice should bee justly executed: And
to judge in a point of difference, hearing but one partie
speake, is assuredly to be vnjust; for this sentence
is directly true: Qui Indicat causam parte inaudita
altera, Aequū licet, Statuat, Iudex iniquus est: Who
judgeth a cause for the one partie, not hearing the other,
though what he doth, may stand to be vpright,
yet is the Iudge vnjust.
            Our auncient Fathers did in their Pictures and
Emblemes oftentimes enclose a very great and substantiall
wisedome: Iustice (as you know) vseth euer
to bee painted with a Sword in the one hand, and a
paire of Scales or Ballance in the other; thereby signifying,
That Iustice neuer strikes her Stroke, till
first the cause be weighed in the Ballance; her Blow
comes not, vntil the weight of the Cause to be tried,
hath by an vpright hand equally receiued sufficient
triall: for then she knoweth rightly how to strike her
stroke, and not before: when the glory of her dignity
shall receiue perfectious Honor, as wel by protecting
the Good, as in punishing the Bad.
            
               Mee thinkes, that oftentimes when I ryde by the
way, I see the Effects of Iustice rightlie resembled,
when I behold a Riuer with a siluer currant, bounded
in her equall course, with what just proportion shee
doth disperse her streames, without bewraying any
little rage of intemperate violence. But if the passage
of that streame bee stopt; then how like a raging
Sea, shee ouer-flowes her banckes: and that
then by an vnresisted force, the Meadowes, humble
Vallies, weake and low growne Shrubs are drowned
vp; enduring a recure-lesse wracke, whilest
Hilles & Mountaines stand safe from feare of harme.
Euen so it fareth with vs: The equall course of Iustice
being stayed, the poore & meaner sort of people they
are ouerwhelmed with wrongs oppression, whilest
great and wealthy men, like Hilles and Mountaines,
buyld their Stations sure, being freed from any cause
of griefe: Iustice with-held, only the poorer sort are
those that smart for it.
            
               Iustice vnto all estates doth measure an euen proportion
to rich and poore, her met-wand keepes an
equall length, being sealed with the testimonie of an
vpright conscience. To Kings, Rulers, Iudges, and
Magistrates, this sentence is proper Vos Dijestis; you
are Gods on earth: when by your execution of Iustice
and Iudgement, the God of heauen is by your
actiōs represented: but if by vs, that so are called Gods,
Iustice and Iudgement be peruerted; it will be heauy
for our soules, when we shall dye like men.
            Briefly, the office of a Iudge, is patiently to heare
each party speake soberly; to answere or object, directly;

to see (as neere as may bee possible) each
truth substantially prooued: And then to Iudge
with an vpright heart according to Iustice and Equitie:
Neuer in any one thing preferring Conclusion,
before a conscionable, wise, and judiciall Consideration.
In which vprightnesse, the execution of Iustice
vsed by the Right Honourable (my most worthie
Predecessor) in this place shall be an Example, which
I will desire to follow.
            Of all the Morall vertues, Iustice (Queene-like)
is enthroned: for vnto her onely is a Throne ascribed,
because her Execution doth neerest represent
Heauens eternall Deitie. Iustice and Mercie
are inseparable Vertues; Mercie and Iudgement, as
it was Righteous King Dauids, and lately our good
Queenes, heauenly Elizabeth: so it is nowe vertuous
King Iames his Song, in whose princely breast
Mercie and Iudgement are most gloriously vnited.
And to the end, that I his Subiect, and in his
place his Substitute, and you his Subiects may execute
Iustice as wee ought, I will nowe out of my
last word, de Quibus, declare vnto you, of whom,
and of what Causes wee are to enquire, that Iustice
and Iudgement may thereby receiue a more
cleare and powerfull Execution.
            Those then of whome wee are in the first place
to enquire, are such, by whome our King is most
disobeyed, his State disturbed, and Kingdomes
threatened: Whereof (if you consider) it will be
euident, That all those growing and desperate attempting
euils, by which, wee are most prowdly

menaced and Aflicted, doe principally proceed
from three sorts of Recusants liuing amongst vs.
Of all which, the Popish Recusant is the most
dangerous with our English Romanists will I
therefore at the first begin, and in the discription
of their Actions and practises, I doe desire that
my wordes may bee entertained with your best
Attention.
            Our Worldes Admired Queene Renowned
Elizabeth, did (as you know) in the beginning
of her Raigne, change the State of Religion in
this Kingdome in her first Parlament, by the
consent of her Lordes Spirituall and Temporall,
being especially by the Lord of Heauen directed,
Error, Popish blindnesse, and Faithlesse
Constitutions grounded vpon Humaine Traditions
were extinct. And Religions Puritie according
to the Law of Faith, was Reestablished,
being built vpon the vnremoued foundation,
of the alone Autenticke word Canonicall. The
bookes of the old and newe Testament, from
the trueth whereof, shee did alwayes direct the
course of her so happie and Tryumphant Gouernment.
            Notwithstanding, the Change of Religion,
it cannot bee denyed. That for the first tenne
yeeres, of her Maiesties Raigne, the estate of Romaine
Catholique in England was Tollerable,
though some were Committed in the beginning
of her Cōming to the Crowne, yet none
but those whose precedent Actions, had caused

the faith of their Allegience to remaine doubtfull,
and so was the manner of their commitment
mixed with such gratious Clemencie. As
that they rather endured a fauourable restraint,
then any straight or rigorous imprisonment, But
aswell those so restrayned, as generally all the Papists
in this Kingdome, not any of them did refuse
to come to our Church, and yeeld their formall
Obedience to the Lawes Established. And
thus they all Continued, not any one refusing to
Come to our Churches, during the first tenne
yeeres of her Maiesties gouernment. And in the
beginning of the eleuenth yeere of her Raigne,
Cornewallyes, Beddingfield and Silyarde were the
first Recusants They absolutely refusing to come
to our Churches. And vntill they in that sort began
the name of Recusant, was neuer heard of amongst
vs.
            In the beginning of the eleuenth yeere, when
three Recusants, were onely in this Kingdome to
bee found. In the same yeere, Pope Impius, though
abusiuely surnamed Pius Quintus, his Hellishnes
was informed by some of our English Iesuits, that
such was the number of Romaine Catholiques here
in England, as that if his Horriblenesse would denounce
an Excommunication against the Queene
there was in this Realme and Kingdome, a power
Catholical which would presently vpon an instant
be in redinesse, to enter into open hostilitie with
force sufficient to depose, and vtterly to supplant

her Highnes; and to reestablish the Romaine faith.
            
               Pope Impius of that name the firste, vpon the
Information specified the better to seuer his hope
in his good meaning to this Kingdome, presently
plotteth with the King of Spaine for asuddaine Inuasion
vpon the present Excommunication of
the Queene. And to this end one Robert Rodulphy
a gentleman of Florence, was sent by the Pope,
vnder colour of Marchandize, to sollicit a Rebellion
amongst vs. And gaue order vnto him for
the receiuing of one hundred and fiftie thousand
Crownes, to set forward this Attempt. And Phillip
King of Spaine, by the instance of the Pope, had
determined to send the Duke of A
                     •
                  lna into England,
with all his forces in the Low Countries To
Assist some great men amongst vs, who were by
the Pope Sollicited, to be the principall Agents in
a most Rebellious enterprise, vnto whome some
of the one hundred, and fiftie Thousand Crowns
was deliuered, and some other part sent into Scotland
for the like effect.
            Thus as you haue heard euen at the same time,
when her Maiesty the late Queene, delt most mercifully
with the Papists, did the Pope with them
conspire to worke her Ruyne, & this Kingdomes
Ouerthrowe, secretly complaning how on sodaine
they might bring vpon vs Distructions,
Spoyle, and generall Desolatton, when our then
Soueraigne that Queene of Vertue, knowing
Shee had diserued no such euill, did not in the
least sort suspect any such danger.
            
               The Pope hauing as he thought surely Established
the foundation of his hopes; Hee then Denounced
the Excōmunication against the Queene
which was not vnto her selfe made knowne, vntill
the intended Rebellion in the North brake forth,
a little before Christmas, in the yeere 1569, being
the twelfth yeere of her Highnesse Raigne. And
then it was knowne, that the Pope had Excommunicated
her Maiestie. And thereby freed her
Subiects as the Bull imported, from their Subiection
and Obedience. But God was pleased that
the Popes Bull was so Bayted, as that the Rebellion
by it procured, was sodainly suppressed; For
the Pope whose labour is to defend Lies, was himselfe
deceiued with a lie, for the strength of the
Papists here not being such as hee was enformed,
The true harted Protestants taking parte with
the Soueraigne, did quickly Cutt the Throats of
our English Romaines, dryuing some of the heads
of that Rebellion, vnto a shamefull flight, and
brought the rest by our Lawes Iustice, to a shamefull
death.
            Her Maiestie in the thirteenth yeere of her
Raigne, hauing made the Law before specified,
the very next yeere following, out Commeth
Sanders Booke de Visibili Monarchya, wherein he
plainely seteth downe how the Pope had sent one
Morton and Web, two Priests before the said Rebellion
to the Lords & Gentlemen in the North,
to Excite them, with their followers, to take vp
Armes, signifying vnto them the Popes Commandement:

Alleadging, That her Maiestie being excommunicated,
Her Subiects were released from
their Obedience. And therefore he doth Directly
Iustifie the sayd Commotion. Ascribing the euill
successe thereof to the late publishing of
the saide Excommunication. Because it was
not generally knowne, vntill the yeere after it
was Denounced. VVhen Felton had set it vpon
the Bishop of Londons gate. Affyrming that if it
had bin published the yeere before, or when the
Rebells were in Armes, they had assuredly preuailed
against the Queene, and executed the saide.
Sentence at the same time, for her deposinge
from the Crowne.
            Thus Trayterously with more then Brazen
Insolence, did that Traytor Sanders spitt
out his poysoned venim. Thereby desiring to
Corrupt the hearts of her highnes Subiects, and
to make them fit for a newe Rebellion, which
course by him takē, was Immitated by Parsons, &
many others to the like effect. Who ceased not
by there Hereticall and Lying Pamphlits, with
most Trayterous impudencie, to abuse her Maiestie
and the State. And not thus contented, in
the yeere one thousand fiue hundred seuentie
and nine, Stukely assisted by Sanders, and other
Catholiques, both English, Irish, and Italian, with
the Popes Commission, entred into Ireland. The
Pope himselfe, in the furtherance of that Course
sending thither certaine forces vpon his owne
Charge, Whilest all that time, her Maiestie that

               Queene of mercie was so farre from being moued,
as that with Patience, shee endured all
these Iniuries, onely inforcing that one Lawe,
which as you haue heard, shee most Iustly made
against them.
            Whilest Ireland by the Popes procurement
remained in Combustion. It happened that, Pius
Quintus dyed, and Gregorie the thirteenth succeeded
in his place, who presently Reneweth
his Predecessors former Bull, and denounced
her Maiestie to bee Excommunicated, with Intimation
of all other particulers in the former
Bull mentioned, which done, there was by
him sent ouer into England▪ Campion and Parsons,
they came vnto vs in the yeere one
thousand fiue hundred and eightie, there comming
was to Alienate the hearts of her Maiesties
Subiects, from their due obedience. And
to make a partie strong to depose the Queene,
Ioyning with the Pope, and King of Spaine, by
whome there was then an intended preparation
against vs. But the Attempts and practises of
them both at that instant fayling in England.
The Pope as a Temporall Prince, displayeth his
Banner in Ireland, with purpose to depriue her
Highnes. First from that Kingdome, and then
by degrees to depose her from this. Notwithstanding
so mild was the proceedings of her Maiestie
against them, as that there were in the space
of Tenne yeers, not much aboue twelue persons,

that were by the Iustice of her Lawes adiudged to
die, and the most of them Semenaries, and all of
them Conuicted in causes of Treason.
            Her Maiestie when shee heard of the second
Excommunication, and had seene what followed
in her Kingdome vpon the first. Shee was then
in all Christian Pollecie enioyned to preuenr the
successe of dangers imminent. Her Highnesse
therefore, in the yeere one thousand fiue hundred
eightie and one, caused a Proclamation to bee
made for the calling home of her Subiects from
beyond the Seas, such especially as were Trayned
vp in the Seminaries, perceiuing that they
learned nothing there but disloyaltie, & Treason.
And presently after this her Proclamation, shee
called a Parliament, wherein a Lawe was agreeable
in effect to the sayd Proclamation, enforced
with a penaltie of death, for any Ies
                     •
                  ite or Seminary
Priest, to repayre into England, and for any
to receiue or intertaine them, shee would willingly
that those of such profession, should keep themselues
without the Lymits of her Kingdome.
            But if against her will, they would come into
her Land to sow the seed of Sedition, and Rebellion
amongst her Subiects, and to lay, their plots
how to supprize her life, and to make a way
for Forraigne Enemies with bloodie handes to
enter vppon her Dominions. And by Hostill
Inuasion to bring her Kingdomes to distructition,

and to expose her people vnto the Slarie
of a seruile yoake, What shoulde her Maiestie
lesse haue done in the preuention of
such a Lamentable euill, but to hang vp them
that were the principall Actors in so bloodie
and Tragecall a Tyranny.
            From the yeere eighty one, to eightie eight,
her Maiestie was not free from Continual Traiterous
and Rebellious practises, desperately attempted
against her life, or intended subuertion of her
Kingdome. First the Popes forces being ouerthrowne
in Ireland, the Pope and King of Spaine,
presently ioyned with the Duke of Guise, for the
executing of a most desperate disignment against
her Maiestie. Arden and Someruilde, would
haue layd vyolent handes vpon her sacred person.
Dostor Parrie, intended the like villanie. Northumberland
reuolted from his Obediēce. Mendoza
the Iesuite, and others of that Crue or Sect,
appointed by the Pope to order and Mannage
these deuelish designments.
            In the yeare eightie, to forerunne the purposed
Spanish Inuasion, against which time Campion,
Parsons, Haywoode, and all the Iesuites and Seminaries,
had so besturred themselues. There is
certaine bookes printed beyond the Seas, sent
ouer into England, therby to prepare the hearts of
our people, to Ioyne with Spaine, and to take vp
Armes against their Soueraigne, with perswasions

grounded vpon this position. Viz. That in all warres
which may happen for Religion: euery Catholike man is
ioyned in conscience to imploy his person and forces by
the Popes direction, that is, how far, when, where, & how
either at home or abroad, he may and must breake with
his temporall Soueraigne, and that vpon paine of deadly
sinne. Vpon a foundation so diabolical: What fruits
other then diuellish can be expected? And yet, do
but further note how damnable a spirit is in their
bookes and writings bewrayed.
            All the Papists in this kingdome, were most violently
perswaded, that vpon the Spanish inuasion,
they should all ioyne their greatest force with
Spaine. It was in them accounted an error of conscience,
want of courage, and effeminate dastardie,
that they had suffered her Maiestie almost thirtie
yeares to raigne ouer them. They were threatned
with Excommunication, and vtter ruine, both of
themselues and their posteritie, if they did any longer
obey and defend, or acknowledge her highnes
to be their Queene or superior, and did not foorthwith
ioyne their forces to the Spaniards. And to
the end, that this most godlesse, trayterous, inhumane
and vnnaturall appointment, by subiects to
their lawfull annointed Soueraigne, and natiue
countrey, might receiue the better acceptance;
There was vsed a most insinuating, though faithlesse
manner of perswasion, guilded ouer with a seeming
shewe of Holinesse: (For thus,) our English
Romane Catholikes were promised) That in the king of
Spaines armie, there were diuerse Priests readie to serue

euerie mans spirituall necessitie, by confession, counsell,
and all consolation in Christ Iesus, and that they should
be so assisted by the blessed patrons, both in heauen,
and in earth, with the gard of all Gods holy Angels, with
our blessed Sauiour in the soueraigne Sacrament, and
with the dailye, most holy Oblation of Christs owne
deare body and bloud. As that it could not fall out
otherwise, but that they should assuredly preuaile:
Hereby may the world perceiue in what Angelike
manner of brightnesse Popish doctrine can suite
treasons damnable, euen as blacke as hell.
            You haue heard what preparation was prouided
by the Pope and Papists, for the furtherance of
Spaines intended inuasion, we will now proceed
to matter of action. And but call to our remembrance
(that euer to bee remembred) powerfull
wo
                  •
               ke of God:) for our deliuerance in the yeare
88. The king of Spanes Armado, that admirable, and
warlike nauie, so well furnished with valiant souldiers,
and all munition fit for warre, when suddenly
we were in danger by a Potent enemie to be surprised,
when her late Maiesties Royall Nauie, was
scar
                  •
               ly put foorth to sea. And the best ships of
strength not fully furnished with shot and powder,
as was necessatie in so weightie a businesse:
yet to the neuer dying glory of a maiden Queene,
such was her princely power, although at sea but
in part' vnprouided, as that by the loue and grace
of heauens eternall prouidence, her Maiestie by
a most noble Battell at sea, euen in the presence
of her kingdoms Territories, did vtterly disperse and

ouerthrow, that surnamed inuincible Spanish nauie,
so that not any Spaniards floate, (vnlesse
brought captiue could arriue) vpon her Englands
shoare. Nor but verie few of their so much admired
fleete of shippes, returned to their natiue
home. Thus did God on Queene Elizabeth bestow
a glorious victorie, euen in the despite of
Pope, Papist, trayterous Iesuits, Seminaries,
Monkes, Friers, and all the rablement of that Antichristian
See.
            The power of Spaine, was brought against vs,
by the procurement of our English Papists, and
what recompence was intended for them, in the
charitie of their catholike profession may appeare,
by that which the Duke of Medina Sidonia affirmed,
which was, That both Catholickes and Heretikes
that came in his way, should be all one to him, his
sword could not discerne them, so he might make
way for his maister, all was one to him. Thus did▪
Papists, as still they doe, desire to worke our
downe fall in the certaintie of their owne destruction.
            God hauing shewed his loue to our late Queene
and kingdome, by that wonderfull deliuerance
before described: The Pope to further his
accustomed indeuours, practised with Spaine,
about a new inuasion, and the better to bring
his purpose to passe: Parsons, that auncient
Iesuite, and most notorious traytor, vnder the
Pope, chiefe gouernour of all the Iesuits, (principall
enemies to Iesus,) was placed in the

               Spanish Court, by whose perswasion there was a
new Seminarie erected at Valedolyde, from whence
in three yeares, there was sent thirteene priests into
England, to prepare a passage for the new intended
inuasion. Whereupon in the yeare 1591. a
Proclamation went forth for the apprehending of
all such Priests or Seminaries, as should come from
Spaine. Because their intention was knowne vnto
the State here. But to the end the Diuell (the Pope
I should say) might want no instruments for the effecting
of murthers, treasons, and rebellions, by
Parsons procurement, more Seminaries were erected
in Spaine, (and England still troubled with
Romes trayterous disciples.) But the new inuasion
being twise set on foote, God did so warre against
their purposes, as that their prepared Nauie was at
sea, dispersed by stormes, so as most of them endured
shipwracke.
            That expectation failing, then was the Infant of
Spaine intituled to the Crowne of England: (and
to that end, sundry bookes diuulged) Queene Elizabeth
was by them accounted a tyrant: more tyrannicall
then Nero, Decius, Dioclesian, Maxentius, or
any the greatest persecutors of the Christians: Not
thus contented, from the yeare 88. to the yeare 99.
there were continuall treasons practised against the
Royall person of her late Maiestie, Patricke, Collen,
Lopez, Yorke, VVilliams, Squier, all attempting to
murther her Highnesse.
            All these attempts, plots, proiects, & trayterous
stratagems, taking no effect. Then was there from

the Pope a new Bull sent, whereby the Papists were
commanded to vse a formall maner of obedience,
vntill they might grow to be a strength sufficiently
strong to depose the Queene. Which expectation
once accomplished, then had they power by the
sayd Bull to take vp armes against her. Thus they
neuer left continuall practising, vntill a little before
her Maiesties death: about which time, by
some of the principall Agents, in the last most horrible
treason, there was complotted another Spanish
inuasion: For the accomplishing whereof,
the yonger VVinter was a messenger vnto the king
of Spaine, and Guydo Fawkes vnto the Pope, and a
third was imployed to the Archduke.
            The king of Spaine at that time being our enemie,
entertained VVinters motion, with most kind
acceptance, protesting that the English Catholiks
should bee as deare vnto him, as his home-borne
Castillians, and in loue to the intended businesse,
vowed in the word of a king, to defend their safety,
(all which, as souldiers say) with pollicie in warre
he might do) being then our enemie. But it is a
matter cleane out of my Element, and therefore I
will dispute no further about it: But the Counsell
of Spaine holding a conference about the mannaging
of the plot by VVinter layd. It was obiected
that there would be want of horse for such a businesse.
Whereupon Winter vndertaketh to furnish
them with a certaine number, and receiueth gold
to that end. At last the purposed designement being
embraced with a generall consent, a souldier

standing by, being some Commander, a Captaine,
or such like, ruffles out this souldier like Latine,
Nunc tempus pro nobis erit aliquid obtinere: Now shall
it be time for vs to get something. But in the middest
of this intended preparation, it happened, that her
Maiestie Royall, and most gracious Elizabeth died:
And our now Imperiall Soueraigne King Iames,
did both inherite her kingdomes and her vertues.
            His Majestie beeing with peace established in
his royall seate, the king of Spaine would no longer
embrace his former purposed appointment:
Nor would consent, that any thing should against
a king be plotted, with whom he neuer had warre:
Nor by whom he neuer receiued any iniurie. So
as our Papists were in that behalfe dismissed of
their expected hope: and enforced to seeke out
some other meanes; and now I will bewray
a secret (I am sure not generally knowne.)
In the discourse whereof I doe desire attention.
            Pope Clement the ninth, who was accounted
the last best of many Popes, (all notwithanding
being naught.) He vnderstanding Spaines purpose,
as before is specified, concerning an inuasion, supposing
that the Queene might die before that businesse
tooke effect: And foreseeing vnto whom
these kingdomes should of right descend, sent secretly
a Bull into England, which was so closely
concealed, amongst our Papistes here, as
that her Maiestie in her life time knewe not

thereof. (For if she had) I am sure, that by reasō of
mine employment neare vnto her: I should haue
heard if she had knowne any such thing▪ But assuredly
both her selfe, and the State, were ignorant
therof.
            
               But now this Bull being brought to light (which
my selfe haue seen & read) it importeth thus much▪
               
quādo contingeret illam miserimā Elizabethā mortuā
esse That when that miserable wench Elisabeth should
happen to dye, Tunc nos volumus, Then we will, that all
and euery of you, do vse your best & vttermost endeuors
quibuscunque modis et vi
                  •
               s, by what strength or meanes
so euer, to keepe out the Scottish Hereticke, that in any
wise he may not be admitted to the kingdome of England,
vnlesse he would reconcile himselfe to Rome,
and hold his crowne of the Pope, and conforme himselfe
and all his subiects to the religion of the Romane
Church. This Bull vntil Garnet was taken, slept in
England, beeing filled with a most proud, scornfull
and Trayterous boldnesse.
            
            When that miserimam foeminam Miserable woman
or wench Elizabeth shall dye, had the Papall
proud vsurper, no other attribute to bestowe
vppon a Queene then Miserable wench? shee liued
Renowned thorough all the Corners of the
worlde, shee ruled in peace, beloued of all her Subiects,
vnlesse those infected with the Romane Leprosie,
shee was admired, & feared, co
                  •
               fre
                  ••
               ing all oppositions,
with vndoubted confidence, shee was a
Prince potent enough, to defend her Kingdomes
and to helpe her Neighbours beeing oppressed

with glorious victorie she beat Spaine from off her
coasts, and rifled him in the bosome of his owne
kingdome, wrapping his townes and shippes in
cloudes of fire and smoake. She swayed the Royall
Scepter of her kingdomes, gouernement with triumphant
victorie; maintaining peace ámongst her
people, euen in the worlds despight, 44 yeares her
vnmatched wisedome, and vnconquered prowes
crowned her the Peerelesse wonder of her sexe: she
liu'd and di'd a Queene, her life beloued, and her
death lamented: And yet for all this, was she no
more in the Popes account, then a miserable wench.
Let the Popes pride sinke to hell: whilest heauens
Elizabeth (whose blessed soule from earth to heauen
is taken) doth, and shall with God and Christ
for euer liue in the heauenly glorie of eternall happinesse.
            Pope Clement the ninth, hauing by his Bull, as
before specified, giuen commaundement that the
Papists should by all meanes howsoeuer, withhold
our now Soueraigne from his lawfull right. (And
notwithstanding that Rebellious Commission,) his
Maiestie being with great ioy peaceably enstalled.
Peersie & Catesby went vnto their great Prouinciall
Garnet, & of him enquired, whether the king being
as he was alreadie established, they might by vertue
of the Popes Bull, vse any meanes to supplant or
depose him, considering they were not of force to
withstand his comming at the first. And Garnet
answered, that vndoubtedly they might, whereuppon
they presently resolued to put in execution,

that most horrible powder treason, the like whereof,
vntill that time, was neuer to the world reported.
            Some are of opinion, that if a tolleration of religion
had bin admitted vnto the Papists: that then
no such bloudie stratagem should by any of them
haue bene practised. But if you shall consider the
tenor of the Popes Bull, you may then perceiue,
that their request of indifferent Tolleration was
but a colourable pretence in them. For that might
not haue serued their turnes: For they were enioyned
to worke his Maiesties ouerthrow, vnlesse he
would reconcile himselfe to Rome, hold his Crowne
of the Pope, and conforme himselfe and all his subiects
to the Religion of the Roman Church: It is not
then a toleration only which they seeke, nor could
they haue bene contented therewith (although so
much shall neuer be granted vnto them.) They may
therefore easily despaire of the rest (though they
the Pope and the Diuell) doe neuer so much conspire
to bring their Hell-borne practises to passe.
            As touching the last horred treason, by inhuman
sauages complotted: I know not what to speake,
because I want words, to describe the trayterous,
detestable, tyrannicall, bloudie, murtherous villanie
of so vilde an action. Onely this had their
horrible attempt taken place. This Sea-Inuyrond-Iland,
the beauty, and wonder of the world.
This so famous and farre renowm'd great Brittaines
Monarchie, had at one blowe endured a
recouerlesse ruine, being ouerwhelmed in a sea of

bloud, all those euils, should haue at one instant
happened, which would haue made this happiest
kingdome of all kingdomes, the most vnhappy.
Our conquering Nation, conquered in her selfe:
her faire and fertile bosome, beeing by her owne
natiue (though foule vnaturall children) torne in
peeces, should haue beene made a scorne to all
the nations of the earth. This so well planted,
pleasant, fruitfull worlds, accounted Edens paradise,
should haue beene by this time, made a place disconsolate,
auast and desert wildernesse, generally
ouerrunne with heards of bloud-desiring wolues.
This so well gouern'd, Populous, potent Monarchy,
had in one moment beene left without either
King, Queene, Prince, State, Nobility, Law, Iustice, or
any strength of gouernment, sodainly had we then
beene throwne not onely to the cruelty of ciuill
warre, that too too murtherous Domestick spoyling
enemie: But also euen in that instant generally
haue beene exposed vnto the all-deuouring hand
of forraine Enemies, in our Congregations, the
songs of Syon had no more been sung: But in their
steed had bin brought vnto vs the songs of Gehenna
sēt from Rome: that Sathans synagogue, all our best-freedomes
liberty, had by this bene turn'd into the
worst bondage of most slauish seruitude: Papists,
Romane Catholickes that would haue wrought all
our destructions thus; Should not Iustice, iustly
then commaund their actions chiefly to be enquired
of.
            If what hath bene spoken, be vnto your memories

committed, you may then consider, that from
the eleuenth yeare of Queene Elizabeths Raigne,
vntill the third yeare of our now Soueraignes
gouernment, the Papists haue continually labored
to aduance the supremacy of the Romane Church,
which to accomplish they haue contended thirty
foure yeares, in which time they haue not omitted
to practise Treasons and Rebellions onely amongst
vs here at home. But haue also complotted to
bring vpon vs Forraine Inuasions, & that from time
to time, so soone as they were dismissed of one
hope, they presently set a foote some other proiect:
both at home and abroad: and still being by
the loue and mercy of GOD towards vs continually
preuented: At last, taking counsell with
hell, and Sathan, they had practised a most hellish
attempt. wherein their Diuellishnesse brought it
selfe nearest to the nature of the Diuell, making
fire and brimstone the instruments of our destruction.
And though the principall Actors of that
euill, haue thereby themselues destroyed: yet the
former experience of their continuall attempting
may giue vs warning, that they will not yet sease
to attempt, and though that Iesuites and Seminaries
haue beene the principall Agents in all the
seuerall complotted treasons, and that the Papists
amongst vs cannot generally be accused, yet thus
much I must say, those persons, and that Religion
whereby Iesuites and Seminaries are receiued, protected
and concealed, are equally to be accounted
daungerous, for were there not such receiuers amongst

vs, Romes state, Traytors would not so fast
come, swymming from Tyber hither, to arriue at
Tyborne, onely, I conclude therefore, that if in
great Brittaine, there were no Papists, this Monarchy
should be as free from treason as any Nation in
the world.
            But now deare Contrimen, seeing you haue
heard what godlesse and dangerous practises haue
continually by Romes fauorites beene plotted against
vs. I desire that with attention you will vnderstand
what it is (as they say) for which with
such vehemency they contend. The world is
made belieue, that the aduancement of Religion
is the onely cause for which they striue, wherein
they ioyne themselues vnto the Pope, because there
is no religion good, but that which is by the Pope
allowed, wherein my purpose is to binde all Papists
vnto their owne assertion.
            That Pius Quintus whome those of their side
doe account to haue beene a good Pope (though
by false perswasions too much misled) before the
time of his excommunication against Queene Elizabeth
denounced, sent his letter vnto her Maiestie,
in which hee did allow the Bible, and
Booke of diuine seruice, as it is now vsed amongst
vs, to bee authenticke, and not repugnant to
truth. But that therein was contayned enough
necessary to saluation, (though there was not
in it, so much as might conueniently bee) and
that hee would also allowe it vnto vs, without
chaunging any parte: so as her Maiestie would

acknowledge to receiue it from him the Pope,
(and by his allowanc) which her Maiestie denying
to do, she was then presently by the same Pope excommunicated:
And this is the truth concerning
Pope Pius Quintus, as I haue faith to God and
men, as I haue oftētimes heard it auowed by the late
Queene her owne wordes: And I haue conferred
with some Lordes that were of greatest reckoning
in the State, who had seene and read the letter,
which the Pope sent to that effect: as haue bene by
me specified. And this vpon my credit, as I am an
honestman, is most true.
            By this then all our English Papistes, either Iesuites
or Seminaries may learne to knowe that it is
not Religion that they striue for, but onely to
maintaine the Antichristian head of Romes vsurpt
supremacie. And if there bee in this presence any
Romane Catholickes, or so manie of this nation,
as shall heare of that which hath now beene spoken.
I entreate them, as my deare and louing
Countrey men, that they will no longer bee seduced,
by any liuing spirite sent from Rome, the Pope,
whom they beleeue, hath himselfe allowed, that
in our Church, VVe haue a doctrine of Faith and
Religion, sufficiently necessarie to Saluation: Deere
Countreymen, wee haue then enough, and
neede not the helpe of anie Pope, Sythence all
the Papistes generally came vnto our Churches
before our late Queene Elizabeth was excommunicated.)
Against our Dread Soueraigne there is no
Excommunication denounced. In Gods name,

then let vs ioyne in our prayers, and Sacraments,
and persorme a due obedience to God, and to our
King, as wee are all of one Nation, so let vs be all
of one Church, and christ beeing onely our head, let
vs all desire as in one sheepfolde, to be the sanctified
members of his glorious bodie.
            If there be any Papists so foolish, and altogether
reasonlesse, as to expect that in time his Maiestie
may be drawne to such alteration, or Tolleration:
as they desire. I will them assuredly to know, they
hope in vaine, for his Maiestie is, and euer hath
beene confidently resolued, in matter of Religion, to
continue the selfe same order and profession,
which he now professeth. Whereof I will giue
you an instance, Since the time of the Earle of
Northumberlands Imprisonment, there was amongst
his papers found a letter, which was obiected against
him in Starre Chamber, when himselfe was
called vnto his answere: The letter was directed to
the Kings Maiesty, that now is, as he was then King
of Scotland. In which amongst other things, the
Earle had aduised his Highnesse not to desire to bee
proclaimed Heire apparant to this Crowne, nor
proclaime Prince Henry to be the Prince of VVales,
But to stay the time, vntill the Queenes death. And
that then he would resolue at his comming to admit
vnto the Catholicks a Tolleration for their religion,
which he requested, because the Papists did
put some trust in him, to Sollicit that businesse in
their behalfe. This letter beeing read, his Maiesties
owne answer was shewed: (Till that time, by Gods

owne hand preserued) to signifie vnto the world'
his religious vnremoued confidence. To the first
parte of the Earles letter, his Highnesse answered,
that he had no contrary purpose, but to attend
Gods leasure. And for his motion concerning the
Catholicks tolleration, he was purposed to come vnto
this kingdome in peace. But as touching matter
of Gouernment, he was resolued neuer to alter
anything, either in Church or State. His Maiesties
most noble and Kingly resolution, not enduring
then to temporize vnder any pretext of humane
pollicy. Can it now be thought, that his Highnes
will be remoued in matter of Religion, from that
Station whereupon his Soules saluation standeth
built.
            Such Papists (as notwithstanding the impossibility
of their hope will still remaine peruerse) despising
to be admonished: Let them know for certainty,
that the lawes concerning them, shall receiue
a most strict and seuere execution, you therfore
of the iury, ought to be very carefull in that
businesse. And all the iustices in their seuerall Limits,
are in their allegiance to the King, bound in
conscience to vse all diligence so to obserue the
Papists, as that vnto their houses, there bee not any
lesuites or Seminaries intertayned. For there practise,
is to Alienate the hearts of our English Subects,
from the obedience to their soueraigne. In
which imployment, though the Iesuites bee most
notorious, yet I account the Seminarie Priests more
dangerous; Because their estimation stealeth to it

selfe a better opinion in the hearts of the simple.
Notwithstanding, all their worke is directed to
one and the selfe same end; If all good subiects
then shall desire the administration of Iustice, according
to the Lawes established: they may either
be conuerted or supplanted. By whome our subuersion,
and vtter supplanting hath so often times
beene attempted. I therefore leaue them, their actions
and proceedings to be iudged off, and carefullie
to be lookt into, by your most mature consideration
and best diligence, least that our too too
much conueniencie, doth yet vntimely bring vppon
vs some dangerous mischiefe. Them and their
actions therfore are principally in the first place to
be enquired of, and that with such regard as their
cunning may be no meanes outreach the meaning
of the Statute Law inacted for their punishment,
wherin though there be as much concluded, as the
wisedome of our state could deuise, in the preuention
of any future euill, yet as I heare, the Pope
hath already granted such dispensation, as that by
their hellish, Sophistrie, of Equiuocating, they may
take a course wherein to deceiue our hope of there
amendment, but in Gods name let the law prouided,
receiue a iust and faithfull execution, & then
doubt not, but their faithlesse Popish policie shall
be sufficiently preuented. And that in time the
most sacred person of Gods anointed King, whome
Pope Clement the ninth, cold proudly dare to tearm
the scottish Heritike, shall vnderneath his Princely
foot tread downe Romes faithlesse Papall proud

and Antichristian heresy, & now in hells despight,
vertuous King Iames being the Emperiall Maiesty of
great Brittaines Monarchy, the strength of whose establisht
awfull gouernment, makes the proudest
Territories & most strong foundation of earths Babilonde
to shake, I doubt not but in his royall selfe
and his most blest posterity, as is already by force
of his commaunding power, not without iust cause
fearfully suspected, the destruction of the scarlet
whore shall be made certaine to her, and her adulterates,
when they together shall bee with wrath
destroyed for the accōplishing of which most glorious
worke, let all true beleeuing protestants, like
faithfull subiects to their lawfull Soueraigne yeelde
there best obedience to his highnesse lawes, and
thus much concerning Romane Catholikes.
            
            Those that you are in the second place to enquier
of, are a second manner of Recusants, though nothing
so dangerous as the Popish recusant is, yet are
they a Sect not to be tollerated in any Monarchyall
gouernment. They are a certaine Brotherhood,
which can indure no Bishops: The originall founder
of their schisme, as they now professe, it hath (as
some of them say) turnd an Apostate, to his first
profession, so as now they are ashamed of his
name, and will by no meanes in their fraternity be
deriued from him, yet they remaine knowne to the
world, by the name of Brownings. The most part of
them are simple, & Illiterate people. And they together
with those of that sorte, which seeme to haue
learning, are as all the rest, onely arrogant, and

wilfully peruerse, fitter to be reformed by punishment,
rather then by argument: And though their
ignorance vnderstands not what they doe, yet
doe their endeauours striue to shake in sunder the
whole frame of our Emperiall gouernment, for if
(as they desire) the forme of our Ciuill Lawes were
abrogated, Then should our Common Law, and
it of necessity fall togither. For they are so wouen
and incorporated each in other, as that without
the one, the other cannot stand: for example.
            An action Reall, beeing brought at common
Law, in Bar thereof Bastardy is pleaded, our common
Law can then proceed no further, vntill by
the ciuill Law the matter of Bastardy be determinned,
So is it in the right of a Womans Dowre, and
in the tryall of VVills; In all these, and diuerse others
without the Assistance of the ciuill Law, the
comon Law hath no power to determine. If then the
ciuill Law must of necessity remain, it is no lesse necessary
that the iudges therof should be continued.
            And againe without the graue assembly of our
Reuerend Bishops, his Maiesties high court of parliament,
should be vnfurnished, no law being there
enacted, but that which is by the King, his Lords
spirituall and temporall confirmed. These therefore
that would haue no Bishops amongst vs, do in
their desires striue, from his highnes, and the dignity
of his State, to pluck the right hand of gouernment,
and as much as in them lyeth to break
in sunder, the golden frame of iust Authority for
if no Bishops, then no Lawes, if no Lawes, no King;
               
and to this height doth their presumption clime, although
their ideot blindnes seems as if they did not
vnderstand so much, the mischiefe of their schisme
is most vnsufferable: For neuer was there a nation
knowne to flourish hauing a Monarchie in the kingdome,
and a Mallachie in the Church. And therfore
you of the Iurie faile not to enquire of all such Sectaries
and present them.
            It is therefore the faith full Protestant, that only
sets the Crowne vpō our Soueraignes head, & holds
it vp so fast, as no opposition can make it shake.
And by their loyall hands will Heauen bepleased, to
keep it safe from falling, which Mercy in the most
Royall issue now established, God for christs his sake
cōfirme vnto vs, so long as Sun & Moon endureth.
            The last sort of Recusants, though trouble some,
(yet in my conscience the least dangerous) are those
which do with too much violence, contend against
some ceremonies vsed in the Church, with whose
indirect proceedings, in mine owne knowledge,
his Maiestie is not a little grieued. But I will hope
(as his Highnesse doth) that in time, they will grow
wise enough to leaue their foolishnesse, and consider
that ceremonies not against the Analogie
of Faith, nor hindring Faiths deuotion, are no such
bug-beares as should scar them from the exercises
of diuine duties, nor cause them to disturbe the
peace of our Church, whose gouernment is more
consonant to Scripture then all the best reformed
Churches at this day in the world. You of the
Iurie faile not therefore to enquire of their abuses,

which doe delay to conforme themselues vnto the
lawes obedience, that such of them as doe growe
insolent, may not goe vnpunished: And thus much
concerning our three sorts of Recusants.
            
            Thus hauing touched these groning euills,
which beeing well considered, doe cry for iustice against
themselues, threatning (if not suppresse) To
make our Commōwealth to grone vnder the burthē
of inforc'd calamity. I will now, from them proceed
vnto those growing enormities, whose vngouernd
height is already to such imperfectiō grown,
as that the iustice of this kingdomes gouernment,
receiueth scandall by their meanes, and the publick
weale grieued by vniust oppression.
            I heare a generall complaint against the multiplicity
of Ecclesiasticall Courts, and that causes
are in them continued longer then an vpright and
orderly proceeding would necessarily inforce, by
meanes wherof, his Maiesties good subiects, do receiue
losse, and are much hindred, by there so often
constrayned attendance. But in this Diocesse,
I hope the occasion of any such complaints, shall
no more be heard of, Because I speake before those
reuerned Magistrates,The L. Bishop and the Chancellour of that dioces being then present vpon the bench. in whose authority consisteth
sufficient power to reforme those abuses already
complained vpon, I will therfore insist no further,
few words content the wise, what I haue
spoken, I know is heard by an approued wisedome.
            As touching the pennall Statutes for the punishing
of any vnreuerent demeanure in Churches,

or violence offered to the ministers, or quarrelling
stryking, or drawing of any weapon in Church, or
Church yard, I know they be ordynary matters,
giuen in euery charge. And therfore you are not
ignorant of the Lawes in that case made and prouided:
I will therfore in respect of the shortnesse
of the time, onely point out vnto you some seuerall
officers, whose actions not beeing sufficiently
looked into, many abuses are committed, which do
passe vnpunished.
            Our common wealth, Receiues much iniurie
by our Escheators, who by abusing their cōmission,
doe most intollerable wrong, to many of his Maiesties
good Subiects, for an Escheator will come
into the country, and beeing informed of an honest
Yeoman deceased, be it that his Lands, be not
aboue the yearly value of forty or fiftie Pounds, &
leauing an Heire behind him, an inquiry shall bee
made, by what euidence euery acre of ground is
holden, and finding but one peece, for which an
expresse euidence cannot bee shewed, for that particular
parcell, Then by a Iury to that end Summoned
by the Escheator, that peece of groūd must
be adiudged to be held in Capite. And so an office
beeing found: all the whole inheritance must bee
taynted, and the yong heire a warde to the King,
who then beeing presently Begged by some one
or other, by then hee hath compounded for his
wardship, sued out his liuery, and then perhaps
marryed to one starke naught, or not worth any

thing, the yong heire shall bee left iust worth so
much, and no more: And this (as I thinke) is a most
lamentable thing. God forbid that euery man
should be inforced by such course, to proue his
right in euery particular acre of ground which he
hath. For many particular peeces are oft included
in one euidence, without being distinguished by
seuerall names. So that it is impossible, but by
such course, as the Escheator takes, lands that neuer
held in Capite, must needs be brought in compasse
of such Tenure. And againe, the intent of the Law,
for the benefit of the king, looketh only to Manors,
Lands, and Tenements of great value, without hauing
respect to such petty things. Where an heire
to cleare the incumbrance, must ouerthrow his estate,
loose his inheritance, and be vndone for euer.
But this notwithstanding, so the Escheator may
haue his part, in the spoile, he careth not to vse any
indirect corruption. You of the Iurie therefore
for the good of your selues and yours, carefully
looke to the proceedings vsed in this case, and such
abuse as you shall find therein, let it be presented.
And such as shall bee found offendors, they shall
know, that we haue lawes to punish them. For
proofe whereof, I would you could find out some,
of whom there might be made an example: But if
you will be content to let the Escheator alone, and
not looke vnto his actions, he will bee contented
by deceiuing you, to change his name, taking vnto
himselfe the two last syllables, only with the Es left
out: and so turne Chetor.
            
            
               We haue then an excellent Officer, surnamed
the Clarke of the Market, concerning whose office,
for mine owne part, I see not the necessitie
thereof, considering the Iustices of peace in their
seuerall limmits, are at euery Sessions to enquire
of, and to punishall those abuses which are by the
Clarke of the market continued, vnder shew of reformation.
For he will come downe and call before
him all waights and measures, and where a
fault is found, there must a Fee be payd, which is
deuided betwixt him and the Informer: So the offendor
payes for his offence, to the end it might be
continued, but not reformed. And thus the Clarke
of the market by receiuing bribes, enricheth himselfe,
by abusing his Maiesties lawes, and wronging
his Subiects. It was once my hap to take a Clarke
of the market in these trickes: But I aduanst him
higher then his fathers sonne; by so much as from
the ground to the toppe of the Pillorie. If you
of the Iurie will therefore haue a care to find out
these abuses, by Gods grace they shall not goe
vnpunished. For we haue a Coyfe, which signifies
a Scull: whereby in the execution of Iustice, wee
are defended against all oppositions, bee they neuer
so violent.
            There is a certaine ruffling officer, which will
seeme to command much by the authoritie of his
Cōmission. And he wilbe known to be a Purueyor.
Some of which officers, if they can find nothing to
be dealing with, they will puruey mony out of your
purses: if you will suffer them. But know there is no

mony to be purueyed, vnlesse by the high way side,
and any Purueyor that shall take such course, is but
in his passage, the high way to the gallowes.
            
            But to speake of that, which may by them bee
lawfully done, admit a Puruey or commeth downe
with Commission, to take vp timber for the Kings
vse; What timber is it then that he must take: He
cannot come and pull downe any timber in my
house, what then? May he go into any of my woods
which I purpose to preserue, and there marke out
of my best timber, and inforce me to suffer it to be
felled, and carried away at the kings price? No,
There is not any such authoritie granted vnto him.
But only thus, If I haue any timber felled, which I
purpose to sell: then may the Purueyor (the King
hauing vse of timber) come and make choise of
what trees he will: For there is great reason, that
in such case the king should first be serued. But if
any of you do desire to preserue your timber growing,
be not scared with a Purueyors warrant:
Nor do not preserue the standing of your trees, by
bribing any one of them. The dignitie of his Maiesties
prerogatiue Royall is not vsed to enforce his
subiects to indure wrong. But the rust being scoured
off, which abused time, hath cast vpon it, then
will the glorie thereof shine in the perfection of an
vncorrupted brightnesse. You of the Iury therefore
looke into the abuses done by Purueyors, and present
them.
            Besides these spoken of. There is also a Salt-peter
man, whose Commission is not to breake vp any

mans house or ground without leaue. And not to
deale with any house, but such as is vnused for any
necessarie imployment by the owner. And not to
digge in any place without leauing it smooth and
leuell: in such case as he found it. This Salt-peter
man vnder shew of his authoritie, though being no
more then is specified, will make plaine and simple
people beleeue, that hee will without their leaue,
breake vp the floore of their dwelling house, vnlesse
they will compound with him to the contrary. Any
such fellow, if you can meete withall, let his misdemenor
be presented, that he may be taught better
to vnderstand his office: For by their abuse the
countrey is oftent times troubled.
            There is another trouble some fellowe called a
Concealer, who is indeed little better then a plaine
Cosiner, and would in many things be proued so,
if well looked vnto. There by many Satute lawes to
preuent the occurrence of his mischiefe, giue him
not a peny for any of his claimes or titles: For they
are meere illusions, and like himselfe not worth any
thing.
            There be 4 sorts of people, whom if you obserue,
you shall find not any of them to thriue. I haue alwayes
known them little better then beggers, and
may easily be knowne by these names. A Concealer,
of whom I haue spoken: vnto whom is rightly
ioyned a Promo
                     •
                  ter, a Monopolitan, and an Alcumist:
The Promooter is both a begger and a knaue,
and may, if well looked vnto, in the part of an Informer,
(For many abuses) by your information, either

be well punished or reformed. Their Office, I
confesse, is necessarie: And yet it seldome happeneth,
that an honest man is imployed therein: yet
there is some hope, that by punishing their abuses,
they may at the last bee made honest against their
wils. In which imployment, you of the Iurie shall
do well to vse a respectiue diligence.
            As touching the Monopolitane, hee for the most
part vseth at a deare rate to pay for his foolishnes:
For some of that profession, haue bene so wise, to
sell twentie, thirtie, or perhaps fortie pound land a
yeare, and bestow most part of the money in purchasing
of a Monopolie: Thereby to anoy and hinder
the whole Publicke VVeale for his owne priuat benefit:
In which course he so well thriueth, as that by
toyling some short time, either in Starch, Vineger,
or Aquauitae, he doth in the end thereby purchase
to himselfe an absolute beggerie, and for my owne
part, their purposes and practises considered, I can
wish vnto them no better happinesse.
            But then our golden Foole the Alcumist, he will
be striuing to make Gold and Siluer, vntill he
leaues himselfe not worth a pennies weight in either
of both. I will not deny, but to vnderstand the
nature, quintessence, & spirit of the Minerals, out of
them to extract a Metaphisicall and Paracelsian manner
of Physicke, may according to art becommendable,
but by the studie of Alcumie, to desire to
turne imperfect mettals into Gold and Siluer, such
labour I account ridiculous: And oftentimes by
those of this C
                     •
                  micall Science is Fellony comitted:

For by any imperfect commixture, to vse multiplication,
either in Gold or Siluer, is directly Fellonie
by Statute Law: you of the Iurie are therefore
to enquire of such offendors, and present them.
            Because I must hast vnto an end, I wil request that
you will carefully put in execution the Statute against
Vagarants: Since the making whereof, I haue
found fewer theeues, and the Gaole lesse pestered
then before.
            The abuse of Stage players, wherewith I find the
Countrey much troubled, may easily be reformed:
They hauing no Commission to play in any place
without leaue: And therefore, if by your willingnesse
they be not entertained you may soone be rid
of them.
            You are also concerning Innes and Alehouses diligently
to obserue what the Statute Lawe determineth.
As also to keep the orders set down by my honorable
predecessor, concerning which, there is now
by the appointment of the Lords of the Counsel, certaine
Briefes to be deliuered vnto all the Iustices in
their seuerall Limmits. And assuredly, if you of the
Iurie, pettie Constables, Chiefe Constables, and Iustices
of Peace, would together labour that the Lawes
carefully Enacted for our good, might receiue a
a due and iust execution, abuses would then bee reformed,
God and our King faithfully serued and honored.
And the tranquillitie of our Publicke weale
preserued: which so great happinesse, that it may
the better be accomplished, I would request, that
all imployed in any place of authoritie, would haue
an speciall care to suppresse that root of euill, from

whence all mischiefs do proceed, and that is Idlenes:
For idle persons are those of whome the Psalme
speaketh, They doe wickedly all the day long, they imagine
wickednesse vpon their beds, the imaginations of
their hearts are euill continually, and such for the most
part are all those, giuen ouer to an idle disposition:
who by their wickednes do make themselues worse
then beasts: For, Homo malus infinitis modis plura
mala perpetrauerit quam bestia, an euils man by an infinit
manner committeth more euill then a beast. For the
reformation of which dangerous euill: you shall do
well to haue an especiall eie vnto the company that
frequent Tauerns, Innes, Alehouses, Bewling allies,
and such like thriftlesse places of resort, where you
shall find Tradesmen, and Artificers,, which haue
no other meanes whereby to liue, then onely the
lawfull vse of their Science, or Manuall profession.
And yet such is their vnthriftie idlenesse, as they
will spend their time and labors profit, at some, or
all the places before recited: whilest their wiues
and children sit at home and weepe, wanting necessarie
maintenance: Those of such condition, let
them be enquired of and presented: For were the
Iustice of the Lawe rightly executed vppon such
offendors (they receiuing condigne punishment
for their offence) would be inforced to betake them
selues vnto a better course of life, and liue as becometh
good Subiects in the list of a more commended
obedience.
            Of that idle company, you shall also finde some
of our accounted Gallants young Gentlemen, vpstarts,

perhaps honest yeomens sonnes, that by their
intemperate Ryote, loue to spend their inheritance
before they come to inherit, and being questioned
for their chargeable and expensiue manner of liuing,
they will brauely answer that they spend nothing
but their owne: And will seeme as if they
scorn'd to be reformed by admonition or authority.
The law prouideth a course whereby to teach such
vain & idle royoters so to spend, that they may keepe
their own: For when by their misdemenor all their
owne is spent; Then their next course is to liue
vpon the goods of others: and then at last, such
Gallants turning starke theeues, do make their last
period at the Gallowes, reaping to themselues, by
an vntimely death, the fruit of idlenesse.
            There is also a sort of idle seeming Gentlemen,
whom if you do obserue, you shall find them walking
with a gray-hound in a slip, or a birding peece
vpon their necke, and they forsooth will make a
path ouer the Statute Lawe, and into any mans
Groundes, Lordshippes, or Liberties, passe and repasse
at their pleasure: As if it were lawfull for euerie
Fellow to keepe a Graye-hound, and to hunt,
when and where he listeth, or as if a birding peece
were no Gunne, and so not included in the Statute
made against Gunnes.
            
            But if you would finde out those Fellowes, and
present them, they shall be taught to knowe themselues:
And that the wisedome of a Kingdomes state,
in the framing of a Statute Law, could not be deluded
by a vaine and shallow brain'd idlenesse of their

ridiculous Foolery. Let them be therfore punished
whose misdemenor in this case offendeth.
            The better to preuent the Ryotous expence of vnthriftie
idlenesse, you shall do well to haue a speciall
care vnto the Statute for Apparell, by the neglect
whereof too much abuse is nourished.
            As touching all the abuses last recited, haue great
respect to punish one abuse, in which all our idle
Gallants and disordered disolutes do desire to swim,
vntill themselues, and their whole estate do sinke, in
the Slymie dregs of Swinelike drunkennes, to drunkards
therefore haue especiall heed, you know the Lawe
prouideth for their punishmēt, & were such offendors
duly presented, Indited, Fined, & imprisoned, they may
by such good meanes be in time haply refined from
that contagious euill, their continuall amisse, beeing
continually with Iustice punished, to the vtter suppressing
of such vild occasion: From whence as frō
               Hels mouth flames forth, Ryoats, murthers, man-slaughters,
quarrels, fightings, whoredemes, and presumptuous
blasphemies, all proceeding from that sinke of sin,
in whose sick healths is dronke the bodies Surfiting,
and the Soules damnation. In this, as in all the rest of
the abuses specified, vse your best indeauors for the
furtherance of a setled Reformation, according to
the Lawes established: For you must know, that Vita
&, vigor Iuris, in execucione consistit, The life and
strength of the Laws, consisteth in the execution of them:
For in vaine are iust lawes Inacted, if not iustly
executed.
            And now my louing Countrey men, because I
would that all which I haue spoken, may receiue

a profitable remembrance. I will thus conclude,
Similes and Comparisons doe best confirme our vnderstanding:
and do fastest cleaue vnto the memorie;
my conclusion therefore, shall consist vpon
this one Similitude.
            
            There was a certain man, who hauing a great account
to make vnto a mightie King, made triall of
his best Friends, that might accompany him, in that
dangerous iourney, and not forsake him vntill his
account were made. This man vpon his Inquisition
found one friend that would go with him a great
part of the way, but then forsake him. And that
was his (Riches.) Some other Friends he found
that would goe with him vntill he came in sight of
the Kings pallace, but then they would also leaue
him and beare him company no further, all these
Friends were his wife and children, that would
follow him to his graue. But at last, he found one
Friend that would go with him into the presence
of the King, and not forsake him, vntill he had seene
his account made, and for euer beare the greatest
part with him, either in woe, or happinesse, and
this Friend was his Conscience; Deare Countrymen
betwixt God and your Consciences therefore, make
your peace, for he is the King, vnto whom all of vs
must make a strickt account of all our actions done▪
This then considered, such would be our care, as
God and our King should be obeyed, and our peace
in this life, and in the world to come preserued.
Vnto which eternall grace be we
all in Iesus Christ committed.
            FINIS.
         
      
   