
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A prooued practiſe for all young Chirurgians, concerning burnings with Gunpowder, and woundes made with Gunſhot, Sword, Halbard, Pyke, Launce, or ſuch other.
                  
                  Wherein, is deliuered with all faithfulneſſe, not onely the true receipts of ſuch Medicines as ſhall make them bolde, but alſo ſundry familiar examples, ſuch, as may leade them as it were by the hand, to the doyng of the lyke.
                  Heereto is adioyned a Treatiſe of the French or Spaniſh Pockes, Written by Iohn Almenar, a Spaniſh Phyſition.
                  
                  
                     Alſo, a commodious collection of Aphoriſmes both Engliſh and Latin, taken out of an old written coppy.
                  
                  Publiſhed for the benefyte of his Countrey, by Wylliam Clowes, Mayſter in Chirurgery.
                  
                     ❧
                     ❧
                     ❧
                  
                  
                     Seene, and allowed, according to the order appoynted.
                  ¶ Printed by Thomas Orwyn, for Thomas Cadman. 1588.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To all true profeſſors of Chirurgery in generall whereſoeuer, Wylliam Clowes, wiſheth all happineſſe, with much increaſe of knowledge, and after this life, the moſt ioyfull and bleſſed life euerlaſting. Amen.
                  
                     I Haue followed the examples of many excellent learned men, which in times paſt did vſually dedicate theyr paynefull labours and trauels, according to the worthines thereof, ſome to Kings, ſome to Queenes, Princes, Nobles, and other great perſonages, partly as teſtimonies of their owne vowed affection and duty toward ſuch worthyes, and partly, as petitioners for protection to their labours vnder their happy patronage: who were therefore as fortreſſes of defence to ſupport them againſt ſuch, as then (and the like whereof we want not at this day) lay ſnarling, and ſcornefully prying into other mens doings, to blemiſh and deface the ſame as much as in their power conſiſted. In which reſpect, it was moſt truely ſayd of a learned man, that he may be called a very good Cooke, that is able to make one ſawce to ſerue euery mans taſte. Or that man may be called a moſt perfect and rare man, whoſe works being publiſhed to the viewe of all men, can pleaſe euery mans humor, eſpecially in theſe dayes, wherin, are ſo many daynty cares, and ſo many queaſy ſtomacks, with no want of rayling toongs, which Horatius Morus, in his Epiſtle to Ierome Comfort, Doctor of Phyſicke, declareth, ſaying: Is there any thing ſo
                     
                     ſounde, or ſo paſsing well handled, which can eſcape the venemous tongues of ſuch as would ſting Homer himſelfe, if he were liuing at this day? Wherfore my louing brethren and freends, (I meane none but you that are the true profeſſors of Chirurgery) vnto you do I moſt willingly offer theſe my ſimple labours and trauels, as heeretofore I haue done, hoping alſo you will as willingly receiue it into your good Patronage, and to defend it with your friendly ſupportation, and that is all I craue: and that you will accept of it, as did King Artaxerxes the cup of cold water at the hands of poore ſilly Sinaetes. Then, as for the intemperate eares of the malitious ſort, who make no difference between good and bad, or truth from falſehood: yet I truſt, they ſhall do me no more diſcredit nor hurt, then had Prometheus of Theſſalia, who receiued by the Sword of his mortall enemy, a great wound in his breſt, for a full purpoſe and determination of his death thereby, but contrary to expectation, the ſame did cure Prometheus of a feſtered ſore, which before did greeuouſly trouble him, ſo the hand that meant to hurt, did heale, and the wicked determination of an ill digeſted minde, yet contrary to his expectation, had a good and happy ende, no more hurt (I hope) nor no leſſe good, ſhall my enemies toongs, neither hands procure vnto me.
                  And now my friends and Brethren, to whome I ſo willingly dedicate theſe my labours, vnderſtand you, that my preſent purpoſe, through Gods aſsiſtance, is to deliuer, for the benefit of all young practizers of Chirurgery, certayne obſeruations and notes of ſome ſpeciall cures, by my ſelfe accompliſhed, with diuers needfull and neceſſary remedyes, prooued moſt profitable,

not onely for burning with Gunpowder, but alſo for woundes made with Gunſhot, Sword, Daggar, Harbard, Pike, or Launce, all which, I haue gathered out of diuers learned Authors, and by my ſelfe augmented with an addition alſo of a moſt excellent learned Worke, written by Iohn Almaner, a Spaniſh Phyſition, that doth intreate of the French Diſeaſe. Which Treatiſe, was deliuered me by a good freend and a well willer, vnto all the young practizers of Chirurgery, for whoſe ſakes he Tranſlated the ſame out of Latine into Engliſh, and required me to publiſh it foorthwith: the which, (courteous Reader,) I haue moſt faythfully ſet downe, and adioyned it vnto theſe mine obſeruations, with certayne Aphoriſmes both in Engliſh and Latine, very profitable for all young Students which are deſirous of learning and knowledge.
                  In which diſcourſes, if I haue ſlipped or ouerſhot my ſelfe in my penning, I craue pardon, for I knowe, I ſhall make a rude perfourmance of a good meaning, the which I commit in the end to thy conſideration, and my ſelfe to thy courteſy.
                  
                     
                        Vale, in Christo, Wylliam Clowes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Good men are not forbidden to hope for Honor for theyr vertue, ſith both are the bleſsings of GOD.
                  
                  
                     
                        blazon or coat of arms
                     
                  
                  
                     But ſome whoſe mindes, a World will not ſuffice,
                     As Caeſars raigne, and others doe deſpiſe:
                     And ſuch I ſay oft ſpeake vs faire in face,
                     Yet worke the ſpite mens credits to diſgrace.
                     Which done, full fine, as foes they will you skorne
                     With open wrongs, which are not to be borne.
                     But I conclude, let ſuch ſay more or leſſe,
                     Nothing ſhall ſtand, but what Gods hand doth bleſſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Epiſtle to the Reader.
                  
                     SInce I finiſhed my laſt Booke, intituled, De morbo gallico, the which I preſented vnto all the true profeſſors of Chirurgerie, in Anno 1585. It was giuen me to vnderſtand, that a new Impreſſion of my Booke was preſently to paſſe: then I wayed with my ſelfe, it would be very hard for me to accompliſh all things that mine intent did leade me vnto, for the correcting and enlarging of the ſame Booke in ſo ſhort a time, (wherein I knowe are diuers faults eſcaped) but I promiſed heereafter, if God did permit me life and health, I would to my power ſupply all wants. So I willed the Printer to proceede, according to my former collection, for that I did ſuppoſe the matter ſufficient, and the wants tollerable, if it were rightly cenſured by men of learning and skill in the Arte. But as for the ſcornefull ſcanners, their commendations I diſdayne, for I knowe they are froſen in the dregs of their owne corrupt iudgements, and therefore whileſt they ſhould ſpeake well of me, I might be thought like vnto them: but if it ſhall pleaſe any good man, that is (I ſay) learned in the Arte, who doth eſpye the wants and imperfections of my Booke, that he will vouchſafe to publiſh an other worke of his owne collection or tranſlation intreating of the ſame matter, then truely I will my ſelfe not onely yeeld him his due commendations, but alſo be thankefull to God that it hath pleaſed him to make my ſimple Booke the cauſe of the publiſhing of any learned worke. Which will be no doubt a benefite vnto our Countrey and common wealth, notwithſtanding the gayneſaying of ſome, who continually ſpit foorth poyſon out of their noyſome and vnſauorie mouthes, againſt diuers godly learned, and wel diſpoſed perſons, who haue with long and tedious labours publiſhed diuers Bookes of Phyſick and Chirurgery in Engliſh. For ſay theſe malitious men in deriſion and ſcornefull manner, Behold, theſe be our late London engliſh Writers. In deede it is ſayd, that Demoſthenes himſelfe, being a greatInfallible ſignes of their vild diſpoſitions. learned man, could not auoyde the ſnares of thoſe that enuyed his diligence in the writing of his Bookes, which is ſo much the

leſſe greefe vnto me. But I anſwere theſe our backbiters, I meane, ſuch as are gilty in this caſe, by deſiring, that it will pleaſe them  at their leiſures, with a good conſcience to walke vprightly heerin, and to examine moſt of the Works of our late London Engliſh Writers, and then I truſt they ſhall finde no wincking at abuſes, nor holding of candles before the eyes of them that are ſtarke blinde, they haue ſo zealous a care vnto ſinceritie, and alſo that our young plants may be well and ſufficiently watered with learning, and knowledge in the Arte. And this they haue truely, and faithfully publiſhed in Engliſh, according vnto that meaſure of knowledge, which God of his great goodneſſe hath beſtowed vpon them. Thus you may playnely perceiue the goodneſſe of the tree by the fruite, but what is that, which enuy hath not defamed, or malice hath not defiled? for enuy and malice is a moſt miſcheuous trap or ſnare, wherein many heedleſſe men do fall. Now followeth another ſort of domesticall enemies, and theſe (I thinke) are leapt out of Carons Boate, and haue wilfully  drowned themſelues in the whirlepoole of ſlanderous reports. And theſe paragons will needs treade bypaths, to ſeeke ſtrange noueltyes. Yet if they were better aduiſed, it would not be impertinent vnto their credits, but they do account it odious to be reproued, or to ſuffer themſelues and their abuſes to be ſpoken of: and do moſt idiotlike behaue themſelues againſt Hypocrates and Galen, and all Galeniſts, whoſe worthy Workes being extant to the view of all men, haue purchaſed to their Authors amongſt the good, eternall prayſes and credit for euer. Neuertheleſſe, you may eaſily perceiue what ſpirits they carrie, that thus wound the dead with ſpeeches of defame, and yet themſelues in reſpect, ignorant in the Arte. And ſome of them are ſcarce able to write and reade true Engliſh, but doe brag withoutToo foule or impudent a fault in challengers or 
                           •
                        auillers meaſure (vpon a very ſudden) of their excellent cunning, which happely they had ſtolne out of the beggerly budgets, of ſome counterfeite ſtale Peracelſian Quack ſaluer, or Mountibancke, and yet moreouer do challenge, to be the true Diſciples of Peracelſus, but God knowes, they are not worthy to ſerue vnder his regiment for pyonors: for they miſſinterprete Paracelſus whome truely they vnderſtand not, and condemne Hipocrates
                     
and Galen whome they neuer read. I would no man ſhould thinke I go heere abouts to ſpeake againſt the thing that is good, neyther do I ſeeme to mayntayne the thing that is euill, neyther will I reward any good man with euill reports for benefits and knowledge receyued, for truth is truth from whome ſo euer it come, be it from Hipocrates, Galen, Paracellus, or any other learned men. And therefore I ſay vnto ſuch aforeſayd, let not the Paynter goe beyond his penſill, nor the Shoomaker beyond his Shoo, for ſo his pride may haue a fall, and all his honor lye in the duſt.
                  And now good Reader, ſeeing mine intent is not to hold my toong at abuſes, I will heere a little farther decipher the reſt of theſe exclaiming aduerſaries, which haue moſt impudent ſtrumpets faces, that will I thinke bluſh at nothing: and heere I will  farther ſpeake of an old cauelling companyon, and a maister of lyes, one, whome hecretofore I haue deciphered in my Booke De morbo gallico, he hath with reprochfull ſpeeches returned agayne to his old humor, and ſpurned againſt Incarnatiues. But all thoſe young Students, which are deſirous to be ſatisfyed heerin, amongſt many other worthy Authors, reade Vigo, cap. 21. fol. 175. which Booke, Maiſter Baker hath partly corrected, as himſelfe hath there declared, or elſe reade the old engliſh Booke tranſlated by M. Traheron, fol. 111. cap. 21. ſo he that is but meanely read in the Arte, may by his good indeuour and diligence, eaſily finde and knowe the true nature and properties of Incarnatiues of diuers ſorts, and therefore Incarnatiues which haue beene diuiſed by many graue and learned men, from ſucceſſion of ages, are not to be reiected at the becks of euery ſuch like lame ſchoolemaiſter, or ridiculous ringleader, which will needes reach out his hand, and with his Momus pen leade others to ſeeke a Diamont with a Lincke, which could ſhew it ſelfe in the darke: but I maruell that his diſciples or followers are not aſhamed of ſo baſe a champion, or elſe one of them aſhamed of another. It is ſayd, that this wiſard of late dreamed he was transformed like one of Acteons whelps, and that he had courſed a Collyers Cart, onely to ſeeke for one that had ſtolne away the King of the Frogs, which Iupiter ſent downe in a great lightning

and thunder, which dreame, ſeemed to be farre more dangerous vnto him, then the ſtrange Starre which Doleto ſawe in Calabria: neuertheleſſe, his naked name, and fayned forgerie of this baſe borne birde, I meane not further to touch: let no ſuch bosters be your warrant what ſoeuer they ſay, for he is called an ill Fiſher, that cryeth ſtincking Fiſhe.
                  Moreouer, a new adopted Chick of this old Cocke, and the  very key of his counſell, is dropt out of dores vpon a ſudden, andThis fellow is ſo wiſe in his owne conceit, that he renounceth to follow the method and wayes of euring, after Hipocrates and Galen, becauſe they were Heathen men. I aunſwere with the ſayings of the godly, wiſe, and learned, that he which 
                           〈◊〉
                         a Chriſtian, will liue as a Chriſtian, and yet may take Phyſick and Surgery of a 
                           •
                        ew, if he haue skill. hath plunged himſelfe in the bottomleſſe ſea, or filthy dregs of his aforeſayd Grandſires caluiſh iudgements and opinions: and in the verie pride and glorie of his skill, he ſetting himſelfe as it were in the chair of ignorāce, (a fit Pulpet for ſuch a Prophet:) did there with terrible ſtearne lookes, and ſquared ſpeeches affirme, that indeed it was ſuperſtuous to vſe Incarnatiues, which inuading mind and attempt did become him as well as a ring of golde in a ſowes ſnoute, whoſe will wants wit through prodigalitie to accompliſh his childiſh intent and purpoſe. But now forſooth, this was vrged and brought in by the ſimiles of dogs toongs, and Momemyaſſe, a very deepe wit to vnderstande mysteries, and whoſe capacitie heerein, he ſayth himſelfe, farre paſſeth our reach, for his mysticall knowledge, lyeth ſecretly hid vnder the ſhadowe of Apollos gorgeous cloake, and bewtifyed in print with Eſculapius golden bearde, wherein, there is neyther groſeneſſe, nor impurities, as there is in our Incarnatiues, &c. But the exalted eſſences fooloſophically extracted by him, out of the egge of an Elephant, the marye of a whetſtone, and the braynes of a Woodcocke, ſoirculate to digeſt in his baren head, and this is his miſterium magnum, wherewith if he anoynt theyr eyes, then ye ſhall (ſay they) beholde certayne Spirits that inhabit or dwell in the ayre, called Nenuſareni, and Aerdadi: a high matter in a lowe houſe, which ſore troubleth the wits of theſe wandering Pilgrimes, which contrarie to the direct line of equitie wrong ballans the meaning of good Authors, and ſo thinke thereby, to patch and cloute vp theyr owne ſilly credits, by pulling downe and defacing of others, and thus would they roote vp that which they neuer planted. Therefore I may rightly compare this image of

enuy, and ſuch lyke, vnto the malitious man, which deſired of Iupiter he might loſe one of his eyes, ſo that another whome he hated, might loſe both his, &c. but I will now blot paper, or ſpend time no longer to aunſwere any ſuch, for it is no conqueſt to beate an Aſſe to death.
                  Alſo, I meane to vnfolde the ſtrange euents that ſucceeded  after the taking of a certayne pernitious pill, which pill, as it is ſayd, was ſprinckled abroade by an odde birde of the ſame neaſt afore rehearſed. This Pill of his, was ſhadowed vnder the vale or title of Turbith mineralis, and it is no ſuch thing.
                  Moreouer, it was ſayd to be a Paracelſion Pill, but I am not of that opinion, for I ſuppoſe, no good or godly Paracelſion would haue giuen it to a dog. The compoſition of the ſame vile Pill Mayster Reade hath diſcouered in his Booke of Arceus lately Tranſlated, and by him publiſhed, as a caueat for all good people to beware of that Pill. And in my ſimple iudgement,Such abuſe is neuer wincked at, but when idiots ruleth the roſt, there the iuſt may be oppreſſed, and many a good cauſe troden vnder ſoote. no good man ought to countenance, allowe, excuſe, ſmother, or conceale ſo perillous a medicine, ſith it hath left behinde it ſo foule and filthy broade ſcarres, that touched the liues of foure perſons, fyrſt, Iohn Butler, Mayster of a Shippe, a Barbar ſurgeons ſeruant of London, a Ropemakers boy in Rowſey, and one Master Waſhborne a Marchant, that dyed alſo in Rowſey. This cruell Pill was ministred vnto theſe foure perſons by two ſimple fellowes, who were Surgeons of two Ships, which ſayde, they were deluded by this crow brightfaſt companion, which did write it downe its their booke of ſecrets, with his owne hand, for a pretious iewell, and there recorded it to be good for all diſeaſes. a bad pollicie, and verie ill deuiſed, but how needfull it is for all good men to beware of this Pill, let euery man iudge which hath care of his owne health, yet I do not malice the perſon of the man, but his filthy Pill,There is no friendſhip to be had with ſuch honeſt men. although to ſee to, he is more fitter to be made a turnebroche, or a Scullien of a Kitchen, then to be admitted to be eyther Phyſition or Surgeon, but it is ſayde of a learned man, if ſuch kinde of knaues might be well puniſhed for example ſake, by the handes of the Magistrate for ſuch offences, ſo ſhould the

young Students in the Arte be leſſe deceyued. I do not heere rehearſe a tale of a tub, which requireth no longer remembrance, than the view, or looking on; but a matter of ſuch moment, which ought to be eternized in thy minde, and although I knowe he dangereth his owne welfare, that reproueth euill mens faults,Not. 1. and ſhall lye open to ſlaunder and reproch, yet I ſuppoſe it better to be maligned of ſuch, then to conceale ſo great a miſchiefe, that might otherwiſe enſue by the farther ſpreading of ſo vile a medicin, and therefore I muſt crane pardon, for I do meane heereafter in this whole diſcourſe, not to ſhun any ſuch rotten rootes as they come or chaunce to lye in my way.
                  Heere I am I ſay farther preſt and vrged to vnmaske another  of the ſame neaſt of young Snakes, or rather old ſuttle Serpents, who I truſt in God, partly by me, and alſo heereafter, by the helpe of others more learned, they ſhall be all ferited (which way ſoeuer they goe) from their wicked buries, moſſes, and ſtarting holes: and farther, I would haue followed their abuſes at this time, and alſo the abuſes of others vnſpoken of, but that I haue beene preuented by ſome ſpeciall cauſes, troubles, and lets, but if heereafter they do not amend, I will diſcouer them to their ſhame, and their names. And therefore curteous and friendly Reader, note my ſayings which I will openly publiſh, and iudge with diſcretion. It is not long ſince that a ſubtile deluder verie craftely, hauing vpon ſet purpoſe his brokers or eſpials abroade, vſing ſundry ſecret drifts to allure many, as did the Syrens by their ſweet Sonets and melody ſeduce Mariners to make them their pray, ſo did his brokers or eſpials deceiue many, in proclayming and ſounding out his ſame abroade from houſe to houſe, as thoſe vſe to do which crye Miſtreſſe, haue you any worke for the Tincker, at the length, they heard of one that was tormented with a quartaine, then in all poſt haſte this bad man was brought vnto the ſick patient by their craftie meanes, and ſo forth, without any tariance, he did compound for fifteene pound, to rid him within three fits of his Agew, and to make him as whole as a ſiſh of all diſeaſes: So alittle afore his fit was at hand, he called vnto the Wife of the patient to bring him an apple of the biggeſt ſize, and then with a pinne writte in the rinde of the

apple Abracadabra, and ſuch like, and perſwaded him to take it preſently in the beginning of his ſit, for there was (ſayth he) a ſecret in theſe words. To be ſhort, the patient being hungry of his health, followed his counſell, and deuoured all and euery peece of the apple. So ſoone as it was receyued, nature left the diſeaſe to digeſt the apple, which was too hard to do, for at length, he fill to vomiting, then the core kept ſuch a ſturre in his throate, that where to fore his Feuer was ill, now much worſe, a malo ad peius, out of the fryingpan, into the fire: preſently there were Phyſitions ſent for vnto the ſick patient, or elſe his fifteene pound had beene gone, with a more pretious Iewell, but this lewde fellow is better knowne at Newgate then I will heere declare. Such counterfeite Charmers, with Figures and Caracters, Tagaltius doth condemne, as abſurd and erronious, which wicked practiſes he ſayth becommeth no honeſt artiſt to vſe, or to exerciſe.
                  It is alſo ſayd, that in Archadia, a Woman began to cure with wicked Charmes, without the applying of any medicines, which beeing knowne in Athens, ſhe was condemned by the Senate to be ſtoned to death: a iuſt reward for ſuch vngodly practiſes.
                  I reade likewiſe of another lewde Woman, which was accuſed of Witchcraft, the cauſe was, for that ſhe did commonly take vpon her to cure Men, Women, Children, and Beasts, by a certayne Charme, the which, they ſay, ſhe would do, onely for a penny in money, and a loafe of bread. This thing was miſliked of many good men in the Countrey where ſhe did dwell, and for that cauſe, ſhe was vpon ſuſpition of Sorcery and Witchcraft, brought to the Aſsiſes, and there Arrayned for it. The ſimplicity of the old Woman was ſomewhat conſidered of by the whole bench, then the Iudges and the Iustices graunted her this fauour, that if ſhe would truely declare vnto them What manner of Charme it was ſhe vſed, ſhe ſhould be deliuered: and beeyng in great feare, and doubt of her life, forthwith in the preſence of them all, declared it to be as followeth.
                  Firſt (ſayd ſhe) after I had receyued the penny in money, and  the loafe of bread, then my Charme was this.
                  
                     
                     The Charme.
                     1. My Lofe in my lappe,
                     2. My Penny in my purſſe,
                     3. Thou art neuer the better,
                     4. Nor I am neuer the wurſe.
                  
                  Immediatly after, the Iudges with the reſt perceiued it to be meere deceit, & couſenage: then they did ſtraightly charge her, vpon payne of great puniſhment, to leaue off her deluſions, and coſening of the people, & ſo ſhe was diſcharged, as it is there ſaid.
                  I could ſpeake of many other abuſers of Phyſick and Surgerie, but what redreſſe would be had, I knowe not, and yet I do not meane to ſpeake of the old Woman at Newington, beyond Saint Georges feelds, vnto whome, the people do reſort, as vnto an Oracle: neyther will I ſpeake of the Woman on the Bancke ſide, who is as cunning, as the Horſſe at the Croſſe keyes, nor yet of the cunning Woman in Seacole Lane, who hath more skill in her Colebasket, then iudgement in Vrine, or knowledge in Phiſick or Surgery. But I could diſcouer many others, which practiſe Phyſick and Chirurgery, with the bit in their mouthes, and the raynes in their necks, which do not only thereby deceiue the ſimple people, but oftentimes the wiſeſt men, and theſe are as hurtfull, as mothes in cloaths, or cancker ruſt in Iron.
                  There are many other abuſers about this City of London lurcking in corners, and ſometimes they do raunge and wander  aſtray from towne to towne, from countrey to countrey both farre and neere, by ſea and land, and theſe I ſuppoſe to be the very ſpawne and frye of that Rogiſh route, which practiſed Chirurgery at Muttrell, in the time of that famous Prince King Henry the eyght, which fraternitie, and brotherhood of abuſers of the Arte, good Maister Gale hath diſcouered in his Booke of the office of a Chirurgion, who ſayth, that they were all baniſhed the Campe, and if they had not auoyded with ſpeede, they had been all hanged as theeues and murtherers.
                  And what ſhall be ſayd to ſome, which not long ſince haue beene commanded to prepare themſelues, and with all ſpeede to  ſerue her Maiesty in the Warres, then preſently with many ſolemne circumstances, did deſire to be excuſed, protesting, that they had no knowledge in Surgery, but onely, for the drawing,

and ſtopping of a tooth, letting of bloud, or for the cure of the french Rocks, and thus they did playnely throw all their skill in Surgery flat to the ground, which a little before ſhined moſt brightly in the eyes of many. But this I ſay is well knowne, let the ſeruice be once furniſhed with ſufficient Surgeons, which oftentimes is very hard to do, then they begin to ſhake their chaines,The greateſt barkers are not the beſt biters. and keepe a ſtirre, that they can cure that which all the beſt Chirurgions in London or elſewhere do forſake, but what manner of curing they vſe, I may not ſpeake that I knowe. I could rehearſe diuers of this ſtye, but they would ſay my Booke were ſeditious: but this may ſuffice for a caueat. Therefore theſe to ſay the troth, may fitly be compared vnto a certaine boasting bragger dwelling beyond the Seas, which did attempt to the great admiration of the ſtanders by, to deck on with a ciment for theTruth can neuer ſo well appeare, as when it is compared with deceite and falſehood. nonce, a mans eare that was cleane cut off from his head, yet his glory was but ſhort, for within two dayes, the 
                        •
                     arerotted, and fell off againe, and he became a poynting ſtock to the whole Towne and Countrey. I would no man ſhould heere miſconſtrue me, or to thinke I vrge any thing in this my whole diſcourſe, againſt any good or honeſt artiſt, for my meaning is not againſt any ſuch, who haue beene, and are, in the Arte, right diligent and ſtudious for the good of our countrey & common wealth, but againſt ſuch, as Veſalius, Tagaltius, Vigo, Arceus, Maiſter Gale, Maiſter Hall, Maiſter Banneſter, and ſuch as theſe good men, do diſalow, who haue in all their whole diſcourſes and writings, neuer ſought for vaine glory, promotion, or reward, but only by their vertues, and laudable ſtudies, to make knowne the vndiſcret, and vaineglorious brags, friuolous vantings, peeuiſh practiſes, and wicked dealings, of a ſort of abuſers of the arte and good artiſts. And I ſuppoſe no honeſt man elſe, which is a true artiſt, but doth, and will alſo deteſt and hate all ſuch caterpillers, which ſuck the ſap and eate the bread out of the mouthes of many a good Surgeon, who haue been very much decaied by reaſon of ſuch ill perſons, to the great impoueriſhment, not only of themſelues, but likewiſe of their poore Wiues and children. Which men are well known, if ability were anſwerable to their willingnes and skill, to doo her Maiesty very good ſeruice in the Arte,
                     
wherein they haue beene trayned, and ſpent themſelues a long time in trauell and ſtudie for the attayning of the ſame.
                  Now time calleth me to an end of this Epistle to the Reader, and of a part of the generall diſcourſes of abuſes and abuſers of the Arte, and all good artists, and I will conclude with the laſt and the very worſt of all ſorts, and they are thoſe, that withThe more ignorant they are, the more bolder they are, and yet hate to be 
                           •
                        eproued. open mouth ſtand vpon their tiptoe, ſaying with many puiſſant and forcible reaſons, Away with all theſe bookes, and bookemen, for they haue made our Arte too common. I perceiue, it was not without great cauſe, that Plinie complayned, and ſayd, Lyke as there is no light without a ſhadow, no more is vertue without enuy, but by Gods good grace, I will returne their ſpeeches vpon their owne heads. Chilo the learned Philoſopher ſayd, That in Bookes you ſhall finde written the veritie and truth of things ſecret and vnknowne, the which time can neuer conſume, nor fortune deſtroy, happy is that man which eſcapeth ſuch Ciclops dens, without danger of the fluxe of their foule mouth, but I ſay vnto them whatſoeuer they be, that onely their naked experience which they ſoThe fooliſh perſwaſion of naked experience, hath deceyued a great many. brag of, without learning in the Arte, may ſitly be compared to a tree without fruite. The firſt beginners of their ſect of buſſardly Empricks, I reade was Philinus Cous. Acro. Agrigentinus, and Alexandreus, with others. And farther it is ſayd, that their experience is nothing worth, that is not grounded vpon reaſon, the mother of all Artes and Sciences, and reaſon and knowledge is gotten and made ripe by reading and weighing the well obſerued practiſes, and meditated rules of the generations of learned men, and diligent artiſts in time, gone before vs, heereunto (I ſay) ioyning our owne practiſe, we get vs the m
                        •
                     re prompt and excellent vnderstanding, how to put things in profitable execution▪ and thus both reaſon and experience matched togethers, maketh a perfect artiſt, and he that denieth this, hath neither wit, arte, good experience, nor honestie▪ and ſo I conclude, that the reading of good Authors, is the ſchoole of wiſe men, for learning, and knowledge, is the moſt rare gift of God, which maketh men become famous vpon earth: for example, as approoued Hiſtoryes do report, Plato, and Socrates, were well

knowne to be two famous Philoſophers, though they were the ſonnes of two poore Citizens of Athens, for their well occupied minds in learning and knowledge aduanced them to great honor, as it may appeare by their great renowme, large volumes, and infinite labours, remayning ſtill vnto poſterities, and therefore it is as poſſible for an Owle to encounter with an Eagle, or a Wren with a Faucon, as for ſuch boysterous blockheads, with their wodden practiſes, grounded onely vpon experience, the ſchoolemistreſſe to fooles, who with vnequall compariſons, do challenge men of reaſon and knowledge in the Arte, with their beaderowles of infamy, folaryes, fables, and old wiues tales, long bred and nouſled vp in the ſtorehouſe of abuſes, but it is a moſt true ſaying, and it is in theſe dayes come to paſſe, that euery peeuiſh Pan will compare with learned Apollo, but with ſpite and hatred in their harts, euery Momus will aſſayle Minerua, with rayling priuely behinde mens backs, and euery Zoylus will barke at Cicero, with open iniurie in their deedes.
                  But
                  
                     Ye may not feare ſuch enemyes
                     To Arte, and Authors good,
                     Who though they fawne in flattery,
                     Yet thurſt they for your bloud.
                  
                  
                     For theſe haue watcht full priuely,
                     Such is their vile deſire,
                     Care yee not for their courteſey,
                     Ne force yee of their yre.
                  
                  
                     This warning for a caueat,
                     To mee it ſhall ſuffice,
                     Except to thoſe that will not ſee.
                     A word may ſerue the wiſe.
                  
                  But our good God, which hath euer defended vs from the raueningBeware of hypocriſie, ſhadowed vnder the cloke of frendſhip and amitie. iawes of ſuch dangerous foes, or ſmiling ſerpents, which with ſtealing ſteps, do ſowe the ſeeds of ſedition, with the hands of Briarious, will returne all the euils which they do worke

vpon their owne heads. Thus (good Reader,) I will through Gods aſſistance, proceede to the accompliſhing of this ſmall Treatiſe, notwithstanding their great threatnings to kill with Dagger, Sword, or Battle axe, but I little esteeme of ſuch, ſith theſe my labours ſeemed in the opinions of men, both godly, wiſe, and learned, not to be vnprofitable, or vnworthy to come abroade, for the benefit of all yong Students in the Art, whoſe Readings and practiſes, I wiſh moſt willingly that God may prosper. Amen.
                  
                     Willyam Clowes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  COurteous Reader, I ſuppoſe it almoſt vnpoſsible at the firſt impreſsion of any Booke, but ſome faultes will paſſe, be it neuer ſo carefully looked vnto, yet none heere I hope ſo egregious, but that I know euery honeſt mind will frendly weigh the cauſe, & conſider the troubles that is had in ſuch works. But as for the malitious quarrell pickers, whoſe poyſoned natures is to turne nothing to good, theſe, I ſay, will not onely miſlike and repine, but with their ſcorning lookes rather watch to finde faultes, than with honeſt minds to amend thoſe, which vnwillingly haue beene committed: therefore I haue gathered this ſmall Errate: and if in the courſe of your readings, it will pleaſe you with your pennes firſt to couer & correct the faults eſcaped, as it is heere declared, & alſo very eaſy to find, both the chapter, leafe, and line, then I ſhall thinke my ſelf moſt happy, & ſo wiſh you ſuch profit by theſe my labors, as your own harts doo deſire, & as the matter is able to affoord, as knoweth God, who direct you in all theſe your ſtudyes and labours. Amen.
                  
                     Faultes eſcaped.
                     
                        PAge. 1. Line. 9. for proclayming, reade proclayme. Pag. 3. line. 4. reade foliorum maluarum, lin. 22. albumina cuorum. pag. 4. lin. 30. 
                              •
                           lei papaueris. lin. 31. vnguenti. pag. 5 lin. 15 in the margent reade Quercetanus. pag 6 lin. 26 foliorum maluarum. lin. 32. 32. vnguenti. pag. 7. lin. 2. ſeminis pſ
                              ••••
                           
                           ▪ lin 10. 11 olei. li. 15. albuminum. pag 8. lin. 5. cinnabrij. lin. 7. Diachalciteos. pag. 10. lin. 18. radicum Bugloſſ
                              •
                           . pag. 11. lin 4. aqua fumiterrae lin 7. fumoterrae pag. 12. lin 6. cum gummi. lin. 9. Reſin
                              •
                            pini. lin. 10. Gummi. lin. 13 colophoniae. pag 15. lin. 16. chamomillae, and in the margent, reade Cataplaſma anodinum pag. 16. lin. 6. & oculis populneis. lin. 26. Aquae hordei. lin. 28. ſarcocollae. pag. 17. in the margent reade Angeli Bolognini Reſtrictiuum. pag. 18. lin. 19. diamoron. pag. 22. lin. 13. ſeminis ſinapis. pag 39. lin. 5. cum gummi. lin. 14. ophiogloſsi. lin. 17. nummulariae lin. 18. lilij con
                              •
                           all
                              •
                           um pag. 42. lin. 28. cauterie. pag. 43 lin 15 peritoneum. pag. 45. lin. 16. cannabis. pag. 47. lin. 1. agrimoniae. li. 3. Androſaemi. li. 4. Aſchyri li. 21. piloſellae. li. 23. Quinqueneruiae. pag. 49. lin 30. vnguenti. pag. 50 lin 4. albumen vnius oui. lin. 14 cum gummi. pag. 51 li. 5. reade diſtillentur ac ſeparato oleo adiungantur, &c. lin. 12. galangae. li 15. nucis moſcatae li. 16. cubebarum. li. 18. ligni. pag 54. li. 14. Empl. Reſolutiuum. pag. 55. lin. 27. aceti pag 56. li. 6. reade, vitellos ouorum tres. li. 29. & 30. vnguenti. pag. 60. li. 28. epiſpaſtices. pag. 62. li. 14. 25. camforae. pag. 7. in the 1. and 2. line, are left out the doſes of mellis communis, which ſhould be lib. 2. and of vitriol. alb. which ſhould be 4. ounces. pag. 88. lin. 20. reade▪ & de Ianua.
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           depiction of surgery on a wounded man
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     To his very good freend, Mayſter Clowes Chirurgion, all health, &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     IN writing of Bookes for the benefit of the ſtudious, as I conſider of ſundry commendable courſes taken by the Authors in that behalfe, ſo yet is there none (in my iudgement) more apte, either to amplify the Authors name, or elſe to increaſe the Readers knowledge, then that which is done by way of familiar examples and obſeruations: for ſuch are properly beawtifyed with theſe three amiable ornaments, Varietie, Perſpicuitie, and Certainty whereof in ſeuerall, the fyrſt delighteth, the ſecond informeth, and the third aſſureth, but ioyntly, all concurre, to the readie ripening, and ſpeedie preparing of the Artiſt to anſwere the expectation of his calling. When 
                        〈◊〉
                      therefore, the principall of your labour (Maister Clowes) hath in this Booke beene, to deliuer faithfully your experiments in the curation of woundes, with ſuch playne inſtances of the medicines vſed in particular caſes, and hiſtoricall obſeruations of their ſeuerall ſucceſſes, ioyned with the noting of occurrences, and preuention of accidents, as may in deede (according to your ſpeach) leade the young artiſt by the hand to do the like, I do not onely for mine owne part, finde my ſelfe bound to encourage and commend you, but dare alſo aſſure you, in behalfe of the bette
                        •
                      ſort, of all thankefulneſſe: Hippocrates hauing led that trace in his Epid
                           •
                        
                        micis, hath therein no ſmall eſtimation with the learned Phyſitions Amatus, Valleriola, Coiter, Arc
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        , Dod
                           •••••
                        , and Skenchius, haue agayne renewed that courſe, and receyued reuerent accompt for their labours. The learned Cr
                           •
                        to in his old age, ſeemeth to haue repented of nothing in that kinde ſo much, as that he had not reſerued and written the obſeruations of his practiſe, by which he ſuppoſed his name might more haue been commended to poſterity, then by any other of his writings. I am not ignorant alſo, that to write obſeruations of a mans practiſe, is a way, by which the Reader may be as much and perhaps more dangerouſly abuſed, then by any other, namely, if the Author ſhould be vnfaithfull, or conceited in his owne priuate opinions, which by this meanes he would ſeeke to eſtabliſh and obtrude vnto the credulous reader, but as the later of theſe can not be obiected againſt you, if the whole behauiour of your life may be taken for a teſtimonie, ſo neyther may the former be ſuſpected by any that haue care to guide their iudgements by the rule of charitie. Adde heereunto, that beſide the proteſtation you haue made in the word of a

Chriſtian, concerning the veritie of theſe things, and your ſincere and vpright meaning in the penning thereof, I am able, and will be ready in ſundry poynts, and namely, in your medicines and preſcriptes, to teſtify that you haue concealed nothing from the Reader. As for the 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     t, with thoſe alſo that I ſpeake of, if their likelihood and probabilitie may be ſent among the learned and artiſtes of iudgement to gather their voyces, I doubt not but your ſide ſhall be full. But you ſay, your encouragement is greatly hindered, when you conſider and call to minde, in what euill part things are nowadayes taken, that were not euill meant, and that ſuch as would ſeeme wiſe men are become ſo fooliſh, that they can not heare the euill partes of baſe abuſers diſgraced, but by and by they muſt deeme themſelues in like 
                        •
                     ort thereby defaced. I ſee the vlcer you appoynt me vnto, I d
                        •••
                     erne it to be Cacoethes, and the malignitie thereof to be greater then any man can cure: but withall I deny, that it ſhould be any worthy cauſe of your diſcouragement, nay rather I hold, that you are afreſh to take courage agaynſt it, for dyuers reaſons, fyrſt, for that the burthen ſhall not lye onely vppon your backe, but that others are charged in lyke ſort with you, who will not ſhrinke the ſhoulder from you in the bearing thereof, and many handes (you knowe) make quicke and eaſy worke. My ſecond reaſon is, becauſe the Deuill entendeth thus by their meanes to vpholde hys kingdome of ignorance and wickedneſſe ſtill among vs, agaynſt which, if we be enemyes of hys kingdome, we muſt needes make warre with all our might. Thirdly, becauſe this is an infallible truth, which you may write vppon, that no man will miſiudge, or maligne your inuectiues agaynſt the wicked and theyr practiſes, or take themſelues defaced by theyr diſgrace, but ſuch as haue guylty conſciences, and are priuie to themſelues, eyther of the ſame or lyke enormities, or atleaſt, that they do mayntayne or wincke at the ſame in others, when as rather by theyr places they ſhould puniſh them: this latter ſort (I hope) will be more wiſe, then to be found guylty of vpholding iniquitie, and if there haue been ouerſightes committed heeretofore (as the beſt aduiſed will not denye) I truſt they will become more warie for the lyke heereafter, but the former 
                        •
                     orte are rightly touched in the olde and common prouerb of a galde horſſe backe. When a great many kicke at our dreſſing of two or three me
                        •
                     s ſor
                        •
                     s, it is a ſigne that they are all infected with the lyke, and do therefore feare, leaſt we would lay handes on them alſo, and then what reproche can that be to vs, when as our writings agaynſt a fewe notoriouſly naught, ſhall diſcouer vnto the world a greater number that are in ſecret: as naught, they can not ſay we haue accuſed them, when as in deed their owne conſciences haue fyrſt condemned them, wherein, if they had ſtood ſounde towarde their ownehearts, nothing could haue touched them, ſo that we ſee theſe ſayings well con
                        •
                     y
                        •
                     med, A good conſcience is as a braſen wall. And agayne, An euill conſcience is as a thouſand witneſſes againſt a man. Of theſe things, if I would ſtand long, I could ſay much, that ſhould worthely redound

                     
                        •
                     o the ſhame and confuſion of all ſuch, but remembring the length of an Epiſtle, I will ſhut vp the reſt in this briefe. One verie aptly compared the conſcience of a man, to the minor, or aſſumption of ſuch Syllogiſmes as do conclude particularly vpon a generall charge or accuſation propounded for example. The Lawe ſayth, He that killeth or maymeth, muſt be killed or maymed, the guilty conſcience then aſſumeth thus: But I haue killed or maymed, and ſo this concluſion commeth vpon hym, therefore I ought to be killed or maymed agayne, all writers in Chirurgerie do giue this propoſition, All vnskilfull men do wickedly abuſe this Arte, and ought to be puniſhed, then the guilty conſcience euery where maketh this aſſumption: But I am an vnskilfull man, now followeth the concluſion on the neck of it, Therefore I do abuſe the Arte, and ought to be puniſhed. So when any Writer deſcribeth the properties of wicked practiſers, he perhaps doth not ſay, this man is one, or ſuch a man is ſuch, but the conſciences of thoſe men, to whome ſuch propertyes pertayne, do tell them ſo much in theyr boſomes. Who then (I pray you) is theyr accuſer but themſelues? Yea, but (will ſome ſay) in your inuectiues agaynſt abuſers, you deſcribe the men ſo by theyr propertyes, as euery one may knowe who you meane. I aunſwere, fyrſt, I haue knowne ſome, who thynke themſelues no ſmall men, that haue greatly ſtayned theyr wiſedomes in miſiudging ſuch deſcriptions, therefore I wiſh men to be well aduiſed in theyr Interpretations. Secondly, if it be ſo, as they ſaye, that a man by hys propertyes may bee poynted out as with ones finger, my counſell is, that euery man muſt labour to change away hys euill qualityes for good, that ſo, when they ſhall be ſpoken of, they may commend hym, and not diſprayſe hym. And verely me thynke, it is full of reaſon, that they, who are ſo angry for hearing of theyr qualityes, ſhould be much more aſhamed to vſe them.
                  Feare not therefore (Mayster Clowes) in the loue of mans health, to ſhewe your ſelfe euen a vehement enemy, to all that hate, or hurt the ſame: Mans health (I ſaye) craueth it at your handes to decypher ſuch counterfaytes in all theyr colours, that they may (at leaſt) be auoyded of the people, though they be not alſo puniſhed of the Magiſtrate, which notwithſtanding were moſt of all to be wiſhed. I ſee you euery where carefully except the ſonnes of arte, and all honeſt and diligent men in our calling, of purpoſe becauſe you would not haue your inuectiues applyed to any that deſerue them not. If then there ſhall be any one that wyll needes take the things that are ſpoken to himſelfe, and ſo beyng angry at his owne ſhadow, will alſo play Will Sommers part, in ſtriking him that ſtandeth next him: if any (I ſaye) ſhall thus deale with you, imagin therein what good ſucceſſe you haue had, that in laying for one Foxe, you haue caught a couple, one, whome before you knew by ſpeciall propertyes: and another, who hath now reuealed himſelfe by the guiltineſſe of his conſcience, double gayne (you know) bringeth double reioycing. In ſuch ſort verily, ſhould I thinke the matter meeteſt to be taken, as namely,

if I ſhould declare of one that I knowe did giue a Gentleman common praecipitate (as it ſeemeth) but mixt with a little vnguent out of his ſaluatorie, for a pill to purge him with: and another that to remoue a defiled bone, applyed a faire Mallet and a Chiſſell to the matter for more ſpeede: and by the declaring of theſe, I ſhould alſo rub the galled backs of others, whome I knewe not before to be ſick of that diſeaſe, were there not as good cauſe for me to be glad of the ſucceſſe of my diſcouery, as for all other men to take it to their aduantage for the ſhunning of ſuch impoſtors? the beſt men, I doubt not, will giue their voyces to this: the worſt ſort, I am ſure, you meane not to make your iudges. You haue heard my iudgement of your labours, and my opinion of your aduerſaries, the latter, your owne experience and working ſhall dayly confirme, the other, the Chirurgians practiſe, and orderly imitation, ſhall abundantly ratifye.
                  And as I do entreate you for the publiſhing of this preſent fruite, ſo do I no leſſe exhort you, to the keeping of other obſeruations heereafter to the like vſe. In both ſuites I perſwade my ſelfe, (for the good will you beare vnto me) that I ſhall preuayle.
                  
                     Your aſſured freend, and wellwiller,
Iohn Banester.
                  
               
               
                  
                  In prayſe and commendation of the Author and this VVorke, I. G. Master of Arte, and Student in Physick and Chirurgerie.
                  
                  
                     AMong many other good things of late publiſhed in the Art of Surgery, I cannot but prayſe, and greatly commende this breefe and ſhort treatiſe, ſet foorth by Maiſter William Clowes, proceeding from good iudgement gotten by his induſtrie and much experience by his owne practiſe. I thinke verily that as no man of ſounde iudgement can miſlike the matter, ſo no man that is in credit for his honeſtie, will diſcommend the intent of the man, but rather attribute vnto him the title he deſerueth (a wellwiller to his Countrey.) In the cenſures of the wiſe, a more neceſſary Worke could not come foorth in this Art, conſidering the time. Surely the want of that knowledge in many ſory Surgeons which in this booke is manifeſted vnto vs, hath coſt many a poore Souldyer full deere, and hath made that ſtick by many Mariners, which they ſhall neuer be able to clawe off whiles they liue. For when they haue been any way maymed or indangered with loſſe of life or limme, then commes the bare ſingleſoled Surgeon, as he rightly tearmeth them, and what to do by arte knowes not, yet ſomething he muſt attempt, treading in his old cowpath, as though he were healing a broken head, or plaſtering of a kibed heele, hauing one or two boxes of greene Salues, with a plaſter of Diachilon, and a greene graſſe Melilot, with their motheaten Muſsilage, and theſe are good for ſooth for all ſores, and ſo committeth the health of the patient to the mayne chance, a miſerable thing, that warlike men ſhould firſt fall into the hands of men, and afterward to be as it were maſſacred by ſuch ignorant beaſts.

But that they may leaue their brutiſh ignorance, and theyr ſauage cruelty, let them reade ouer if ſo be they can, this directiue agayne and agayne, and if they be not tootoo ſottiſh, they ſhall fynde theyr iudgement amended, theyr wittes ſharpened, theyr practiſe corrected, and theyr fingers directed, poynt by poynt, from the beginning of the cure, till the finiſhing thereof.
                  Thou ſhalt fynde alſo heereunto annexed (good Reader) a learned Worke for the cure of the french diſeaſe, written by a Spaniſh Phyſition. Alſo, certayne ſingular Aphoriſmes, collected out of moſt excellent Authors, a Worke worth the labour, and worth thanks to, for that a man may walke ſafely in this narrow compaſſe, who before might be indangered of loſing himſelfe or his ſenſe, in the wilde foreſt of Aphoriſmes. And ſurely, we can not if we did as we ſhould but greatly thanke God, for that as in moſt other, ſo in this arte, the neceſſary knowledge, and ſufficient practiſe is brought of late into ſhorter volumes then euer it was, ſo that though we may ſay, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     vita breuis, yet can we not of late yeeres ſo rightly ſay 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     ars longa, for now hauing the pathes ſo wel trode by our owne countreymen, they better knowe our nature then Strangers did, we may walke ſafer with ſmall ſtudie, then they could with tedious trauaile in tyme paſt. Heeretofore men might well ſaye, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     experimentum periculoſum, becauſe peraduenture it coſt many a man a limme, and many men might be ſpoyled▪ before experience were ratifyed. Now that which before was incultum nemus, being made parua ſiluula, a man may take a ſure ſtaffe to leane vnto, whereas before he might truſt to a rotten ſticke, and ſo be deceyued. Now becauſe this notable worke is wrought at home, vp ſtarteth Aeſops mangy curre, and all Acteons Dogs in a great cry; ready to pull downe the authors heereof, but their maiſter muſt be their maiſter, barke and brawle they neuer ſo lowde. Why they be ſo fell, I knowe not, vnleſſe it be that the bleareeyed man

can not abyde the candle, nor he that hath been brought vp in a darke den, abyde the lyght of the Sunne: but to ſay the truth, Hinc illae lachrimae: ego excludor, ille recipitur. by this meanes they are knowne to be ignorant aſſes, and therefore by wiſe men worthely ſhut out of dores, which if Aeſops aſſe had been, he had not ſo dangerouſly taken acquayntance of his mayſter. Yet there is another flye bytes theyr galled backe, as bad as this, for that euery day more then other, the dawes ſtollen feathers are plucked from him, and he knowne to be but a dawe, what with the old, pulling the black haires from theyr crowne, and the yong, pulling the gray from theyr forheads, they muſt needes appeare to be but bald buſſards. and thys is the cauſe they crye out, fye vpon Bookes, for, Litera ſcripta manet, as they are knaues in grayne, ſo they are fooles in Print: but to ſpeake much, were but a folly, for words with them are but wynde, it is Morbus inueteratus, an old vlcer of the ſtomacke, which if you touch, it fluxeth at the mouth, ſpewing out theyr poyſon agaynſt all learning and learned men, who would cure them of theyr foule euill. I haue oftentimes meruayled how they that are artiſtes in deede, can ſuffer ſuch braſenfaced beaſtes to liue among them, who if they be long tollerated, will cauſe Surgery to be of that credit, that a man had rather fall into the chaps of a mad Dog, then into the hands of a Surgeon. for as their words tend to the defaming of the moſt skilfull, ſo their works to the diſgracing of the Arte. whereſoeuer they goe, they leaue ſuch a ſtincke behynde them, that all men that hath had to deale with them, cry fye vpon them. To prooue this to be true without a ſillogiſme, looke vppon the aftercures that are among you. It is ſome mens worke to rectifie other mens errours. Heere I might ſpeake to the worſhipful company of Surgeons in London, amōg whom I know many haue good knowlege, and alſo great reaſon ioyned alwayes with their practiſe, Cicero contra Catalinam ſpake to Senators, Hoc quis ferre poſſit, inertes homines
                     
                     doctiſſimis viris inſidiari, ſt ultiſſimos prudentiſſimis, ebrioſos ſobrijs, dormientes vigilantibus, and therefore if either arte or artiſtes be reſpected in this caſe, Non eſt lenitati locus: ſeueritatem res ipſa poſtulat, ſuch matters are not to be ieſted withall, the Stocks were a fit place for ſuch perſons to publiſh theyr skyll. Hos igitur a vestris aris & aulis, a tectis vrbis, a moenibus, a vita fortuniſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , ciuium arcebitis, & tanquam hostes patriae, latrones Angliae, rectâ pergant in exilium. Who could tollerate eyther Molem inuidiae, procacitatem linguae, or, Spolium populi, but euery man hath ſpoken ſo much, and ſo little preuayled, that I am out of hart to ſpeake any more. But yet I muſt needes teare off one ragge more from their torne coate, before we part. Theſe caterpillers, or peoplepollers, being thus paynted out in their ſeuerall colours, with theyr proper badge to knowe them by, well perceyuing, that among ſo many torches, theyr pictures muſt needs be perceyued, ſeeke to couer themſelues vnder other mens hoodes, get other to compoſe, and they to ſubſcribe, and then the worke is theirs, and ſo they become of blinde buſſards, that can ſcarce write and reade, great learned men. If Tully were aliue, he would crye out, O honorem contumelioſum, ſuch men in deed do rather aucupari gloriam, though ignominioſam, then publicae vtilitati inſeruire. I vnderſtand that Aeſops Aſſe is alyue agayne, and would couer himſelfe with a Lyons skinne, but if he do appeare, we ſhall perceyue his long eares well ynough, then were he beſt to keepe him ſelfe within his owne territory, leaſt he become by word much famous through greater folly. But ſuppoſe he can eſcape cleanly a while, yet will Academicus lye whiſpring hos ego, &c. tulit alter honorem, I could ſaye ſomething which I leaue, expecting alteration of diſpoſition, that would be like a water of great force, to trye whether there were any figges in theyr bellyes or no, but becauſe the one may be wiſer then the other, I keepe ſilence, hoping that Philoponos ſhall haue good words for his good will, and I would pray them all, that old Philadelphus
                     
for his friendly dealing might be free from their furie, but no ſalue I thinke can cure that ſore, for this will euer be true, Inuidia virtutis comes, Enuy followes vertue at the hard heeles, not to treade in her ſteps, but to trip vp her heeles if ſhe could. But to conclude, I thinke all haue ſome kynde of conſcience or other, and there is magna vis conſcientiae, & magna, ſayth Tully, in vtramque partem, vt nihil timeant qui nihil commiſerint, & poenam ſemper ante oculos verſariputent qui peccarint, A cleere conſcience will acquite continually where good meaning is, but a canckred hart will alwayes accuſe where froward dealing is, and ſo farewell good Reader, and iudge as thou ſeeſt cauſe, and apply that which is ſpoken in good will, to thine owne profite.
                  
                     Vale.
                     From Cambridge, 
                        Iune the 24.
Anno. 1588.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     T. P. To his louing freend Mayster Clowes.
                  
                     IN tempests ſafe by Pylots skill we ſayle,
                     In flattering ſnares true friendſhip vs vpholds:
                     From loathſome greeſe good comfort doth vs bayle,
                     Theſe three in one, Clowes Booke to vs vnfolds.
                     He ſtirres the helme, and friendly comfort lends,
                     When ſurges rage, when ſnares, when griefe off ends.
                  
                  
                     When outward ſores as boystrous waues do ſwell,
                     When venime hid, as flattring tongues do ſting,
                     When both as greeſe each hart with torments quell,
                     When naught but death doth ſeeme releefe to bring,
                     Then Clowes thy Pylot can from Sea to ſhore,
                     From payne to ioy, from ſicke to ſound restore.
                  
                  
                     Once Aeſculapius Theſeus ſonne did cure,
                     
                        Machaon once did Philoctetes ſaue,
                     Their prayſe for this vnsteyned doth endure,
                     Such iuſt reward good skill and knowledge haue:
                     Whome fame, vnſought for, followeth at the laſt.
                     Which ſought for, by vnskilfull, flyes as faſt.
                  
                  
                     
                        Clowes as Apollos ſonne, by Art is ſayd,
                     Not one, but ſundry Hippolites to ſaue,
                     And Baneſter Machaon ſeemes, whoſe ayde,
                     As many Phyloctetes dayly craue.
                     How then, ſhall theſe not liue in trumpe of ſame?
                     Since thouſands cured ſhall extoll their name?
                  
                  
                     Amongst which ſort, my ſelfe although the laſt,
                     Yet not the leaſt part of their cure did find.
                     Whoſe arme paſt cure, an Atrophy did waſt,
                     And ſinewes ſhronke contracted out of kind,
                     Which paſt all skill, vnskilfull Surgeons thought,
                     To health by skill theſe skilfull Surgeons brought.
                  
                  
                     
                     But as the ſweeteſt cloath the moathes do eate,
                     And freſheſt Roſe the cancker ſeekes to ſpill.
                     And as the ſtatelyeſt towres the winde doth beate,
                     And fretting lightning ſtrikes the loftieſt hill,
                     So enuy ſeekes the deadly foe of fame,
                     By ſlanderous toongs to hinder their good name.
                  
                  
                     The Dogs their vomit loues, the Goates their crags,
                     The Swine delight to tumble in the mire,
                     Our common prouerbe telles that ſcuruie nags,
                     Are fitteſt for to pleaſe a ſcabbed ſquire.
                     No maruell then though folly ſuch embrace,
                     Which ſeeke by lyes theſe skilfull mens diſgrace.
                  
                  
                     Yet they ſhall ſhyne as gold that rusteth not,
                     When theſe as droſſe with ſhame conſumd ſhall lye,
                     Repining much that no report may blot,
                     The rightfull prayſe which of theſe twayne ſhall flye.
                     So Momus ſhall with theſe compared fleet,
                     As doth the Beetle vnder Roſes ſweet.
                  
                  
                     Feare not therefore theſe ſlanderous toongs reports,
                     Which ſtrike the beſt, but bad vntoucht do ſaue.
                     Of your good names they batter not the forts,
                     But hating skilfull, ſhew what skill they haue.
                     Continue faſt, ſtrange cures procure your fame,
                     Do good, and none but bad will touch your name.
                  
                  
                     T. P.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  Now as followeth, is ſet downe thoſe cures, which by Gods helpe haue bene finiſhed and brought to perfite health.
                  
                     The cure of two Gentlemen greeuouſly burned with Gunpouder. Chap. I.
                     
                        ALthough it bee the maner of Fugitiues and Landlepers, which runne and gad from Countrey to Countrey, and from towne to towne, proclaiming their cures at the Market Croſſe, as did not long ſince one raunging runnagate, who called himſelfe Iohannes Petrus, aliàs Scleeues, which would needes take vpon him to cut of a great Wenne that long time had growne on a mans ſide: and without any tarience, with his flattring ſpeeches and ſweet words brought a ſleepe the poore patient to agree to haue his wenne taken away: the which in a ſhort time he did attempt. And to ſhewe the worthines of his handy worke, preſently did cut off the top or vpper part of the Wenne, which done, immediatly after, to grace the reſt of his worke, he tyed it round about the roote with a ſtrong ligature, to cauſe it beare out, & to ſhew the more vgglie vnto the beholders: Then he trayned his patient into the Market place, with all his ſore ſide open and bare, for the market folkes to beholde. But God knowes, within fewe daies his poore patient, by his beaſtly vſage, dyed: for which lewd abuſe, a Gentleman of Darby, called Maiſter Buckley, an Atorney of the law, vpon an honeſt zeale and for conſcience ſake baniſhed this abuſer out of the Countrey as an outlawe for euer. I will not follow theſe men, or rather monſters, neither

will I protract time, or vſe many circumſtances, but now I come vnto my purpoſed matter. It happened in anno
                        Note. 1577. two Gentlemen were drying of Gunpouder in a braſſe panne, who, as it did appeare, had no conſideration vnto the ouer heating of the panne, but without knowledge of the danger or care of themſelues, did continually ſtirre the pouder with their hands, vnhappely it chaunced, the pouder vpon a ſudden became on fire, wherewith they were moſt greeuouſly burned, both hands and face, and alſo their bodies, and their clothes were ſet on fire, which cauſed them to make a moſt lamentable crying: which being heard of diuers in the ſame houſe, and perceiuing their chamber to bee in a great ſmoake and ſmell of Gunpouder, preſently they entred in, and with al haſt that poſſible might be, did carie them into another roume, and there they did cut, rent, and teare of all their clothes from their bodies: otherwiſe, without theſe helpes, there is no queſtion but they had bene both burned to death. There dwelled neere vnto them a Gentlewoman, who did bring them into great eaſe with a whay, the which ſhe made of veriuce and milke. Neuertheleſſe, ſhe being fearefull to meddle any farther,A ſigne of a good conſcience. for that ſhe neuer had experience in ſuch great burnings with Gunpouder, and her ſtomacke could not away with the ſight nor ſauour of them, and then preſently I was ſent for: And after diligent view had, I did firſt anoynt the parts that were bliſtered, ſpecially on their handes and face, three times a day, for the ſpa
                           •
                        e of fower daies, with this remedie following, &c.
                     
                        Gale. Rec. 

                           Salis com. ℥. ſs.
                           Succi Cepae. ℥. iiij.
                         Miſce.
                     But where the ſkinne was burned off, and the parts made ravv and paynfull, there I vſed this vnguent, the which I haue infinite times approued in many cures that haue bene burned with Gunpouder, which medicine was neuer chaunged till the parts were perfectly whole, without any farther helpes but only this.
                     
                         
                        Clowe. Vnguent Ambuſi Rec. 

                           Axunglae porcinae lib. iiij.
                           Olei lini lib. ij.
                           Olei Roſ. lib. j. ſs.
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Folia maluarum.
                                 Violarum.
                                 Nympheae.
                                 Plantaginis.
                                 Prunellae
                                 Vmbilici veneris.
                                 Androſemon.
                                 Sempervini.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Infuſe theſe ſixe daies, then boyle it with a gentle fire of coales, till the herbes bee parched, then ſtrayne it, and adde thereto

                           Cerae albae. lib. ſs.
                           Nitri Albi. ℥. vj.
                        
And if you pleaſe in the bayling to put in of Shoemakers peece greaſe lib. i. your vnguent will bre the better: I haue with this vnguent cured many, and it is of my collection. But note this, that vnto their eyes I applyed this rémedie following.
                     Rec

                           Aquae Roſ. rub. ℥. iiij.
                           Lactis mulieris. ℥. ij.
                           Ouorum albuminis. numero. ij.
                           Saccari candi. q. s. Miſce.
                        
And I annoynted the eye liddes and the parts neere therevnto with this excellent vnguent.
                     Rec. 

                           Olei Roſ. ℥. viij.
                           Ceruſae lotae in aqua Roſ. rub. ℥. ij.
                           Cerae albae. ℥. ij.
                           Albuminis onorum. numero. iiij.
                           Camphorae. ʒ. ij. Miſce, fiat vnguent.
                        
                     
                     In the end I finiſhed theſe cures without blemiſh or ſignes of any burnings with

                        
                           Oleum ouorum, &
                           Oleum amigdalarum, &c.
                        
                     
                     I would be loth that any of the fruite of my labours ſhould bee profitable vnto the wicked, or come into their hands, ſith they are like Eſops curre, neither good to themſelues, nor fruitfull to others.
                  
                  
                     Here followe certaine remedies, good for burnings with Gunpouder. Chap. 2.
                     
                        IT is requiſite to bee noted and obſerued, that in any wiſe you attempt not to cut any of the blisters of them that bee ſo burned with the flame of Gunpouder: for that will cauſe your patient to be in too intollerable payne: but they muſt be anoynted, as aforeſayd, with the ſame remedie for the ſpace of three or fower daies, or els with any of theſe here ſet downe.
                     
                        M
                              ••
                            ſap.Rec. 

                           Saponis nigrae. lib. j.
                           Mellis com. lib. ſs.
                           Salis com. ℥. j.
                         
Miſce.
                     Or this.
                     Rec. 
                           Succi cepa. ℥. ij.
                           Olei lini vet. or Varniſh. ℥. j. 
                        
Miſce.
                     Any of theſe may be vſed as aforeſaid, and then if you pleaſe you may ſafely proceede in this cure with my vnguent, or els with any of theſe here vnder written.
                     
                        Am. Parre his vnguentum pro igne. Rec. 
                           Lithargiri auri. ℥. iiij.
                           Olei Roſ. ℥. iij.
                           Olei Depapaueris. ℥. ij. ſs.
                           Vnguentum populeon. ℥. iiij.
                           Camphor. ʒ. j.
                         
Miſce, & fiat vnguentum.
                     Or this.
                     
                     
                        Medici florentini. Rec. 

                           Olei Roſati. ℥. viij.
                           Olei ex ouis. ℥. ij.
                           Nitri albi puluerizati. ℥. ij.
                           Cerae. ℥. j. ſs.
                           Corticis med. ſambuci. m. j.
                         
Miſce, & fiat vnguentum ſecundum artem.
                     Or this.
                     
                        D. B.
                        Rec. The pith and barke of Elders, ana. ℥. ij. boyle theſe in three pints of water, till halfe be conſumed, then ſtrayne it, and adde to oyle of Nuttes ℥. iiii. boyle theſe till the water bee conſumed, and adde thereto Cerae. q. s.
                     
                     Et fiat vnguentum.
                     Or this.
                     
                        Ioſephus Quirſitanus.
                        Rec. Lard molten in the flame ℥. ii. and powre it into the iuyce of Beetes and Rewe, the Creame of Cow milke ℥. i. Mucilage, of the ſeedes of Cidoniorum, & Dragagant, ana. ℥. ſs. Miſce & fiat vnguentum.
                     
                     Or this.
                     
                        Jacobus We
                              •
                           
                           kerus.Rec. 
                           Calcis extinctae ℥. iij.
                           Olei. lib. j.
                           Cerae lib. iij.
                        
                     
                     Thou ſhalt euery day once waſh the chaulke, and let the water be taken away with a ſpunge: do this tenne daies, then waſh it with Roſewater and let it drie, and then melt your Waxe and Oyle, and take it from the fire, and put in the calx, made in moſt fine powder vnto the Oyle and Waxe. &c.
                  
                  
                     The true maner and order of the curing of a Marchant of this citie of London, which was wounded with Gunſhot. Chap. 3.
                     
                        A Fewe yeeres paſt, a Marchant of good account in this Citie of London, called Maiſter Thomas Gore, being at Fluſhing in Sealand, there making of great ſuite vnto the Prince of Orenge and the States, for the releaſe of a ſhippe and goods of his and his

friends, which the Fluſhingers had taken at ſea, in which time of his ſuite, he did ſtand at a doore where his lodging was, beholding a band of Dutch Souldiers, as they were marching to the walles: And as it is the maner of Souldiers, in townes of warre, to diſcharge their peeces as they paſſe by: ſo one of thoſe Dutch Souldiers, that partly knew him, and the cauſe of his comming to the towne, as the Gentleman himſelf confeſſed. This Souldier at that time had his peece charged with a bullet, and ſo ſhot at him, he hauing both his handes claſped together, and the bullet paſſed through the middle of both his hands, and fractured the bones, and alſo wounded him through the vpper part of his left arme, and alſo brake that bone in many peeces, which did rent and teare the muſcles, ſinewes, veynes, and arteries: after which followed great paynes, pulſation, and inflammation, that continued a long time, notwithſtanding he was preſently dreſſed by the Surgions of the towne, but he receiued of them ſmall comfort or hope of his recouerie. Then his friends being Gentlemen and Marchants of London, were by him giuen to vnderſtand that he was ſtill from day to day worſe and worſe. Then they ſent for him to London, and preſently vpon his arriual I was called vnto the cure: And after conference had with a Doctor of Phiſicke for his diet, purging and bleeding, I made readie forthwith this Cataplaſma, which appeaſed the paynes, and ceaſſed the inflammation.
                     
                        ana. m. ij.
  
                              Folia maluarum &
                              Violarum.Cataplaſma.
                              
                           
                        
                        ana. m. j.
  
                              Florum Chamomillae
                              Fol. Roſ.
                           
                        
                     
                     Boyle all theſe in newe milke till they bee very ſoft, then ſtampe them in a morter, and adde therevnto

                           ana. ℥. j. ſs.
  
                                 Vnguentum Roſ.
                                 Vnguentum populeonis.
                              
                           
                           Vitellos ouorum. numero. ij.
                           Farinae hordei. ℥. ij.
                           
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Radicis althae &
                                 Semina Pſillij.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Sometimes I did put in theſe mucilages of each ℥. ii. and of oyle of Roſ. ℥. i. ſs. with the crummes of white bread ſteeped in newe milke ℥. iii. Thus the parts were freed from all paynes and enflammations: which being done, to ſhunne the like daungerous accidences, which oftentimes in ſuch wounds is hard to reſiſt: therefore I applied round about the parts this defenſiue.
                     
                        Defenſiue.
Rec. 

                           Oleum Roſ. ℥. ſs.
                           Oleum Myrtini. ʒ. iij.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Sanguin. Draconis
                                 Boli armeniaci
                                 Farinae Hordei
                              
                           
                           ana. q. s.
  
                                 Albuminis ouorum
                                 Aceti Roſ.
                              
                           
                         Miſce.
                     
                        Mundificative. Rec. 

                           Mel. Roſ. ℥. ij.
                           Terebinthinae ℥. iij.
                           ana. ℥. j. ſs.
  
                                 Succi Apij &
                                 Plantag.
                              
                           
                        
Boyle all theſe together a little, and then adde therevnto,

                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Farinoe Hord. &
                                 Fabarum.
                              
                           
                           Sarcocollae. ʒ. j. ſs.
                           Croci. ʒ. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     Powder that which is to bee powdered, and mixe all theſe together, ſtirring it continually, till it come to perfection. Notwithſtanding I had very great helpe by this Mundificatiue, and the powder of Mercurie precipitate, yet I was after conſtrayned to vſe more ſtronger remedies: And amongſt others, I found moſt profite in this powder following, which did not onely take away the euill fleſh, but alſo it did remoue

diuers fragments and peeces of bones which were hidden within the ſpungious fleſh, &c.Clowes.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Mercurij praecipitati. ʒ. iij.
                           Aluminis combuſt. in aceto Roſ. ʒ. j.
                           Cinalri. ʒ. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     Likewiſe I commonly vſed Emplaſtrum Diachalſitheos, and the gum plaſter, publiſhed in my booke De Morbo Gallico, in the 27. leafe, which plaſter was inuented and practiſed by a very excellent Surgion a Frenchman borne, who followed the warres a long time vnder the King of Nauarre, and alſo in the Lowe Countries: By chaunce comming ouer into England, fel acquainted with Maſter Baker, vn
                           •
                        d whom he did giue this gum plaſter, as he called it, & ſince by meanes it is come into many mens hands. Truely the plaſter is worthie commendations, &c. But, as I haue aforeſayd, after I had taken away all the ſpungious fleſh, and mundified the wounds, and alſo remoued the looſe bones, then I next vſed my Vnguentum Incarnatiuū, wherevnto ſometimes I did mixe Aluminis combuſt. in Aceto Roſ. which vnguent did not onely drie vp ſuperfluous moyſture, but it did moreouer gently clenſe without any great mordication or byting: which being performed, then I did ſhortly after deſiccate and drie vp the ſayd wounds with Vnguentum Deſicatiuum, and Emplaſtrum Diachalſitheos. And thus I performed this work and cured him perfectly within this Citie of London.
                  
                  
                     The cure of one Maiſter Andrewe Fones, a Marchant of London, who being in a ſhip at the Sea, was ſet vpon by the Fluſhingers, in which fight he was very daungerouſly wounded with Gunſhot. Chap. 4.
                     
                        THis Marchants Shippe was ſet vpon by certaine Fluſhingers at ſea, and being a long time in fight with them, and very ſore oppreſſed by the number of men and Shippes, yet they did fight it out vntill

at the laſt by chaunce he was that into the vpper part of his breaſt neere vnto Os forculae, or the channell bone, and ſo paſſed through till it came to the lower part of Os ſcapulae, or the ſhoulder blade, where it did reſt till lie came to London, which was a long time: for immediatly after his hurt, the ſhip was taken and caried to Fluſhing, where he was in cure, as he ſayd, along time with two of the Prince of Orenges Chirurgians, to his great coſt and charges, yet it profited him nothing. Then I was ſent for, and after ſpeech had, I made probation and found where the ſhot was lodged: then I did without tarience, in the preſence of diuers ſkilfull Chirurgions of London make inciſion, and there I did take out the ſhot. And after that there was great care 
                           •
                        ad of him by his friends, for that I did ſignifie vnto them the wound was not without daunger. Then there was ioyned with me Maiſter Doctor Lopus, one of her Maieſties Phiſitions, which afterward ſhewed himſelfe to be both carefull and very ſkilfull, not only for his counſell in dyeting, purging and bleeding, but alſo for his direction of Arccus Apozema, amongſt others it wrought moſt ſingularly: the proofe thereof I neuer had vntill that time, but ſince I haue vſed it, and I haue found it a treaſure for the curing of wounds in the breaft, whoſe compoſition I will here ſet downe, &c. Firſt, after I had taken out the ſhot, I preſerued the wound with this digeſtiue, the which I vſed vpon tents and pledgets.
                     
                        Digeſtiue Clowes. Rec. 

                           Terebinthinae lotae in aqua vita ℥. iiij.
                           Vitellorum ouorum. nu▪ ij.
                           Olei Roſ. ℥. ſs.
                           Mercurij precipitat, biſcalcinati. ʒ. j.
                           Croci. ℈. j.
                         Miſce.
                     After the wound was herewith preſerued, then I annoynted it round about with oyle of Roſes warme, and Emplaſtrum Diachalcitheos diſſolued in oyle of Roſes, and at euery dreſſing I applyed hot ſteuphs of white wine, and Aqua
                        
                        vitae. q. s. and I defended the wound from accidents with this defenſiue.
                     
                        Defenſiue. Rec. 
                           ana. ʒ. j.
  
                                 Pul. roſ. rub. &
                                 Myrtillorum.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. vj.
  
                                 Boliarmeniaci
                                 Ter
                                       •
                                    ae ſigillat
                                       •
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Succotum Plantaginis
                                 & Solani
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ij. ſs.
  
                                 Olei Roſ. omphac.
                                 & Myrtillorum.
                              
                           
                           Aceti Roſ. ℥. j.
                           Cerae. ℥. ij.
                        
                     
                     In which time and ſpace of the vſe of theſe outwarde remedies, I did giue him to drinke of this Apozema oftentimes q. s.
                        Arceus Apozema.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           ana. p. iiij.
  
                                 Hordei mundat. contuſi.
                                 Paſſularum mundatarum contuſarum.
                              
                           
                           Radicorum Bugloſſae contuſae. ℥. iij.
                           Gliceryzae contuſae. ℥. j. ſs.
                           Seminum cumini. ℥. ij.
                           Iuiubarum, numero. xx.
                           Prunorum, numero. xv.
                           Radicum petrocelini contu. m. j.
                        
                     
                     All which being boyled in xiiii. pounde of Rayne water, to the conſumption of the third part, after that let it be ſtrongly ſtrayned, wherevnto ſhall be added▪
                        
                           Penediarum. ℥. iij.
                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Sirupi Roſarum
                                 & de duabus radicibus ſine aceto.
                              
                           
                           Saccari albi lib. ſs.
                           Cinamomi puluerizati. ʒ. j. Fiat Apozema.
                        
                     
                     
                        And likewiſe for cleanſing and mundifying of the ſayd wound, I vſed this next following, and alſo many times beſides with Baſilico, mixed with Mercurie precipitate.
                     
                     
                        Petri Andreae Mundificatiuum. Rec.

                            Terebinthinoe Venotoe lotoe in aquafumitoriae. ℥. iiij.
                           Vitellorum ouorum, numero. ij.
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Mellis Roſ.
                                 Sir. de fumitoria.
                                 Farinae orobi. ℥. iij.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Thuris.
                                 Maſticis
                                 Aloes hepaticae.
                              
                           
                           Radicis Peucedani. ℥▪ j. Miſce.
                        
                     
                     Alſo I iniected inwardly with a 
                           •
                        iting this excellent loſion, which did wonderfull well mundifie and clenſe the breaſt.Iniectio. Mundificatiua. Vigon.
                     
                     Rec.

                           ana. ℥▪ ij.
  
                                 Hordei mūdati
                                 Lentium.
                              
                           
                           Caudae equinae. m. j.
                           Roſ. Rub. m. ſs.
                        
                     
                     Boyle them in equall parts of common and Plantiue water, cum modico ſucco mali punici, vnto the conſumption of the third part, putting thereto, when it is ſtrayned,

                           Sacchari rub ℥. ij.
                           Sir▪ ex infuſione roſ. ℥. iij.
                           Croci. ℈. ſs. Miſce.
                        
                     
                     After the parts were perfectly mundified, then I perfected the cure with theſe remedies here vnder preſcribed.
                     
                        This iniection doth mundifie, incarne, & conſolidate.Rec. 

                           Aquae hordei lib. ſs.
                           Sir. roſ. ℥. j.
                           Penidiarum. ℥. ij.
                           Liqueritiae. ʒ. ij.
                           Myr
                                 •••
                              
                              ▪ ℥. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         with the afore rehearſed infections I vſed this

vnguent, which is very neceſſary for ſuch wounds made with gunne ſhot: and I haue approued it in many other cures.
                     
                        Vnguentum de Peto. Clowes. Rec. 
                           Succi de Peto. lib. vj.
                           Adipis ouini. lib. ij.
                           ana. lib. ſs.
 
                                 Oleorum Roſ. lumbricorum
                                 & Olei Hipericonis cum gummis noſtrae inuentionis.
                              
                           
                           Terebinthinae Venetiae, ℥. xij. in aqua vitae lotae.
                           Reſini pini. lib. ſs.
                           Gummis Elemnij. ℥. vj.
                           Olibani. ℥. iiij.
                           Maſticis. ℥. ij.
                           Collophonij. lib. j.
                           Mellis Roſ. lib. ſs.
                           Cerae albae. lib. j.
                           Vini albi. lib. j. ſs.
                         Miſce, & fiat vnguentum ſecundum artem.
                     With theſe remedies and order here rehearſed I did perfectly make him whole, and cicatrized vp the wound with vnguentum deſicatiuum rub. and ſo hee remayneth vnto this day, within this citie of London.
                  
                  
                     The cure of a certaine Souldier that was wounded with gunne ſhot in the lowe Countries, he was ſhot in at the bottome of his bellie on the left ſide, and the bullet paſſed through and reſted in the right buttocke neere vnto Anum, where it lay ſecretly hid and could not be found for the ſpace of three yeeres, in which time it became a Fiſtula of a hard curation. Chap. 5.
                     
                        IN the yeere of our Lord 1573. I was ſent for vnto my ſingular good friend Maſter Richard Yong, one of her Maieſties Juſtices of Peace of Middleſex, who did earneſtly requeſt me, that I would for his ſake, if it were poſſible, that the foreſayd Souldier, whoſe name was called Maiſter Giles, might bee recouered agayne

and brought to his former health, for that he was knowne to be a very valiant man. Which cure in truth ſeemed to me to be very hard and difficult, for that he had bene for the ſpace of three yeeres with diuers very good Chirurgions, both beyond the Seas, as alſo in England, and yet his greefe did ſtill reuerſe and breake out agayne. The reaſon I perceiued, was, for that the place where the bullet lay could neither by probation nor coniecture, bee certainly knowne where abouts it did reſt, and that was the chiefeſt cauſe, I ſuppoſe, they fayled in this cure. So at this worſhipfull Gentlemans requeſt, I did take him in cure, and after probation made with probes of leade and waxe Candles, and long and ſmall flexible tents that were apt to yeeld to euery crooked turning, yet by no meanes I could come to the knowledge or vnderſtanding where the bullet had conueyed and hid it ſelfe, neither could the patient himſelfe giue me any certaine direction thereof: then firſt of all I enlarged the mouth or orifice of the Fiſtula, with a tent made of a Spoonge, and for that the callous hollownes did penetrate deepe, and as I haue ſayd, being vncertaine of the bottome which was in that part where the bullet lay, therefore I ordayned a long and ſmall ſtiffe tent made of fine lint without any groſſe threeds in it, and ſo with the white of an Egge well beaten I framed my tents in length and bigneſſe according to the greatneſſe and ſmalneſſe of the greefe: which being thus prepared according to arte, then I did annoynt euery tent flightly ouer with vnguentum Roſarum, only to haue the powders cleaue faſt & take better hold on the tents, wherby it might be ſo conueyed in to deſtroy and remooue the callous hardneſſe which was inuironed about the circuits or compaſſe of the hollownes of the Fiſtula, and the firſt powder that I vſed for this purpoſe was this.
                     Rec. 
                           Vitriol crud. ʒ. ij.
                           Mercurij precipitat. ʒ. iij.
                           Cinabrij. ʒ. ſs.
                           Boli armeniaci orient. q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     
                        After that I had reaſonably well enlarged the Fiſtula with the powder, I vſed it twiſe a weeke, and I remoued the eſcares with vnguentum Roſarum, and layed vpon the ſame moſt commonly Emplaſtrum diachalcitheos diſſolued with oyle of Roſes and the white of an Egge mixt together, and ſo applyed it. And although I had herewith partly taken away the callous, yet I found not that profite and commoditie, as heretofore I had done in the curing of diuers other. Then hoping of better ſucceſſe with this ſtrong powder following, the which I applyed after the ſame maner and order, as the other aforeſayd.
                     
                        The ſtrong powder. Rec. 
                           Vitrioli albi combuſt. ʒ. j.
                           Alluminis vſti. ʒ. j. ſs.
                           Mercurij ſublimati. ℈. j.
                           Boli armeniaciorient. q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     With this powder I did wholly deſtroy the callous, ſo farre as it was poſſible to conuey in my tents. Then ſuppoſing I had made way ſufficient to haue found where the bullet reſted, but yet doe what I could by ſearching, either when he ſtoode vp right, or ſtooped downwards as he ſtoode when he was ſhot, all which profited nothing, till at the laſt I did conſider that ſuch Fiſtulaes that hath mo 
                           •••
                        k
                           •
                        s or turnings then one, could hardly bee cured by teuts: wherefore I followed the counſell of Tagaltius, who ſaith, in the cure of Fiſtulaes where medicine by tents cannot bee brought or conuayed into the bottome, as the cauſe doth require, then to vſe iniections and liquours meete for the purpoſe, to bée caſt in with a ſtring, is, ſaith he, greatly auaileable, as I very well did proue by this cure: for I prepared this water following, the which I did caſt it in with a 
                           •••
                        ing that had a long pipe and a large barrell: The ſayd water is called Aqua Fallopij.
                     
                     
                        Aqua Fallopij Rec. 
                           ana. lib. j.
  
                                 Aquae plantaginis
                                 & Roſ.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. ij.
  
                                 Alluminis Roch.
                                 Argenti ſublimati.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Put all theſe together in a double glaſſe, and boyle it in Balneo mariae to the conſumption of the fourth part. After I had caſt in of this water, preſently I ſtopped the mouth or orifice of the Fiſtula, and cauſed him forthwith to lye downe vpon his right buttocke, according as the paſſage directed me, only to this ende that the water ſhould not returne backe agayne till it had wrought his effect, for within xxiiii. houres after he did greatly complayne of extreeme paynes in his right buttocke 
                           •
                        ere vnto Anum, and there I did perceiue it to be greatly tumi
                           ••
                        ed and ſwolne, then I applyed on the out ſide of his buttorke where he complayned this Cataplaſma, which is a ſingular remedie in ſuch cauſes. The compoſition is as followeth.
                     
                        Anodina. Cataplaſma. Clowes. Rec. 

                           ana. m. j. ſs.
  
                                 Foliorum maluarum violarum.
                                 Hioſciami albi.
                              
                           
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Florū chamomelae.
                                 & Roſ.
                              
                           
                        
Boyle theſe in new milke, and then adde thereto

                           Medullae panis. q. s.
                           Farinae hordei. ℥. ij.
                           Sem. lini. ℥. iij.
                           ana. ℥. j. ſs.

                                 Oleorū roſ.
                                 & Violarum.
                              
                           
                           Vitellorum ouorum, numero, iii.
                           Croci. ℈. i.
                         Miſce.
                     Thus I let him remayne till the next day following in the morning, for then I had a good hope the water had found the paſſage and place where the bullet had ſeated it ſelfe. Then I called other in preſence when I made inciſion vpon the right buttock nere vnto Anum, & there by ye inciſton I tooke out the ſhot. And for that time to mitigate the payne I iniected newe milke and Sugar, with a little oyle of Roſes, and vpon pledgets I applyed vnguentum Roſarum to remoue the aſcher

which was made by the foreſayd water, and I ſtaied the bléeding which came by the inciſion with Galens powder: and ſo he reſted reaſonable quiet all that day and the next night: then at the ſecond dreſſing I ordayned this vnguent, the which I vſed till the paynes and inflammation was ceaſſed, and the ſaid vnguent is made of Axungia & oculorū populei, wherwith I mixed a ſmal quantitie of Mercurie precipitate, then after I did mundiſte it with this mundificatiue.
                     
                     
                        Vnguentum mundificatiuū
                         Rec. 

                           Gum. amoniaci. ℥. ii.
                           Galbani. ℥. i. ſs.
                           ana. ℥. i.
  
                                 Aloes
                                 Sarcoc.
                              
                           
                           Terebinthinae. ℥. iiii.
                           Reſinae pini. ℥. ſs.
                           Olei roſ. ℥. iii.
                           Olei maſtic. ℥. iiii.
                           Mellis roſ. ℥. i.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Succorum plantaginis.
                                 Apij.
                                 Card▪ Bened.
                              
                           
                           Viridis aeris. ʒ. iij.
                        
                     
                     Diſſolue your Gummes in white Wine and make an vnguent according to arte: After that the parts were well mundified, then I did iniect in twiſe a day this iniection, which doth both incarne and conglutinate.
                     
                        The iniection of Tagaltius. Rec. 
                           Aqua hordei. lib. i.
                           Mel. roſ. ℥. iii.
                           Saracol. ʒ. ii.
                           ana. ʒ. i.
  
                                 Olibani.
                                 & Myrrhae.
                              
                           
                           Vini Maluatici. ℥. vi. Miſce, ſecundum artem.
                        
                     
                     Thus in a ſhort time I finiſhed this cure with this iniectiō, & my vnguentum de Peto, & the plaſter of Diachalcitheos.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The cure of one Maſter Henry Rodes, one of the wayters of the Cuſtome houſe, he being vpon the water ſkirmiſhing with his peece, and by reaſon that the ſame had flawes in it, did breake in many peeces, and made a great wound vpon his chinne, & caried away a good part of the manduble and teeth withall: moreouer it did rent his hand in three parts very greatly: all which I cured agayne without mayme or deformitie. Chap. 6.
                     
                        AFter I had ſtitched the wounds of his hands and face, then I preſerued them with oyle of Hipericon warmed, and vpon the ſame to reſtrayne the bleeding I applyed this Reſtrictiue.
                     
                        Angeli Bolognini Reſtrictiui.Rec. 
                           Boli armeniaci. ℥. j. ſs.
                           ana. ʒ. j.
  
                                 Sanguinis Draconis.
                                 Terrae ſigillatae.
                              
                           
                           Thuris gummoſi. ʒ. ij.
                           Pilorum leporis terrefact. ℈. ſs.
                           Ouorum albuminis. q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     And the wounds of the hande were defended from iniurious accidences that commonly follow ſuch wounds, that will admit no cure till they bee remoued by good induſtrie and diligence, which was performed with this defenſiue. &c.
                     
                        Defenſiue. Rec. 
                           ana. ʒ. j.
  
                                 Roſarum rub.
                                 Myrtil.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. vi.
  
                                 Boli armeniaci.
                                 Terrae ſigillatae.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Succi platag.
                                 & Solatri.
                              
                           
                           Aceti roſ. ℥. ij.
                           
                           ana. ℥. ij. ſs.
  
                                 Olei roſ.
                                 & Myrtil.
                              
                           
                           Cerae. ℥. ij. Miſce.
                        
                     
                     Then with decent bolſtring and roulling I preſerued his hand for the firſt dreſſing, laying it orderly vpon a palmeſtrie of wood, bewrapped round with fine towe, and bound it eaſely ſo that his hand might ſafely lye on it, without ſtirring or remouing any way. Then after the wound of his lippe was alſo ſtitched, I vſed vnto the wounde of the outward part the oyle of Hypericon warmed, which I applyed to with pledgets of fine lint dipped in the ſame oyle, and vppon that the foreſayd Reſtrictiue. And I often dreſſed the wound in the inſide of his mouth with Sirup. roſ. & Mel. roſ. and alſo with this Gargariſme here following.
                     
                        Gargariſme. Rec. 
                           Aquae hordei. lib. j.
                           Succi granatorum. ℥. ij.
                           Mellis roſ. ℥. ij.
                           Diamorion. ℥. j.
                           ana. ℥. iiij.
  
                                 Aquae roſ.
                                 & Plantaginis.
                              
                           
                           Alluminis Roch. ℥. ſs.
                        
                     
                     And thus alſo with bolſtring the wound of his chinne and conuenient roulling of it, he reſted till the ſecond day, then at the ſecond dreſſing I ordeyned ſteuphs of white wine with Aqua vitae, q. s. and my vnguentum de Peto, which I vſed continually with the oyle of Hypericon warmed, and the plaſter called Diachalcitheos, and annoynting the parts about with oyle of Roſes: and ſo this wound of his chinne was in a ſhort time perfectly cured. In like maner I prepared at the firſt for the curing of his hande alſo ſteuphs of white wine with Aqua vitae, q. s. and I ordeyned likewiſe this digeſtiue, wherewith I continued vntill▪ the wounds did yeeld perfect

matter, in which time no accidence enſewed that did hinder the ordinarie courſe of curing.
                     
                        Pigesti
                              ••
                           mRec. 
                           Terebinthinae lotae in aqua vitae. ℥. ij.
                           Vitellorum ouorum, nu. ij.
                           Croci. ℈. ſs.
                           Olei Roſ. ℥. ſs.
                           Farinae hord. q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     A conuenient digeſtiue in ſuch wounds is neceſſarie, becauſe of the alteratiō of the ayre, & for bruſing & renting of the parts ſo diſſeuered: how be it, digeſtiues may not be vſed ouer long, for then it will certainly too much putrifie the parts. Moreouer, I vſed in the time of Application of this digeſtiue, Oleum lumbricorum, and Oleum hipericonis, of each equall portions, and twiſe a day I dipped the pledgets of the digeſtiue in theſe oyles, and annoynted the part about with warme oyle of Roſes, and a plaſter of Diachalcitheos diſſolued with oyle of Roſes, and the white of an Egge being al relented together, and ſo I continued with bolſtring and roulling, as aforeſayd, till the wound was well digeſted. Then I did mundifie thoſe wounds of his hande with this Mundificatiue which Maiſter Raſis the French Kings Surgion did giue vnto me: and it is a ſingular remedie in ſuch wounds, as I haue many times approued.
                     
                        Franciſci. Raſij. Mundificatiuum.Rec. 
                           ana. ʒ. iij.
  
                                 Pul. Aloes.
                                 Myrrhae.
                                 & Gentianae.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. ij.
  
                                 Pul. vtriuſque Ariſtolochiae.
                                 & Centaurij minoris.
                              
                           
                           Pulueris ireos florent. ℥. ſs.
                           
                           ana. q. s.
  
                                 Accipiantur omnia cum 
                                       •
                                    ir.
                                 Roſ. ſiccar.
                                 & Abſinthij.
                              
                           
                           Addendo Aquam vitae. ℥. j. 
                         Et fiat linimentum.
                     After the wound was well mundified, then I proſecuted vnto the ende of the cure with myne Incarnatiue, and ſometimes I mixed with it, as aforeſayd, aluminis combuſt, in aceto Roſarum, and after brought it vnto a perfect cicatrize with this vnguentum de minio following.
                     
                        Vnguentum de Minio. Rec. 

                           Minij leuiſsime triti. ℥. ij.
                           ana. ℥. ii.
  
                                 Olei roſati.
                                 Olei myrtini.
                              
                           
                        
Coquantur lento igne cum cera alba. ℥. ſs. Miſce, & fiat vnguentū ſecundū artem.
                     Now here I will draw vnto the end of this cure, the which I performed within this Citie of London. About the ſame time, one Henry Battey a Cheeſemonger, dwelling at BrokenThe cure of one Henry Battey a Cheeſemonger of London Wharfe, which by ouercharging of his Dagge yt did breake in many peeces, and the breech or ſcrew of the Dagge did flye vp into the corner of his eye and fractured the bone, and ſo paſſed vp into his head, and the wound preſently was cloſed together, that thoſe Chirurgions which were before called vnto the cure, ſuppoſed the wound to be very ſmall, and went about to heale it vp▪ but ſtill he did growe weaker and weaker, and in the ende he was ſpeechles, that diuers times the bel toulled for him. Then I was ſent for, and forthwith I enlarged the wound by inciſion, and I tooke out the ſcrewe of the Dagge out of his head, and the peeces of fractured bones, and ſo in a ſhort time after I cured him within this Citie of London, and yet he liueth vntill this day.
                  
                  
                     
                     The cure of a certaine Souldiar that was ſhot through the legge, and fractured the great bone called Ostibiae, or Foſcilla maior. This wound fell to Gangraene within two daies, by reaſon of a wonderfull inflammation that followed, he hauing alſo a very full & plethorick body. Chap. 7.
                     
                        THis Souldier was of a hot collericke and furious nature, and his bodie was repleniſhed with euill humours. The parts about the Gangroene was marueilouſly inflamed, which greatly increaſed the furie and ſpredding of the ſayd griefe: ſo that forthwith I ſcarified the affected part with deepe ſections and ſcarifications. And I opened with a launcet all the ſmall veynes that did appeare about the Gangraene, but where Horſleaches is to be had, it is very profitable to applye them, but in the ſtead of Horſleaches to opening the ſmall veynes with a launcet is auaileable, but not ſo good as the Leaches, becauſe they ſucke and drawe out the aduſted bloud▪ which is congeled and compact in the veynes and parts inflamed: then I fomented the corrupt part two times a 
                           •
                        ay with this Lixiuium, which did excellently cleanſe and conſume the filthineſſe and corruption.
                     
                        Lixiuium Am. Parrei.Rec. 


                           Aceti optimi. lib. j.
                           Mellis roſ. ℥. iiij.
                           Sir. acetoſi. ℥. iij.
                           Salis com. ℥. v.
                        

Boyle all theſe together and then adde thereto Aqua vitae. lib. ſs.
                     
                     When the corrupt part was herewith well fomented and bathed, then I applyed vpon it this vnguentum Aegiptiacum.
                     
                     
                        Vnguentum AEgiptiacum. Rec. 


                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Floris aeris.
                                 Alluminis roch.
                                 Mellis com.
                              
                           
                           
                              Aceti acerrimi. ℥. v.
                           Salis com. ℥. j.
                           Vitrioli Rom. ℥. ſs.
                           Sublimat Pulueriſati ℥. ij. 
                        

Miſce, & fiat vnguentum ſecundum artem.
                     Thus with pledgets of lint I did applye vnto the corrupt part, and vpon the ſame alſo this Cataplaſma, of which I haue had ſufficient tryall.
                     
                        Fallopij cataplaſma. Rec. 
                           Rapum vnum domeſticum.
                           Vnam ſatis craſſam radicem Raphani.
                        
Let them be ſcraped and ſufficiently cleanſed, then take

                           Pulueris ſeminis ſynapij. ℥. j.
                           Gariophilorum. ʒ. iij.
                           ana. q. s.
  
                                 Olei ſeminis lini.
                                 Olei nucum iugland. vetuſtiſsimi.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Let theſe bee laboured in a morter to the forme of a plaſter or Cataplaſme, and then vſe it, &c. Moreouer, there was applyed about the mortified parts three or foure times double this Defenſiue, which is of a marueilous good operation, for it comforteth the member, and will not ſuffer it to receiue corruption.
                     
                        Deſenſiue Vigonis. Rec. 

                           ana. ℥. iiij.
  
                                 Olei roſ. ex oliuis immaturis.
                                 Olei myrtini.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Succi plantaginis.
                                 & Solani.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Let all theſe bee boyled till the iuyce bee conſumed, then ſtrayne them, and adde thereto


                        
                           Cerae albae. ℥. j. ſs.
                           ana. ʒ. i. ſs.
  
                                 Farinae fabarum
                                 Farinae lentium.
                                 Farinae hordei.
                                 Sandalorum omnium.
                              
                           
                           Boli armeniaci. ℥. j.
                           ana. ʒ. i.
  
                                 Pulu. myrtilorum.
                                 Granorum & foliorum eius.
                              
                           
                        
 Miſce.
                     By theſe meanes afore rehearſed, the Gangraene was ſtaied, in which time and ſpace the Liuer veyne was opened, and his bodie was purged with Diacatholicon, and at ſundrie times wee did giue him to eate of fine Mithiridat a little quantitie at a time, which, as Tagaltius ſayth, is merueilous good to defend the filthie and venimous fumes from hurting and offending the Heart, which venimous vapors commonly aſcende vp from the corrupt member: And during all which time he was adioyned to a thinne and cooling diet. Then after that the Gangraene was by theſe meanes fully and wholly ſtayed, then the aſchers were after remoued and taken away by theſe remedies now next enſuing.
                     
                        Vnguentum Tetrapharmacon Galeni. Rec. 
                           ana. q. s.
                           Picis nigrae
                           Reſinae.
                           Cerae.
                           Adipis vaccinae. 
                         Fiat vnguentum.
                     Then I did take of this ſayd vnguent ℥. iiii. of the oyntment that is made of Axungia and Poplear buds ℥. iii. whervnto I did adde the yolkes of two Egges, all which together was well laboured in a morter, then I did therewith remoue the aſchers, which being done, the part affected was after

perfectly mundified with this moſt excellent vnguent.
                     
                        Mundificatiuum optimum Vigon.Rec. 
                           Terebinthinae clarae. ℥. iiij.
                           Mellis roſati colati. ℥. ij.
                           ana. ℥. i.
  
                                 Succi plantaginis.
                                 Succi Apij.
                              
                           
                        
Let them boyle vnto the conſumption of the iuyce, then take them from the fire, adding theſe here vnder written. viz.

                           Statim, vitellos duorum ouorum.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Farinae hordei.
                                 Farinae fabarum.
                              
                           
                         Miſce.
                     And after the place was thus well mundified and clenſed, then i did incarne and heale it vp with vnguentum ceraſeos paruum Meſuae, and with my vnguentum incarnatiuum mixed with Allumin. combuſt. in Aceto roſ. &c.
                     
                     
                        Vnguentum Ceraſeos paruum, Meſuae.Rec. 

                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Ariſtolochiae.
                                 Ireos.
                                 Sanguinis Draconis.
                                 Hamoniaci.
                                 Sarcocollae.
                              
                           
                           Lithargirileuigati. ℥. v.
                           Olei. lib. j.
                         Miſce.
                     And likewiſe I vſed this plaſter following alwaies vpon the foreſayd vnguent, vntill the end of this cure.
                     
                        Emplaſtrum nigrum. Rec. 
                           Olei roſ. lib. iiij.
                           Cerae albae. lib. ſs.
                           Minij. lib. ij.
                           Camphor. ℥. ſs.
                        
                     
                     
                        Boyle together your Minium and Waxe til they be black, then put in your Waxe, and laſt your Camphyr. And thus within the ſpace of tenne weekes he was ſafely cured, and his bone was agayne vnited and knit, his ſplints and roullers were taken alſo away, and the plaſters that did remaine about his legge, for the curing of the fractured bone was likewiſe remoued: and thus I finiſhed this cure as effectually as though he had neuer receiued hurt. But if the Gangraene ſhould yet haue increaſed, as oftentimes I haue ſeene, notwithſtanding theſe and ſuch like good remedies, then the laſt helpe will be miſerable, that is, to cut off the corrupt member in the whole and ſound parts, &c.
                  
                  
                     The maner and order of the taking or cutting off a mortified & corrupt legge or arme, which commeth oftentimes by reaſon of wounds made with Gunſhot, &c. Chap. 8.
                     
                        SIth as I haue ſayd, that oftentimes it happeneth, by reaſon of euill accidents which followe wounds made with Gunſhot, the whole member doth come to Gangraene Sideratio or Sphacelus, ſo that we are many times conſtrayned forthwith to make a ſpeedie diſpatch to cut off the member, which ſhalbe done as Maiſter Gale verie ſkilfully hath appoynted in the whole and ſound parts. And if it ſo fall out, or happen, that a legge is to be cut off beneath the knee, then let it be diſtant from the ioynt iiii. inches, and iii. inches aboue the knee: and ſo likewiſe in the arme as occaſion is offered. Theſe things being obſerued and noted, then through the aſſiſtance of almightie God, you ſhall luckelie accompliſh this work by your good induſtrie and diligence. But you muſt bee very circumſpect and carefull of all things which concerne the methodicall perfection of this worke, that is, you ſhall haue a great regard to the ſtate of his bodie, as alſo for euacuation and dyeting: And after his bodie is prepared

and purged, then the ſame morning you doe attempt to cut off the member, be it legge or arme, let him haue two houres before ſome good comfortable Caudle, or other broth, according vnto the diſcretion of the learned Phiſition, or Chirurgion, only to corroborate and ſtrengthen his ſtomacke. And in any wiſe omit not, but that he haue miniſtred vnto him ſome good exhortation by the Miniſter or Preacher: And you ſhall aduertiſe the friends of the patient, that the worke you goe about is great, and not without daunger of death: for that many accidents or ſyntomies doe runne and flocke together vnto ſuch great wounds: which deſperat euilles in ſuch cauſes will many times admit no cure. All which being conſidered, then ordeyne the night before ſome good defenſiue, and let it be applyed two or three times about the member.
                     
                        Defenſiue Clowe
                              •
                           .Rec. 
                           Emplaſtrum Diachalcitheos. lib. j. ſs.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Succi ſemperuiui.
                                 Succi plantaginis.
                                 Succi Solani.
                              
                           
                           Olei roſ. ℥. ij. ſs.
                           Olei myrtini. ℥. j.
                           Ouorum albumin. nu. ij.
                           Aceti roſ. ℥. j.
                         Miſce.
                     And oftentimes I haue vſed this with good ſucceſſe.
                     
                        An other defenſiue. Gale. Rec.  
                           Boli armeniaci. ℥. viij.
                           Farinae hordei. ℥. iiij.
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Sanguinis Draconis.
                                 Terrae ſigillatae.
                              
                           
                           Olibani. ℥. j. ſs.
                           Aceti. ℥. iiij.
                           Albumin. ouorum. q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     All which being well conſidered, you ſhall haue in a readineſſe

a good ſtrong fourme and a ſtedie, and ſet the patient at the very ende of it: then ſhall there beſtride the fourme behinde him a man that is able to hould him faſt by both his armes: which done, if the legge be to be taken of beneath the knee, let there bee alſo an other ſtrong man appoynted to beſtride the legge that is to be taken of, and he muſt hould faſt the member aboue the place where the inciſion is to be made, very ſtedily without ſhaking, and he that doth ſo hould ſhould haue a large hand and a good gripe, whoſe hand may the better ſtay the bleeding: but in ſome bodies it will not bee amiſſe to admit bleeding, ſpecially in ſuch bodies as are of hot complexionsIn hot complexions we are many times conſtrained the ſecond or third day to open a veyne, only to preuent a feuer, and in bodies of euill conſtitutiō. It is alſo very neceſſary to emptie or looſe the bellie by ſuppoſitories or Cliſters, if cauſe ſo require, &c. and doe abound in bloud. And I haue knowne through the ſkilfulneſſe of the houlder not much aboue ℥. iiii. of bloud loſt at a time: but in weake bodies it may not bee ſuffered to looſe much bloud: for bloud is ſayd to be the treaſure of life, for which cauſe a good houlder is not to be ſpared. In like maner there muſt be an other ſkilfull man that hath good experience and knowledge to hould the legge belowe, for the member muſt not be held too high, for ſtaying and choking of the ſaw, neither muſt hee hould downe his hande too lowe for feare of fracturing the bones in the time it is a ſawing off, and he that doth cut off the member, muſt bee ſure to haue a ſharpe ſawe, a very good catlin and an inciſion knife, and then boldly with a ſtedie and quick hand cut the fleſh round about to the bones without ſtaying, being ſure that the Perioſtium or Panicle that couereth the bones bee alſo inciſed & cut with the Nerue that runneth betweene the two bones of the legge, which ſhallAlſo he muſt haue a good quicke eye, a ſtrong arme, and a ſtout heart. be done with your inciſion knife: all this being orderly performed, then ſet your ſawe as neere the ſound fleſh, as eaſely you may, not touching it, and with a light hand ſpeedily ſawe it off, then hauing prepared alſo in a readines this reſtrictiue pouder to ſtay the fluxe of bloud.
                     
                        The reſtrictiue powder. Clowes. Rec. 
                           Boli armeniaci. ℥. iij.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Sanguinis Draconis.
                                 Aloes.
                              
                           
                           
                              Olibani. ℥. j. ſs.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Terrae ſigillatae.
                                 Maſticis.
                              
                           
                           Croci martis. ℥. ij.
                           Lapidis hematites. ℥. ſs.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Calcis ex teſtis ouorum.
                                 Mummiae.
                              
                           
                           Gypſi. ℥. vj.
                           Farinae volatilis. ℥. iiij.
                         Miſce.
                     Take of this powder as will ſerue your turne, and mixe with the ſayd powder Pilorum leporis terrefact. & ouorum albumin. ana, quantum ſufficet, and let the Hare haires, I ſay, bee cut as fine as poſſible may bee, ſo much as will bring it all to a reaſonable thickneſſe, and when the powder is thus prepared, before you cut off the member, let there bee in like maner made for the purpoſe three or foure ſmall boulſters or buttons, faſhioned in the top or vpper part like a Doues egge or as a Sugar lofe button, flat in the bottome to the compaſſe of a French Crowne, and round vpwards as aforeſayd, and theſe you ſhall make of fine Towe, according to arte wrought vp in water and vineger, wherevpon you ſhall applie ſome part of the reſtrictiue: And when the boulder of the member aboue doth partly releaſe the faſt holding of his hand by little and little, by which meanes you may the better perceiue & ſee the mouthes of the veynes that are inciſed and cut, and vpon the endes of thoſe large veynes that are inciſed and cut, you ſhall place the round endes of theſe three or foure ſmall buttons, and vpon them preſently without tariance, place a round thicke bed of Tow made vp in water and vineger, ſo yt it be fit as neere as you can geſſeit, to the compaſſe of the ſtumpe or member that is taken of, and thereon ſpred of the reſtrictiue,

and vpon that you ſhall lay an other broder bedde of Towe made vp as aforeſayd, ſo large yt it may compaſſe the member ouer, & that it may be ſafely tyed to keepe faſt on the reſt: and vpon the two beds of Tow ſpred the Reſtrictiue reaſonable thicke afore you place them to, and you ſhall tye on the large bedde of Towe being cut firſt with a payre of Siſſers in iiii. parts thereof, one cut right ouer againſt another an inch long and ſomewhat more, that the ſayd bed may be bound to with the more eaſe. And you ſhall tye the large bed to, as I ſayd, with a ligature, which they call a chokeband, doubled two or three times, being flat and fully an inch broade, and a yarde long: in the middle of the ſayd ligature you ſhall ſpred ſome of the reſtrictiue, wherby it may take the better hold to the large bedde of Towe: after it hath remayned on a ſmall time, being thus faſt tyed, then you ſhall place vpon theſe a double large bedde of ſoft linnen cloth: and then with a ſtrong rouller of foure inches broade, and three or foure yards long, let it bée artificially roulled, and where as the bloud beginneth to ſhew through all, in that place you ſhall ſpecially lay a good compreſſor or thicke bolſter made of Towe wrought vp in water and vineger the thickneſſe almoſt of a mans hand, and thinne towards the edges, and in compaſſe of a Philips dollar more or leſſe, as you ſuppoſe the greatneſſe of the fluxe to bee, and couch them cloſe to, in as many places as the bloud doth ſhew it ſelfe: and thus with thrée or foure roullers and as many ſoft linnen beddes, ſome ſingle and ſome double, with ſufficient number of bolſters, ſome great and ſome ſmall, you ſhall artificially ſtay the fluxe of bloud: which order and way did yet neuer fayle me, nor any other that haue vſed the ſame, according vnto the order here preſcribed. Some alſo doe vſe to drawe ouer the great bed of Towe a wet Oxe bladder, and pulleth it cloſe vp ouer the ſame, the which they tye faſt to with the aforeſayd ligature or chokeband, and vpon the ſame a double or ſingle linnen bed: and thus with a fewe broade bolſters and roullers they alſo very orderly ſtay the fluxe of bloud: All which being orderly done, then you ſhall eaſely as poſſible

may be, carie the patient to his bed, hauing a pillowe made readie to reſt the member on: Thus let him lye with as much quietneſſe as may be, kéeping a conuenient diet, then the third or fourth day you ſhall haue in a readineſſe ſteuphs of white wine, with a decent rouller, &c. Likewiſe prepare for the ſecond preſeruation of the wound this digeſtiue, or the like.
                     
                        Digeſtiue. Rec. 
                           Terebinthinae in Auqa vitae lotae. ℥. iiij.
                           Vitellorum ouorum. nu. ij.
                           Olei Roſ. ℥. ſs.
                           Sir. Roſ. ℥. j.
                           Maſticis. ʒ. ij.
                           Farinae hordei. q. s.
                           Croci. ℈. j.
                         Miſce.
                     And applie vpon the ſame digeſtiue this plaſter following, or the plaſter called Flos vnguentorum.
                     
                     
                        Emplaſtrum de Peto, or Hyoſciami lutei. Clowes.Rec. 
                           Reſinae. lib. ij.
                           Cerae albae. lib. j.
                           Adipis hircinae. ℥. iiij.
                           Gummi Elemni. lib. ſs.
                           Aquae vitae. lib. ſs.
                           Succi de Peto. lib. iiij.
                        
                     
                     And if you cannot get Succi de Peto, take in the ſteade thereof Hyoſciami lutei the quantitie aforeſayd, boyle all theſe till the iuyce be conſumed, then ſtrayne it, and after make it vp in rouffes. This plaſter I haue proued to bee good for wounds made with gunſhot: And after the wound is well digeſted and brought to perfect matter, then you may mundifie the ſame with this gentle mundificatiue, or the like.
                     
                        Mundificatiuum. Rec. 

                           Mellis Roſati. ℥. iiij.
                           Farinae hordei. ℥. ſs.
                           
                              Terebinthinae. ʒ iij.
                           Reſinae. ʒ. ij.
                           ana. ʒ. j.
  
                                 Thuris.
                                 Maſticis.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. ſs.
  
                                 Myrrhae.
                                 Sarcocollae.
                              
                           
                           Cerae. ʒ. ij.If you adde to of Cerae one ounce, it is not amiſſe.
                           
                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Olei maſtic.
                                 & Hyperic.
                              
                           
                         Miſce.
                     Or this.
                     
                        Vnguentum mundificatiuum. Rec. 

                           Mellis. ℥. x.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Farinae Siliginis
                                 Lupinorum.
                                 Hordei.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Myrrhae.
                                 Aloes.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Succi apij.
                                 Abſinthij.
                              
                           
                           Terebinthinae clarae. ℥. ij.
                         Miſce, & fiat vnguentū ſecundū artem.
                     For Incarnatiues you may vſe vnguentum aureum, vnguentum ceraſeos Meſuae, or that which is of my collection ſpecified in my booke De Morbo Gallico, or this Incarnatiue following, which I haue vſed in ſuch cauſes, and it profiteth this cure greatly, ſpecially in children, and in ſoft and tender bodies.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. vj.
  
                                 Terebinthinae clarae.
                                 Olei roſati.
                              
                           
                           Reſinae pini. ℥. iiij.
                           Cerae citrinae. ℥. iij.
                           Gummi Elemni. ℥. ſs.
                         Miſce, & fiat vnguentum.
                     
                        And ſometimes I mixed herewith Alluminis combuſt. in aceto roſarum, and being made into very fine powder q. s. it would then alſo gently clenſe without payne, &c. And I did vſually deficcat and drie vp the ſame with this Deſiccatiue, and ſometimes with vnguentum de minio, &c.
                     
                        Vnguentum deſiccatiuum. Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. j.
 
                                 Antimonij.
                                 Ceruſſae.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Plumbi vſti
                                 Lithargiri.
                                 Terebinthinae.
                              
                           
                           Olei roſati. ℥. iiij.
                           Cerae albae. ℥. iij.
                         Miſce.
                     Powder that which is to bee powdred, very finely, then diſſolue at a gentle fire of coales your Waxe Oyle and Cerebinthine, and in the cooling put in the powders, &c. But if you haue not this my powder alwaies in a readines, you may thē vſe Vigoes order, that is, to cauteriſe the place with a bright cauteriſing yron fit for the purpoſe, made red hot: or els with good Maiſter Gales powder, which I wil hereafter ſet downeThe yron is moſt excellēt, but that it is offenſiue to the eye, and bringeth the patient to great ſorowe and dread of the burning and ſmart. in this booke, which powder of his was a worthie inuention, and better pleaſed the patients then the burning yrons, which were, I ſay, very offenſiue vnto the eye, and yet the powder wrought with extreme payne, and made a very great aſcher, & by that meanes the bone afterwards hath bene cut off newe agayne, as I haue ſeene many times within the Hoſpitall of S. Bartholmewes, and ſo did make a very long worke or euer they were cured: but this powder here publiſhed neuer cauſeth payne, but often bringeth with it reaſonable white matter. The foreſayd powder is of my collection and gathering, the which I did put firſt in practiſe in the Hoſpitall of Sainct Bartholmewes, as it is well knowne vnto ſome of the Surgions that then ſerued there, and yet liue within this Citie of London, who were preſent with me when I firſt put

it in practiſe, after the order before declared, at which time there was taken off in one morning ſeuen legges and armes, and ſo by Gods aſſiſtaunce, we ſtayed al their fluxes of bloud, without any payne vnto them, but onely in the compreſſion and cloſe roulling and tenderneſſe of the wound excepted. After it was made known, there were diuers that were deſtrous to haue it: amongſt the reſt Maiſter Crowe, a man of good experience and knowledge in the arte, he was very earneſt with me for it: and for diuers ſpeciall occaſions, I was the more willing to giue it him, but I would not deliuer it vnto him as then, till he had ſeene with his owne eyes firſt the experience and profe of it. Not many daies after the woorſhipfull Maiſters of the ſayd Hoſpitall requeſted me with the reſt of the Surgions to goe to Hygate to take off a maydes legge which they had ſeene in the viſitation of thoſe poore houſes: The ſayd legge was ſo greeuouſly corrupted, that we were driuen vpon neceſſitie to cut it off aboue the knee, which wee did performe by this order here before preſcribed, and he did ſee, we ſtayed the fluxe, and loſt not much aboue ℥. iiii. of bloud, and ſo cured her after within a very ſhort time. Then I gaue him the order and making of the ſayd powder. Only this I am to giue you to vnderſtand, that I haue ſince my firſt collection, added other Simples, which profite it greatly: And I haue alſo giuen it vnto many good Surgions, who were men both ſober, wiſe and learned, as well in London as in the Countrie, that haue bene thankfull for it: But I muſt needes ſay agayne, ſome other there are, whoſe tongues can vnfoulde ſecretes, and their capable heads vnderſtand great miſteries, vnto whō I haue likewiſe friendly giuen it. Theſe men were not onely vnlearned, but alſo ſhameleſſe, and ſuch haue rewarded me agayne, euen like vnto the churliſh Curre vnto whom reliefe was offered, whoſe malice is ſuch, that he neuer reſpecteth the goodneſſe of the gift, nor the courteſie of the giuer, but ſnarleth and ſnatcheth at him that offereth reliefe to helpe to ſatiſfie his hunger: a ſlender recompence for ſo great a courteſie. To ſpeake hereof I am taught by experience,

for hauing beſtowed on them, not only this profitable powder, the which now moſt willingly I preſent vnto all the young profeſſors of Chirurgerie, &c. and I knowe they haue vſed the ſame, vnto the profite of their patients and credite of themſelues: yet neuertheleſſe, ſome could finde in their hearts behinde my backe to render me no other thankes, than did the churliſh Curre, who rewarded euill for good. In ſteade of thankes I haue bene backbitten: and thus I reape for my labour but chaffe for corne: ill will and priuat grudge, for courteſies and friendſhip offered. I doe not here compare any good man vnto any ſuch had perſons, neither will I compare any ſuch bad perſons vnto any good man. But (now gentle and courteous Reader) I doe craue pardon, for that I doe here with the Macedonian call a ſpade a ſpade, a backbiter a backbiter. And ſo I ende, wiſhing all good Artiſtes to take heede and beware, vnto whom they impart their ſecretes, leaſt they alſo enter into the gappe of vngratefulneſſe, or the vnſauerie dunghill of their deſpightfull tongues.
                  
                  
                     Now followe very good approued remedies for wounds made with gunſhot, which may bee vſed with Flamula, if the bullet haue paſſed through, or els with tents according to the depth and greatneſſe of the wound. Chap. 9.
                     
                        Am. ParrieRec. 
                           Mercurij precipitati biſcalcinati. ℥. j.
                           Butyri recentis. ℥. iiij.
                           Vnguenti baſilicon. ℥. iij.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Olei liliaci, &
                                 Lini.
                              
                           
                           Camphyr ʒ. ij. diſſolued in Aqua vitae. q. s.
                         Miſce, & fiat vnguentum.
                     Or this.
                     Rec. 
                           Vnguentum Baſilicon. ℥. ij.
                           Butyri recentis. ℥. j.
                           
                           Mercurij praecipitati. ʒ. ij. ſs.
                        
Miſce, & fiat vnguentum.
                     Or this.
                     
                        Digeſtiue Clowes Rec. 
                           Terebinthinae lotae in Aqua vitae. ℥. iiij.
                           Vitellor. ouorum. nu. ij.
                           Vnguenti Populeon ſimplic. ℥. ij.
                           Olei roſarum. ℥. ſs.
                           Mercurij precipitati. ʒ. ij.
                           Croci. ℈. j.
                         Miſce.
                     This Digeſtiue being vſed with Oleum catulorum ofA note or obſeruation. Maiſter Ambroſe Parries deſcription, hath a certaine league and ſoctetie or facultie to appeaſe paynes, and to alter and chaunge the contuſed ſubſtance of fleſh, made by the bullet, into perfect matter: but if the part affected be poſſeſſed with any diſtemper or inordinate accidents, which often followe ſuch wounds, ſometimes by reaſon the bodie is repleniſhed with thinne and ſeirrous humours, called of the learned Cachochimia, and other diſtemperatures, ſpecially in ſuch bodies as abound in choler, flegme, and melancholie, then it is conuenient to make euacuation by purging the humour moſt moleſting and abounding, which is to bee done with great diſcretion. There are other noyſome cauſes which followe theſe wounds, and do, as it were, excruciat and torment the patient with great inflammations, fluxes of blond, feuers and conuoltions, which ſodainly inuade the bodie: which if they bee not with ſpéede cured, it waſteth the ſtrength, and the recouerie of the patient is to be lamented, and death ſpeedily enſueth. So theſe things being foreknowne, diligently weigh and conſidered, may by Gods aſſiſtaunce, be preuented, where Reaſon and Experience are copartners and partakers together.
                     This Oyle is alſo good for wounds made with gunſhot.
                     
                        Landrada. Rec. 
                           Oleilini. lib. ij.
                           
                              Terebinthinae. lib. ij.
                           Viridis aeris pul. ʒ. ij.
                         Miſce.
                     Or this which is called Oleum catulorum.
                     
                     
                        This oyle doth appeaſe paynes and alſo remoueth the bruſed or contuſed fleſh. Am. Parrie.Rec. 
                           Olei viol. lib. iiij.
                           Catulos duos.
                           Verminum terreſtrium. lib. j.
                        
Boyle theſe ouer a gentle fire of coales till the fleſh bee ſeparated from the bones, then ſtrayne it, and adde thereto

                           Terebinthinae Venetae. ℥. iiij.
                           Aquae vitae ℥. j.
                        
                     
                     Some of late haue added vnto this Oyle the leaues of Nicoſiana, or Peto, with other herbes, and they ſay it profiteth greatly: but I haue vſed it without any addition, as Maiſter Ambrofe Parrie hath himſelfe publiſhed, and for the worthineſſe thereof I can ſpeake by experience: for being ſent for by letters from Right Honorable, and alſo by her Maieſties commaundement to goe into the Low Countries, to attende vpon the Right Honorable Earle of Leiceſter, Lord Lieuteuant and Captaine Generall of her Maieſties forces in thoſe Countries, and ſhortly after my comming thether, I was commaunded by his Excellencie to haue a great regarde vnto the hurt and wounded Souldiers, and there was likewiſe in that ſeruice, Maiſter Goodrouſe one of her Maieſties Surgions,It is more tollerable in him that praiſeth his owne vertues, than he that boſteth of other mens deedes. who was alſo employed about the curing of the wounded Souldiers, and without praiſe of my ſelfe or flatterie to others here nominated, but onely I ſpeake it to the praiſe of almightie God, there did not dye, to my remembrance, one man that was then hurt with gunſhot, ſo that he was not firſt wounded to death, but he was ſhortly after perfectly cured: for our method and waies of curing, did greatly differ from the bitter practiſes of a ſort of ſtraglers, which did thruſt themStealing of ſame & credit, is the onely marke ſuch ſhoote at. ſelues into Captaines bands for principall Chirurgions, and there without either knowledge or ſkill ſeduced many with

their rude obſeruations, and vndiſcret practiſes, which at randon they had gotten, and partly by tradition from their fooliſh maiſters, of whom alſo they had learned bedroulles of errors, with a fewe experiments paſſed from hand to hand: & ſuch, as ſayth Guido, followe one another as it were a ſort of Geeſe or Cranes. I ſay, like maiſters, like men: more fitly may they be compared vnto certaine cart Jades or Packhorſſes, yt lamely doe carie their loades vnto the Inne doore, but farther they cannot, nor will not goe. And thus the blind leadeth the blind, moyling and toyling as though they ſhould roule the ſtone of Siſiphus. But it may bee ſome of them hereafter will repent their raſhneſſe and bouldneſſe: as did the Ape, who as it is ſayd, was ſo proude of his furd Jacket, that he would forſooth needes imitate the Beare, only to ſpoyle the poore Bees of their hiue and Honie. But to conclude with ſuch catterpillers which enter into other mens harueſt, I am perſwaded there bée mo killed by ſuch wicked practiſers, then there are many times ſlayne by the ſword of the enemie. And this I haue generally noted of them, that ſeldome haue they cured any of their Patients, but they did firſt paſſe as it were through a gulfe of miſerie, which is too infallible ſignes of their wilfull ignorance: for no doubt but many of them, as I ſay, doe practiſe their malignant corroſiue, byting or gnawing medicines, to the vtter ſubuertion and ouerthrow of their patients. For, what feuers, what fluxes of blood, what crampes and conuultions do followe, let ſuch as haue ſeene their beaſtly dealings be iudge, ſpecially the poore wounded Souldiers, who abide ſtill the brunt of their ſowterly Chirurgerie. But now (to the praiſe of almightie God be it ſpoken) who did ſo bleſſe our labours, that none of our hurt Patients did at any time complayne of payne or greefe, by reaſon of our remedies, but they did take their naturall and quiet reſt. Being but ſhot through either their thigh, legge or arme, or other fleſhie parts of the bodie, ſo that no ioynts were wounded, or bones greatly fractured withal, but being wounded in the fleſhie parts, then our order was thus, to draw a Flamula through the member, being

made of fine Lawne or ſome fine linnen cloth, & vpon the ſame we applyed of my Digeſtiue, or the like in operation, and ſleeped the ſame in warme Oleum catulorum, and did alſo conuey into the wound of the aforeſayd Oyle being warmed, and in the Orifices of theſe wounds placed a ſhort tent armed with the Digeſtiue, &c. and I layd vpon the ſame Emplaſtrum de Peto, or Hyoſciami lutei, and alſo round about the member the defenſiue made of Emplaſtrum Diachalcitheos, with the Succies, as I haue ſet it downe in the eight Chapter of this booke, and then with conuenient roullings and bolſterings we accompliſhed this firſt preſeruation. And when the wound was in time perfectly digeſted, and the contuſed fleſh made vp the bullet remoued, then forthwith the wound was mundified and made cleane with this Mundificatiue, or the like.
                     
                        Mundificatiue. Franciſcus Raſius. Rec. 
                           Butyri rec. lib. ij.
                           ana. lib. ſs.
  
                                 Cerae citrinae
                                 Reſinae
                                 Reſinae pini.
                                 Picis Graecae.
                              
                           
                           Viridis aeris ℥. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     The wound being well clenſed, then wee did leaue of the vſe of the Flamula, and vſed ſhort and eaſie tents, and did after incarnate and heale it vp with this vnguent following.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. vj.
  
                                 Gummi Elemni.
                                 Opopanacis.
                              
                           
                           Bdelij. ℥. ſs.
                           Reſinae pini. ℥. j.
                           Terebinthinae. ℥. iiij.
                           ana. ʒ. ij.
  
                                 Thuris.
                                 Maſticis.
                              
                           
                           
                           ana. ℥. x.
  
                                 Cerae citrinae.
                                 Olei roſarum.
                              
                           
                         Miſce.
                     And oftentimes I did iniect into the wounds Oleum Hypericon cum gummis. And if the wound did chance to paſſe into the bodie, then I did giue them this wound drinke, or els ſome of theſe drinkes following.
                     
                        ClowesRec. 
                           Vini albi. lib. viij.
                           Aquae com. lib. x.
                           Saccari albi lib. ij.
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Conſolidae vtriuſque.
                                 Filicis aquaticae.
                                 Calendulae.
                                 Ophiogloſſon.
                                 Celidoniae
                                 Polipodij quircinae.
                                 Numilariae.
                                 Lillij conuali.
                                 Sanimundi.
                                 Diapenſiae.
                                 Veronicae.
                                 Verbenae.
                                 Pimpinellae.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Boyle all theſe in Balneo Mariae fiue houres, and ſo let it reſt till it be colde, and drinke hereof two or three times a day, ſpecially morning and euening, ℥. iiii. at a time, &c. I haue with this wound drinke, heretofore found great pleaſure in the curing of diuers perſons that haue bene wounded into the bodie. And for example, I will here ſpeake only of two orObſeruatio. three which were wounded in the bellie, and ſo conclude, for being ouer tedious.
                     There did come vnto me to be cured a Gunner of a ſhippe, which was daungerouſly wounded in the lower region of his

bellie, ſo that a great part of the Zirbus or Omentum, did come out of the wound, and alſo ſome of the Inteſtines or guttes proffered themſelues to come forth likewiſe: but the Patient did keepe al very cloſe and well till he came vnto me: Then I cauſed him to lye downe on a bedde vpon his backe, and after ſearch made, I found the guttes ſafe and not touched of the weapon: then with a ſtrong doubled thrid I did tye faſt the Zirbus, as cloſe vnto the wound as poſſibly well I might, and then a finger breadth, or there abouts, I did cut off that part of the Zirb that hanged out of the wound, and ſo I cauterized it with a hot yron almoſt to the knot: All this being done, I put agayne into the bodie that part of the Zirb which I had faſt tyed, and I left the péece of the thrid hanging out of the wound: which within foure or fiue dai
                           ••
                         after, nature caſt forth. The thrid, as I ſay, being faſt tyed, then preſently I did take a needle, with a double ſtrong ſilke thrid wel waxed, wherewith I did thruſt through both Mirach and Siphach on the right ſide of the wound: but on ye left ſide of the wound I did put the needle but through Mirach onely, and ſo tyed theſe three faſt together with a very ſtrong knot, and preſently I cut off the thrid. Then, on the ſame ſide where I did ſtitch but Mirach only, which I call the left ſide, I did there begin agayne to thruſt the needle through both Mirach & Siphach, and alſo on the right ſide where I did firſt begin to force the needle through Mirach and Siphach, there I did thruſt that but through Mirach onely, and ſo as before I made another ſtrong knot, and then I cut off agayne the thrid, and after the ſame maner I made the third ſtitch, &c. Al which is according to Weckers, & other learned mens opiniōs, who ſay alſo, that the ſtitches of the one ſide muſt be higher than on ye other ſide. The Author of all good knowledge (I meane Galen the Prince of Phiſicke and Chirurgerie) alloweth this maner of ſtitching wounds in the bellie: and alſo it is allowed of all our auncient predeceſſors ſucceſſiuely vnto this day. After (as I ſay) I had thus finiſhed all ye ſtitches that were there requiſite and needfull to bee made, then I did preſerue the ſayd wound

with my oyle of Hypericon, conueying it in wt a fine peece of Lawne dipped in the foreſaid Oyle, and ſo put into the dependant part of the wound. Then to reſtrayne the bleeding, I placed vpon the wound Galens reſtrictiue powder, which I mixed with the whites of Egges and Hare haires, and about the wound I vſed this defenſiue, which did defend the wound from anoyance of euill accidents.
                     
                        Defenſiue. Clowes. Rec. 
                           Emplaſtrum Diachalcitheos. lib. j. ſs.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Succorū ſemperuiui
                                 Plantaginis.
                                 Solani.
                              
                           
                           Olei roſ. ℥. ij.
                           Olei Myrtini. ℥. j. ſs.
                           Ouorum albumin. nu. ij.
                           Aceti roſ. ℥. j.
                         Miſce.
                     Thus, with good bolſtring and roulling, he reſted till the ſecond day. Ye ſhall vnderſtand, that immediatly after he did complayne of the grudging of an Agew, and being therewith ſomewhat diſtempered, preſently there was opened a veyne, and forthwith a gentle mollifying Cliſter alſo: then ſhortly after his bleeding and purging he mended againe, and by this meanes his Feuer was preuented. Thus in foreſhewing of the euilles that happened in this cure, you may the eaſilier ſhunne the like daungers in others. The ſecond day we opened the wound, and we found it very fayre, without payne, or any other euill ſignes or ſymtomes: then firſt I fomented or bathed well the wound with my wound drinke: which being ſo done, I put into the wound warmed my oyle of Hypericon, with a peece of fine Lawne, as before ſayd, alſo with pledgets of fine lint I did ſpred them with vnguentum de Peto: and I dipped theſe alſo in the warme oyle of Hypericon, likewiſe vpon ye ſame pledgets I placed the gum plaſter with warme double ſteuphs ſteeped in the wound drinke, and

ſo I roulled it vp according to arte: then preſently wee gaue him of the ſayd wound drinke ℥. iiii. and betwéene one and two of the clocke in the afternoone we gaue him ℥. iiii. more, and at night betweene ſeuen and eight of the clocke ℥. iiii. alſo, and ſo he did continue till he was cured. Likewiſe for a time his ordinarie drinke at meales was Ptiſanes and Barly water, and he was moreouer adioyned to a thinne and cooling diet. And ſo by this maner and order of dreſſing twiſe in the day, that was in the morning and euening, and by his good order of diet, he was within the ſpace of xxi. daies made perfect whole, &c.
                     Alſo in Anno 1580. there was one William Mouch a
                        There was ioyned with me in this cure Maiſter Clowe▪ a very expert & ſkilful Chirurgiō. ſeruingman remayning about this Citie of London, who receiued a wound in his bellie, and the Zirb iſſued out of the wound ſo broade in compaſſe, that it did very eaſilie couer a great ſquare trencher, which was cured likewiſe with the order and remedies afore rehearſed.
                     Moreouer, in Anno 1586. a little girle of the age of tenne or twelue yeres, dwelled with one Maſter Bracie a Marchant of London, which girle was alſo wounded in the bellie with a knife that ſhe caried in her hand, and in running haſtely ſhe ſell downe vpon the ſame, ſo that the Zirb did come forth of the wound the compaſſe of a mans hand: ſhe being then in the Countrie ſeuen miles from London, vnto whome I was brought: and preſently at my comming I did cut off the part of the Zirb that hanged out of the wound, and then I tyed it faſt, as before I haue ſayd: but you ſhall vnderſtand, I did not vſe any cauterize vnto this girle, neither yet vnto the ſeruing▪
                        Note. man: The reaſon partly was, for that neither the Patients nor their friends would willingly heare of the hot yrons, although it were ſayd to be a ſafe and ſure way: Neither did I finde any diſcommoditie for not vſing of them: which girle was after brought to London, whome I likewiſe did cure in a very ſhort time: for the which the name of: ODD bee praiſed.
                     Now laſt of all (friendly Reader) I haue thought it good

for the better vnderſtanding of all young practſzers of Chirurgerie, to ſignifie vnto them what Zirbus is, & alſo whereof it is compoſed: In like maner what Mirach is, and alſo what Siphach is, each part ſeuerally, and of their place or ſituation within the bodie of man: and by the knowledge hereof ye ſhall eaſely foretell the poſſibilitie and ſucceſſe of the cure: but being ignorant herein, we bewray our ſelues to the world to be none of the ſonnes of arte.
                     The Zirb is ſayd by Vigo, and other▪ learned authors, to bee a Panicle, compound of two Tunicles, and of diuers Arceries and Ueynes, hauing alſo in it a great quantitie of fat, ſo ordeyned of nature to defende the inwarde parts from outwarde colde, and alſo to comfort them, and to keepe them warme, &c.
                     Next vnto the parts outwardly is Siphach, or Peritonea, and it is a ſinowie Panicle, very ſtrong and tough: but without bloud, and of complexion cold and drie, and for theſe cauſes it cannot receiue conſolidation: it is conteyned within the bellie, and it doth circumuolue and keepe in the entrailes very well together, &c.
                     Alſo Mirach is that part which is conteyning on the outwarde part of the bodie, and is compoſed of the outwarde ſkinne, called in Latin Cutis. Secondly, of Adipis, or the fat. Thirdly, of Carnious, or fleſhie Panicles. And fourthly, of Muſcles.
                     
                     Here haue I very briefly rehearſed the parts conteyned and conteyning, from the Zirbus, which is next the inteſtines, vnto the outward parts called Mirach and Siphach, the which I haue thus done for the better inſtruction of all young practizers of Chirurgerie, whom I wiſh voyde of ſclaunder and infamie: And I know ſuch cures do commonly happen in the warres both by ſea and land: for ye cauſe I haue here publiſhed this ſhort note or obſeruation for the benefit alſo of the wounded Souldiers, who oftentimes doe periſh by meanes of the raſh careleſnes and blind practizes of many ignorant Chirurgions, which will take vpon them, to the diſcredite of themſelues

and the arte, the thing which paſſet▪
                         their knowledge and ſkil, but only can face it out very bouldly, & alwaies their bragging knowledge, beareth the ſway with a ſorte of windſhaken reaſons, which would ſet a mans teeth an edge, and trouble any wiſe mens eares in the hearing.
                     Or this.
                     Rec. 
  
                           ana. ʒ. j.
                           Baccarum Lauri.
                           Ariſtolochiae rotundaeMadame Danueil
                                    •
                                 .
                           
                           Prunellae.
                        
                     
                     Beate all theſe to fine powder, and take of Prunellae that groweth in the ſhade, then take the fleſh of freſh water Creuices dryed into powder, and of ſweete Orrace, ana. ʒ. ſs. tye all theſe together in a drie linnen cloath, and ſeeth them with a handfull of Vinca. peruinca. in three quarts of white wine til a quart be conſumed. Epithemat the wound, thē cloſe the lippes of the wound, and couer it with a leafe of red Colewort dipped in the ſayd Wine, and lay vppon them large linnen clothes dipped alſo in the ſame wine: likewiſe if the wound bee deepe, ſiring in the decoction euery morning and euening, and procéede in the reſt as before. Furthermore, let him drinke ℥. i. or ii. of this drink euery morning, faſting vpon it three or foure houres from all meate. If the Potion ſeeme too bitter to thee, to the quantitie of powders and herbes adde to double the quantitie of wine: This drinke haue I proued, & it is wonderfully commended by Noblemen, Gentlemen & ſouldiers yt haue ſerued in the warres in France. This Ladie for her charitable deede in curing of many woūded ſouldiers, may bee compared vnto Artemiſia Queene of Halicarnaſſus, and wife vnto Mauſolus King of Caria: ſhe was the firſt that found out that herbe which we cal in Engliſh Mugwort: the Latine name it after her owne name Artemiſia, &c.
                     Or this.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           ana. m. ij.
  
                                 Fol. & Rad. Rubiae tincto.
                                 Rad. Ariſtoloch. long. & Rotundae.
                                 Fol. & Rad. Plantag.
                                 Fol. & Rad. conſolidae maioris & minoris.
                                 Fol. & Rad. gariophil.
                                 Fol. & Rad. Centauriae maioris.
                              
                           
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Rad. Altheae.
                                 Summitatum Rubi.
                                 Summitatum lapathi acuti.
                                 Tanaceti
                                 Millefolij.
                                 Pimpinellae.
                                 Arthemiſiae.
                                 Summitatum canapis.
                                 Caulis rubei.
                                 Fragrariae.
                              
                           
                           Thuris albi. ℥. ij.
                           Sarcocollae. ℥. j.
                           Vini albi Bocalia. xv.
                        
                     
                     Put all theſe together in an earthen veſſell well nealed or glaſed, that halfe the veſſell may remayne emptie, and let it bee cloſe couered, that no ayre doe euaporate, and boyle it for three houres with an indifferent fire, and let it be ſtrayned, vnto the which let there be added Mellis lib. vj. then let them bée boyled agayne vnto the couſumption of the fourth part: The quantitie hereof is to bee giuen in the morning ℥. iiii. and as much more at night: the wound is to be bathed with the ſame, laying theron a Colewort leafe. This excellent wound drinke is ſayd alſo to be ſingular good for the curing of Phiſtulaes. Other hidden vertues it hath which I paſſe ouer: which drink was giuen me by Maiſter Doctor Foſter, a worthie Reader of the Surgerie Lector in the Phiſitions Colledge, a man for his learning in the arte, knowledge and iudgement, deſerueth

of vs which profeſſe Chirurgerie, and are deſirous to haue knowledge, that if it were in our power, wee would erect, in token of his excellencie therein, ſome auncient Monument, or ſtately Pyramides. It hath bene peraduenture obiected publiquely, yt the negligence of ſome Chirurgiōs frequenting not of his Lectures, doth bewray thē to be rather wilfully bent to ſhrowde themſelues vnder the dark wings of ignorance, than deſirous of learning and knowledge. In déede it may be, there are ſome which are neither good to themſelues, nor profitable to other: And therfore what auayleth it to play excellent Muſicke to thoſe that cannot, or will not heare. But this doth bewray their naturall inclination, who refuſe to frequent ſo good and godlie an e
                           •
                        erciſe, which is both profitable to themſelues, and alſo to our Countrie and Common wealth. For, Chirurgerie is a moſt neceſſary arte, without which mans life cannot long continue, conſidering ſo many miſhappes that chaunce to men daylie.
                     
                        A Balme good for wounds. THis Balme is approued precious in greene wounds, andB
                              〈…〉
                           . healeth them very ſpeedily & effectually, it healeth ſcabbes and wheales in the face and hands, and cauſeth them to bee very fayre. It is very excellent in wounds of the ſinewes and ioynts, it ſtayeth the mucilage and gleeting water: but if you will ſtill it according to arte, you ſhall firſt haue an excellent water: ſecondly, a moſt pure Oyle: thirdly, the Balme, which is moſt excellent in woundes and vlcers of the fundament. The Oyle is precious againſt all aches and gowtes: the water alſo preſerueth from venime and peſtilence, &c. This Balme was firſt giuen vnto me by one Maſter Bactor, which at that time ſerued the Lord of Aburgaueny, vnto whom alſo I did retayne. But to ſay truely, who was the author or inuenter of it, certainly I doe not knowe: but as I haue heard ſome ſay, it is ſuppoſed to haue bene inuented by Maiſter Iohn Halle Chirurgion in Maidſtone, whoſe compoſition is as followeth.
                     
                        
                        ana. m. j.
                        Rec. Egrimoniae.
                        Alchimillae.
                        Androſemon.
                        Aſchiron.
                        Betonicae.
                        Bifolij.
                        Bugullae.
                        Prunellae.
                        Callendulae.
                        Caprifolij.
                        Conſolidae ma.
                        Cruciatae.
                        Hypericonis.
                        Iaceae herbae.
                        Lauendulae.
                        Meliloti.
                        Millefolij.
                        Numulariae.
                        Origani.
                        Perfoliatae.
                        Pilocellae.
                        Plantaginis.
                        Quinque-nerui.
                        Quinque-folij.
                        Roris marini.
                        Veronicae.
                        Violae Nigrae.
                        Violae luteae.
                        Violae matronalis.
                     
                     Let theſe bee gathered each one in his time and kinde, and let them be ſtamped, and then put into ſweete oyle Oliue. So that you may get herbes from time to time, you may in the end haue a gallon of Oyle to the quantitie of herbes, then let it ſtand together the ſpace of one moneth in a pot well nealed and cloſe couered, burie it in horſe dung, and in the meane ſeaſon

get theſe Gummes following.
                     
                        ana. ℥. j.
                        Rec. Gum amoniaci.
                        Galbani.
                        Bdellij.
                        Maſticis.
                        Mirrhae.
                        Olibani.
                        Opoponacis.
                        Sarcocollae.
                        Sagapeni.
                        Storacis calamitae.
                        Thuris.
                     
                     
                        ana. ℥. j. ſs.
                        Gariophilorum.
                        Maceris.
                        Nucis muſcatae.
                        Cinamomi.
                     
                     Powder them that are to bee powdred, and diſſolue the Gummes in good white wine, then ſet the herbes to the fire in a fayre braſen veſſell to boyle with ye Oyle, putting thereto lib. iiii. of good wine Muſcadell, of Vermium tereſtrium wel waſhed in white wine and mundified from the earth lib. iii. Let them boyle thus together, ſtirring it diligently with a ſlice at a ſoft fire till the wine and iuyce be waſted, and that the Oyle haue a fayre greene colour of the herbes: then let it bee ſtrongly ſtrayned, and put thereto your Gummes and other things together, with lib. iiii. of odoriferus wine, that is, Muſcadell or Malmſey, then adde thereto Terebinthinae Venetiae. lib. j. Let theſe boyle againe at a gentle fire till the wine bee conſumed, then take it of and ſtrayne it againe, and ſo reſerue it to your vſe. This Balme, I ſuppoſe, is not inferiour to any Balme that I knowe, bee it Indian Balme or other: the vertues, I ſay, will praiſe it ſelfe. Wherefore it is needles to vſe any farther ſpeeches herein: onely this one note or obſeruation amongſt many other I will declare. It happenedObſeruatio.
                        
in Anno 1575. a Barber Surgion, whoſe name is called William Clarke, dwelling in Southwarke, he hauing in his houſe a lewd ſeruant of the age of xvii. or xviii. yeres, he wanting the grace of God, did in his maiſters abſence (by the intiſement of the deuill) cut his owne throte with a knife, ſo that part of his driuke did, for the ſpace of ſixe or ſeuen daies, flowe out of the wound. I was preſently called to the cure of him, and after I had ſtitched the wound, I did then applye thereon warmed this foreſayd Balme, and ſtayed his bleeding with Galens powder: and ſo for that preſent time I ended, with conuenient roulling and boulſtring. But in ſuch a caſe there be alſo required the helpe of the hand, to keepe cloſe & faſt the medicines, and all helpes will be little enough, as I haue well approued: then after I made in a readineſſe to vſe with the Balme this Vnguentum conſolidatiuum, and alſo my Vnguentum de Peto.
                     
                     
                        Vnguentum conſolidati
                              ••
                           .Rec. 


                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Gummi arab.
                                 Dragag. diſſolut. in aceto.
                                 Sarcoc. ʒ. ij.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. j.
  
                                 Sandaracae.
                                 Hipociſtid.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. j. ſs.
  
                                 Maſtic.
                                 Thuris.
                              
                           
                           Tutiae praeparatae. ʒ. j. ſs.
                           Olei maſtic. ℥. iij.
                           Cerae. q. s..
                         Miſce, & fiat vnguentum ſecundū artem
                     And vpon the ſame the gum plaſter, and about the parts 
                           •
                        eere vnto the wound I vſed this Defenſiue.
                     
                        De
                              •
                           enſiu
                              •
                           .Rec.  

                           Vnguentum de bolo. ℥. vj.
                           Omnium ſandal. ʒ. j. ſs.
                           ana. ʒ. ij.
  
                                 Pulu. mirtillorum
                                 & Roſ.
                              
                           
                           
                           ana. ℥. i. ſs.
  
                                 Olei Roſ. &
                                 Mirtini.
                              
                           
                           Aceti Roſ. ℥. ij.
                           Albuminis ouorum nu. j.
                         Miſce.
                     Thus with this Balme and theſe remedies he was perfectly made whole by me, and ſo he returned home to his friends againe, &c.
                     Or this.
                     
                        Balme. Am. Pa
                              ••
                           ie.Rec. 

                           Terebinthinae venetae. lib. ij.
                           Gummi Elemni. ℥. iiij.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Boli armeniaci.
                                 Sanguinis Dragonis
                              
                           
                           Olei Hypericonis cum gummis. ℥. iij.
                           Aquae vitae. ℥. ij.
                           ana. ʒ. j.
  
                                 Irios.
                                 Aloes.
                                 Maſticis.
                                 Myrrhae.
                              
                           
                         Miſce, ſecundum artem.
                     Or this.
                     
                        Balme. A
                              •
                           de
                              ••
                           a
                              •••
                           .Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Myrrhae.
                                 Aloes.
                                 Spicae.
                                 Sanguinis Draconis.
                                 Thuris.
                                 Mummiae.
                                 Opopo.
                                 Amoniaci.
                                 Carpo-Bal
                                       •
                                    am.
                                 Sarcocoll.
                                 Croci orient.
                                 Maſtic.
                                 Gummi arabi.
                                 Stirac. cal.
                              
                           
                           
                              Laudani. ℥. j. ſs.
                           Reſinae abietinae. lib. j.
                           Terebinthinae com. lib. viij.
                           Vini generoſi. lib. ſs.
                        
Diſtillantur ac liquore, ponatur Muſcigra. xv. & fiat.
                     Or this.
                     
                        Balme.Rec. 

                           Terebinthinae. lib. j.
                           Olibani. ℥. ij.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Aloes cicatri
                                       •
                                    .
                                 Gariophilorum.
                                 Galing.
                                 Cinamomi.
                                 Croci.
                                 Nucis Muſcatis.
                                 Cucubarum.
                              
                           
                           Gummi arabici. ℥. ij.
                           Lignum aloes. ℥. j.
                        
Mixe theſe together, and then put all into a Stillatorie, and ſtill it according to arte, &c.
                     Or this.
                     
                        Balme. Rec. 
                           Olei com. lib. iiij.
                           Terebinthinae. lib. ij.
                           Aquae vitae. lib. iiij.
                           Viniodoriferi. lib. ij.
                           Viridis aeris in pul. ℥. ij.
                        
                     
                     Boyle all theſe according to arte, and laſt put in your Viridis aeris. This was a common Balme, and few better known amongſt ſome olde practizers in time paſt.
                     Or this.
                     Rec. 
                           Olei Terebinthinae lib. j.
                           
                              Vitellorum ouorum ℥. xiiij.
                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Reſinae pini.
                                       
                                          〈…〉
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Myrrhae.
                              
                           
                           Gummi hederae. ℥. ij.
                        
                     
                     Let the yolkes of Egges be firſt fodden hard, then mixe all well together in a Stillatorie, and with a ſoft fire let it bee drawne, and there will come firſt a water, and laſt the Oyle, the which ye ſhal reſerue, for it healeth wounds very ſpeedily. This Oyle was greatly in vſe by my Maſter, maſter George Keble, but whether he were the inuenter of it, or not, I doe not certainly knowe, &c.
                     A plaſter very good for greene wounds, practiſed of late in the Lowe Countries by a worſhipfull Gentleman, called maiſter Ierom Farmer, a great fauourer and louer of Chirurgerie.
                     
                        Paracelſus Plaſter. Rec. 
  
                           Rad. conſolidae maioris. lib. j.
                           Fol. Ophiogloſsi. lib. j. ſs.
                           Vermium terreſtr. lib. ſs.
                           Ariſtolochiae rotundae recenc. ℥. iiij.
                        
                     
                     All theſe being greene, beate them well, and then adde to Vini albi, ſo much in quantitie as will couer all theſe herbes, ſeeth them in a double veſſell well nealed tenne houres: theſe being then ſtrayned and taken out, put in newe herbes and rootes, and boyle it as aforeſayd, and then put to it Butiris recent. q. s. All theſe being mixed together, let it be boyled in a double veſſell, which being effectually boyled, then ſtrayne it, and after ſet it in the Sunne, and reſerue it to your vſe: then take of the foreſayd Oyle and virgine Waxe of each a pound and a halfe.
                     
                        Lithargiri auri. lib. j.
                        Plumbi vſtiloti, lib. ſs.
                        Terebinthinae. ℥. iiij.
                        
                        ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                              Amoniaci.
                              Bdellij.
                           
                        
                        ana. ʒ. vj.
  
                              Galbani.
                              Opoponacis
                           
                        
                     
                     Infuſe theſe in Uineger, and ſo make a plaſter according to arte. This plaſter was giuen me for a ſecrete, by this worſhipfull Gentleman Maiſter Ierom Farmer, when I was at Arnam: at that time when Nemegam was beſieged, he deſired me to put it in practiſe, at which time diuers of our men were hurt, not only with ſhot, but with other weapons. It happened that a Horſeman was wounded in his thigh by the enemie, being a Pikeman: the wound was about ſeuen inches long, entring in at the inſide of his right thigh, and ſo paſſed vpwards, and by good happe it reſted on Os pubis, otherwiſe he had bene ſlayne, neuertheleſſe he was growne very faynt and weake with extreme bléeding. So happely hauing things about mee, I ſtayed his bleeding, which was good for him, and no hurt vnto me, as it fell out. At the next dreſſing I applyedNote. a Defenſiue about the wound, and then I warmed well ſome of my oyle of Hypericon cum gummis publiſhed in my booke De Morbo Gallico, the which I iniected into the bottome of the wound with a ſiring: then I made a very ſhort rent armed with my vnguentum de Peto, and vpon the ſame the foreſayd plaſter. Thus I dreſſed him fiue daies, and the ſixt day I left out the tent cleane, and within xiiii. daies he was whole and readie to ſerue in the field agayne.
                     Or this.
                     
                        Emplaſtrum ſticticum Paracelſt.Rec. 
                           Olei Oliuarum. ℥. vj
                           Cerae ℥. j. quibus liquefactis
                        
adde 

                           Lithargirij. ℥. ij.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Amoniaci.
                                 Bdellij.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. ij.
  
                                 Galbani.
                                 Opoponacis.
                              
                           
                           
                           ana. ʒ ij.
  
                                 Ariſtolochiae rotund.
                                 Calaminaris
                                 Myrrhae
                                 Thuris
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Olei lautini tantundem.
                                 Terebinthinae putae.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Diſſolue the Gummes in Uineger xxiiii. houres, and then boyle it till the Uineger bee euaporate, then let it bee ſtrongly ſtrayned, and put in theſe Gummes by litle and litle, alwaies ſtirring it till the Gummes be incorporate with the reſt of the powders being finely powdred and ſearced: and laſt of all put in your Terebinthine, and make hereof a plaſter according to arte. This is the order which I vſe in the making of it, &c.
                     
                        Emplaſtrum Reſoluendum. Rec. 

                           Amoniaci lib. j.I. B.
                           
                           Galbani lib. ſs.
                           Cerae albae. q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     
                        Emplaſtrum conſolidatiuum & deſiccatiuum, to be vſed in greene wounds in ſteade of ſtitching, often proued. Rec.

                           ana. ʒ. iiij.
  
                                 Gummi Drag.
                                 Sang. Drag.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. ij.
  
                                 Olibani.
                                 Maſtic.I. B.
                                 
                                 Myrrhae.
                              
                           
                           Boli armeni. ℥. j. ſs.
                           Farinae volat ʒ. ſs.
                         
Make all theſe in very fine powder cum ouorum albuminibus, q. s. Miſce.
                     
                     
                        
                        A good plaſter to be vſed for drie ſtitches of wounds in the face, &c. Rec. 

                           ana. ℥. iiij.
  
                                 Reſinae.
                                 Reſinae pini.
                                 Picis nig.I. B.
                                 
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Maſtic.
                                 Myrrhae
                                 Thuris
                                 Olibani.
                                 Aloes hepat.
                                 Terebinthinae
                              
                           
                           Gummi Dragagant. ʒ. vj.
                         Miſce, & fiat Emplaſtrum.
                     
                        Maiſter Raſius plaiſter good for to keepe open any iſſue, the which he gaue me for one of his ſerrets, and I haue ſeene him vſe it with great profice, and I haue found pleaſure in it my ſelfe.
                     
                        Franciſcus Raſius, Chirurgion to the French King.Rec. 
                           Cerae albae lib. ſs.
                           Viridis aeris. ℥. iij.
                           Mercur. Sublimat. ℥. j.
                         Miſce.
                     
                        A Cataplaſme for Inflammations.
Rec. 
                           ana. quart. j.
  
                                 Succorum ſemperuiu
                                       •
                                    .Calmetheus.
                                 
                                 Plantaginis.
                                 Solani.
                                 Aquae lenticulae.
                              
                           
                           Aceto. ℥. j.
                           ana. ℥. 
                                 •
                              . ſs.
  
                                 Oleorū Roſ. vel.
                                 Nympheae.
                              
                           
                           Far, hordei. ℥. ij.
                         Fiat.
                     
                        
                        A Cataplaſme for bruſed wounds.
Rec. 
                           Rad. altheae lib. ſs.
                           ana. m. j. Fol. Mal. & Viol.
                        
                     
                     Terantur, coquantur, & exprimantur, deinde adde Butyri, & Olei com. ana. ℥. iij. Tria ouorum vitellorum, croci modicum, Far. triticeae & Hord. q. s. Fiat Cataplaſma.
                     
                        A Cataplaſme very comfortable, and alſo it appeaſeth paynes. Rec. 

                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Far. fabarum.Valeniola.
                                 
                                 Hord.
                                 Lentium, &
                                 Lupinorum.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Far. ſemin. lini, 
                                 & Fenugrae.
                              
                           
                           Farinae orobi. ℥. j.
                           Croci. ʒ. ii.
                        
                     
                     Bulliant Farinae cum Aceto & mellis paruo. Fiat Cataplaſma.
                     Or this Cataplaſme doth appeaſe paynes and ceaſe Jnflamations. Rec. 

                           ana. m. ii.
  
                                 Fol. maluarum.
                                 Violarum.
                              
                           
                           ana. m. i.
  
                                 Flo. Chamomillae
                                 Fol. roſ.
                              
                           
                        
Boyle all theſe in Milke till they bee ſoft and tender, then beate them in a morter, and adde thereto

                           ana. ℥. i. ſs.
  
                                 Vnguentum roſarum
                                 Vnguentum populion.
                              
                           
                           
                              Vitellorum ouorum. nu. ij.
                           Farinae Hordei. ℥. ij.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Mucilag. ſeminis pſyllij,
                                 & Rad. altheae.
                              
                           
                        
Miſce, & fiat Cataplaſma.
                     
                        Maiſter Gal
                              •
                            powder.
                        Maiſter Gales powder for reſtrayning of great fluxes of bloud.
Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Alluminis ſuccarini.
                                 Thuris.
                                 Arſenici.
                              
                           
                           Calcis viui. ℥. vj.
                        
                     
                     Make all theſe in fine powder, and put vnto them a pint of ſtrong Vineger, and boyle them on the fire, ſtirring it continually till the Vineger be conſumed, then ſet it in the Sunne, or in an Ouen, till it be perfectly dried, that you may make it in very fine powder, and when you will vſe it, take of this powder ℥. iii. of Boli Armoniaci ℥ iij. of Puluis Alcumiſticus ℥. j. Miſce. And when you will vſe it, take of the whites of Egges. q. s.
                     
                     
                        Pul. Galen
                              •
                           .
                        Galens Reſtrictiue powder. Rec. 
                           Olibani ℥. ii.
                           Aloes hepaticae. ℥. i.
                           ana. q. s.
  
                                 Pilorum leporis terrefact.
                                 & ouorum albumin.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Or this.
                     
                        Pul Caimatheus. Rec. 
                           Boli armeniaci. ʒ. vi.
                           Terrae ſigillatae. ℥. ii.
                           Farinae volatilis. ℥. iii.
                           
                           ana. ℥. iiii.
  
                                 Gypſi.
                                 Calcis viu.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     And when you will vſe theſe powders, mire therewich of Albuminis ouorum q. s. Miſce.
                     
                        A powder to rebate ſpungious fleſh, very profitable. Rec.  
                           Mercurij praecipitat. ℥. ij.
                           Cinabrii ʒ. ſs.
                           Maſtic. ʒ. ii.
                         Miſce, fiat puluis ſubtiliſs.
                     
                        A very good drinke for the cure of Fiſtulaes, commended by Tagaltius.
                        Rec. thrée parts of Oſmunde, two parts of Gentian, and oneTagaltius. A drinke for a Fiſtula. part of Centaury, boyle theſe together in white wine & ſtraine it, and thereof giue the patient euery morning a draught: if you put hereto a litle Guaicam, and let it ſtand therein a ſpace and then boyle it, it is the better, &c.
                     A very good Mundificatiue.
                     
                        Mundificatiuum. Rec. 
                           Mel roſ. ℥. ii.
                           Terebinthinae. ℥. iii.
                           ana. ℥. i. ſs.
  
                                 Suc. Apii &
                                 Plantag.
                              
                           
                        
Let theſe boyle together a little, and then adde thereunto,

                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Farinae hord. &
                                 Fabarum.
                              
                           
                           Sarcocoilae. ʒ. i. ſs.
                           Croci. ʒ. ſs.
                        
Miſce.
                     A good iniection for olde and callous Fiſtulaes. Tagaltius.
                     
                        Rec. 
  
                           Vnguentum Aegiptiacum. ℥. ſs.
                           Mer. ſublimat. ʒ. ſs.
                           Lixiuii. ℥. iiii.
                           Aquae roſ. ℥. ii.
                           Arſenici. ℈. i.
                           Aquae plantaginis. ℥. iii.
                        
                     
                     Let all theſe bee boyled together to the conſumption of the third part, and reſerue it to your vſe.
                     A cataplaſma very good for Gangraen. Parreus.
                     Rec. 

                           ana. lib. ſs.
  
                                 Far. fab.
                                 Hord.
                                 Orob.
                                 Lupin.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. iiij.
  
                                 Salis com.
                                 Mel. roſ.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ij. ſs.
  
                                 Succi abſinthij
                                 Marrub.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ii.
  
                                 Aloes
                                 Myrrhae
                                 & Aquae vitae
                              
                           
                           Oximel ſympl. q. s.
                         Miſce, & fiat cataplaſma.
                     No man needeth to doubt of the goodneſſe of this Cataplaſma, &c.
                     
                        An vnguent good for burnings with gunpowder. 
                        Rec. the yellow moſſe that groweth vpon the barke of the Aſh tree and braunches two handfulles, of Sheepes ſewet lib. ſs. melt the Sheepes ſewet and the moſſe together very gently, and then ſtrayne it, &c. and vſe it warme with a feather.
                     
                        
                        A maturatiue plaſter.Maſter Keble.
                         Rec. 

                           Olei liliorum ℥ .vi.
                           Cerae lib. i.
                           Reſinae lib. ſs.
                           Reſinae Pini ℥ .iiii.
                           Picis albae ℥ ii.
                           Galbani ℥. i. ſs.
                           Gum amoniaci. ℥ .ii.
                           Croci. ʒ .i.
                         Miſce, & fiat Emplaſtrum.
                     A very good Lixiuium to ſtay Gangraene comming of colde, by lying in the ſnowe, and the like occaſions, whereby the vitall ſpirites are prohibited to come vnto the mortified part: which Lixiuiū was greatly commended by my maiſter, maiſter George Keble, and I haue many times approued it profitable.Maiſter Keble.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Lixiuij. lib. viij.
                           Lupinorum contuſorū. ℥. iij.
                           Orobi. ℥. j. ſs.
                           Salis. com. m. j. ſs.
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Abſinthij.
                                 Centauri.
                                 Marrubij.
                              
                           
                           Flor. camomil. m. j. ſs.
                           Aquae vitae. lib. j.
                        
                     
                     Boyle all theſe together, till one part be conſumed, and ſo let it reſt all together, and reſerue it to your vſe, &c.
                     Emplaſtrum epiſpatices ad omnes iuncturarum dolores ex frigiditate.
                     Rec. Cerae veteris, colophoniae, reſinae pini. ana. lib. j.Odo
                              •
                           phus O
                              〈…〉
                           . calcis viu. Alluminis plumati, Arſenici. ana. ℥. j.
                     
                        Relent the Waxe and Roſin with a ſmall quantitie of Oyle, then ſtrawe in your powders, being finely powdered, and mixe with them Aceti fortis, q. s. boyle all together at a gentle fire to the forme of a plaiſter.
                     
                        Vnguentum Incarnatiuum.Vigo.
                         Rec. 
                           Terebinthinae. ʒ .ii.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Sirupi Roſ.
                                 Mel. Roſ.
                              
                           
                           Succi plantaginis. ʒ. vi.
                           Croci. q. s.
                        
Miſce: & fiat vnguentum ſecundum artem.
                     
                        Vnguentum Incarnatiuum. Rec. 
                           Cerae liquefact. ℥ .v.I. B.
                           
                           Olei com. lib. ſs.
                           Reſinae. ℥. iiii.
                           Mellis. ℥. i. ſs.
                           Tereb. ℥. iiii.
                           ana. ʒ. ii.
  
                                 Maſtic.
                                 Olibani.
                                 Sarcoc.
                                 Myrrhae.
                                 Aloes.
                                 Croci.
                              
                           
                        
Miſce: & fiat vnguentum ſecundum artem.
                     
                        Ioſephus Quirſitanus.
                        Rec. The mucilage of the ſéede of Fenigreeke ℥. ii. the iuice of Hounds toong, Perſicaria, and the great Comferie, ana. ℥. i. ſs. Oyle of Franckincenſe and Myrrhe. ana. ʒ. iii. Oyle of Hipericon ſimple ℥. ii. Terebinthine waſhed in white Wine ℥. ii. let them ſtand in the Sunne, 
                           〈◊〉
                         at a ſoft fire, vntill they waxe thicke, &c.
                     
                        Vnguentum Incarnatiuum.Maiſter Keble.
                         Rec. 

                           ana. ℥. iiii.
  
                                 Reſini.
                                 Cerae.
                              
                           
                           
                              Terebinthinae. ℥. ii.
                           Olei com. ℥. viii.
                           Mellis. ℥. iii.
                           Vitellorum ouorum nu. iiii.
                         Miſc.
                     
                        A good vnguent for inflammations. Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. i. ſs.
                           Vnguenti populeonis.
                           Vnguenti Roſ.
                        
Being wel waſhed in Roſe water, and Plantaine water, q. s. adding thereto 

                           
                              Olei Roſ. ℥. iiii.
                           Ceruſſae. ℥. ii.
                           Cerae albae. q. s.
                           Terae ſigillatae. ℥. i. ſs.
                           Camphyrae. ℈. ii.
                           Opii. ℈. i.
                         Miſce & fiat vnguentum.
                     An vnguent very good for burning with Gunpowder, or skalding with water, and it healeth without vlceration and paine, and drieth very well, and it bringeth againe the beawty of the skin, and this muſt be aplied to the affected parts morning and euening, &c.
                     Rec. 
                           Seui ſecundae decoctionis Sutorii. lib. i. ſs.
                           Succi Ophyoglloſsi. lib. ſs.
                        
                     
                     Coquantur ſimul in Balneo, ad conſumptionem ſucci: poſtea adde Camphyrae. ℥. ſs.
                     Miſceantur in mortario plumbeo.
                     
                        The vſe. After that you haue warmed of this, with feathers anoint the place burnt, or ſcalded, kéeping vnto the place affected warme coles, vntill the paine be ceaſed, which will be after

thrée or foure times warming. Take great héed that you breake not any of the bliſters which are wont to ariſe, for that induceth paine.
                     
                        Vnguentum neruorum, commonly called Nerue oyle. This vnguent I haue ſéene many times vſed with great profit vnto the patients: and for that I neuer read it in any Engliſh Booke, I haue thought it not amiſſe to publiſh now the ſame. Peraduenture ſome ſkorners will ſay it is a medicine for a Horſſe, neuertheleſſe, maiſter Ambroſe Pary is not aſhamed to ſet it downe in his booke for a medicine profitable for mans body.
                     
                        Vnguentum Neruale. Rec.  
                           ana. ℥. iii.
  
                                 Eupatorii.
                                 Camomillae.
                                 Betonicae.
                                 Saluiae.
                                 Menthae.
                                 Hederae tereſtris.
                                 Abrotani.
                                 Arthemiſiae.
                                 Abſinthii.
                                 Naſturtii.
                                 Maluarum.
                                 Origani.
                                 Pulegii.
                                 Auriculae muris.
                                 Solani.
                                 Camaepitheos.
                                 Vrticae.
                                 Serpentariae.
                                 Fol. lauri.
                                 Ebuli.
                                 Coſti.
                                 
                                 Enulae camp.
                                 Rubiae maioris.
                                 Herbae paraliſis.
                                 Ruthae.
                                 Raphani.
                                 Sambucae.
                                 Ariſtolochiaelōgae.
                                 Apii.
                                 Rad. altheae.
                                 Ciclaminis.
                                 Calendulae.
                                 Caulis rub.
                                 Calaminthae.
                                 Centaurii minoris
                                 Vitis albae.
                                 Hipericon.
                              
                           
                           Butiri maialis. lib. xii.
                           Cerae virgineae. lib. i.
                           Seui arietis. ℥. xii.
                           Axungiae gallinae. ℥. vi.
                           Axungiae anſeris. ℥. iii.
                           Olibani. ℥. xii.
                           Olei laurini. lib. viii.
                         Fiat Vnguentum Neruale.
                     I haue knowne certaine practizers at Seas to vſe this vnguent, with Farinae tritic. and Vini albi. ana. q. s. and ſo boyled them together, and made heereof a cataplaſme for painefull ſwellings about wounds, &c.
                     
                        A water for ſore eyes. Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. i.
                           aquae verbenae.
                           Betonice.
                           Ruthae.
                           Roſarum rub.
                           
                           Eufrag.
                           Celidoniae.
                           Plantag.
                           Calendulae.
                           Feniculi.
                         Miſce.
                     
                        Aqua Viridis aeris, for Vlcers in Virga. Rec. 
                           Aquae Pluuialis, lib. viii.
                           Saccari candi. lib. i.
                           Viridis aeris. ℥. iiii.
                        
Boyle theſe together, and in the cooling put in the Viriciis aeris. Fiat.
                     
                     Or this.
                     Rec. 

                           Aquae Plantag. ℥. iiii.
                           Aquae Roſ. ℥. ii.
                           Aquae Hord. ℥. iii.
                           Syr. Roſ. ℥. ii.
                           Collirium album, ſine opio. ʒ. i. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     
                        Vnguentum Apij, which in times paſt was had in great vſe by the auncient Chirurgions of this Citie of London, & it doth mundify very well, as my ſelf haue had ſufficiēt triall.
                     
                        Vnguentum Apij. Rec. 

                           ana. m. i.
  
                                 Foliorum Plant.
                                 Artemiſiae.
                                 Abſinthii.
                                 Quinque-neruiae.
                                 Sanaemundae.
                                 Periclymeni.
                                 Conſolidae minoris.
                                 & Melliloti.
                              
                           
                           ana. m. ſs.
  
                                 Foliorum Hyoſciami albij.
                                 Violarum.
                                 Craſſulae maioris.—
                              
                           
                           ana. pugillum. i.
  
                                 Bardanae.
                                 Trifolij.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Then take of Apij the waight of all the reſt: iuice them all. Then take of Mellis com. as much as of all the iuice: mixe all together, and then take of Farinae triticeae. lib. ii. Terebintinae. ℥. v. Mixe all theſe together, and ſet it on the fire, and boyle it to the forme of an vnguent, &c.
                     
                        A mundificatiue. Rec. 
                           Mellis. lib. ii.
                           Succi Saniculae. ℥. viii.
                           Viridis aeris. ℥. ſs.
                        
                     
                     Boyle theſe to the forme or body of your Vnguentum egyptiacum. Fiat.
                     
                     
                        Vnguentum Populeon.Vnguentum populeon 
                                 〈…〉
                               & Weeken.
                         Rec. 
                           Oculorum populi arboris recentium collectorum. lib. j. ſs.
                           Axungia porcinae praeparatae. lib. iiij.
                        
                     
                     The Pople buddes muſt bee bruſed and mixed with your Axungiae, vntill your other herbes may bee prepared, then adde to it

                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Fol. papaueris agreſtis.
                                 Fol. Mandragorae.
                                 Fol. Hyoſciami.
                                 Solani.
                                 Vermicularis, aut
                                 Craſſulae.
                                 Lactucae.
                                 Semperuiui.
                                 Bardanae.
                                 Portulacae.
                                 Florum violarum.
                                 Vmbilici veneris.
                              
                           
                           Summiratum pruni tenerarum. ℥. iij.
                        
                     
                     
                        Theſe herbes muſt hee mixed and tempered with Axungia, as aforeſayd, then adde thereto Vini optimi quantum ſatis eſt.
                     Boyle theſe to the conſumption of the Wine, then ſtrayne them, and make an vnguent according to arte. It is very good againſt extreme and raging heates in Feuers: it prouoketh ſleepe, the temples being therewith anoynted, &c.
                     
                        Vnguentum mundificatiuum magiſtrale.Weckerus.
                         Rec. 
                           Mellis roſati colati. ℥. i. ſs.
                           Terebinthinae clarae. ℥. iij.
                           ana. ʒ. ſs.
  
                                 Succi apij
                                 Succi praſsij.
                              
                           
                           Succi abſinthij. ʒ. ii.
                        
Simul coquantur deinde addantur.

                           Farinae hordei, fabarum. ana. ʒ. vj.
                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Farinae lupinorum.
                                 Orobi.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. i. ſs.
  
                                 Sarcocollae
                                 Myrrhae
                              
                           
                        
Reduc. in puluerem, & fac vnguentum.
                     A very good mollifying vnguent.
                     
                        Vnguentum mollificatiuum. Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Axungiae humanae
                                 Anſeris
                                 Gallinae.
                                 Medullae ceruinae
                              
                           
                           Terebinthinae lotae in aqua vitae. ℥. j.
                           Cerae q. s.
                         Miſce, & fiat vnguentum ſecundum artem.
                     
                        A ſparadrap plaſter.Maiſter Keble.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Olei. com. lib. ij.
                           ana. ℥. xj.
  
                                 Plumbi albi, &
                                 Plumbi rubri
                              
                           
                           Cerae ℥. vj.
                        
                     
                     Boyle all theſe together till it waxe blacke, and in the cooling put in

                           ana. ℥. j.
                           Adipis anatis &
                           Caponis. Miſce.
                        
                     
                     Vnguentum Sanatiuum.Maiſter Keble.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Lapidis caliminaris praeparati ℥. iiij.
                           Ceruſae lotae in aqua roſ. ℥. j.
                           Lithargiri auri loti. ℥. ij.
                           Olei roſ. lib. ſs.
                           Seui ouini ℥. ij.
                           Terebinthinae lotae in aqua roſ. ℥. ij. ſs.
                           Cerae citr. q. s.
                           Camphorae. ʒ. j.
                         Miſce, & fiat vnguentum ſecundum artem.
                     A molifying Searecloth: This was giuen me for a ſecret, but I neuer proued it.
                     Rec. 
                           Cerae ℥. viij.
                           Olei pedis vaccini ℥. iij.
                           Reſinae ℥. v.
                        
                     
                     Relent theſe, and ſtrayne it, and ſo dippe clothes in it, and reſerue it to your vſe.
                     A powder which I haue approued to be good toA good powder to take away 
                              •
                           pungious fleſh. remoue and take away ſuperfluous or ſpungious fleſh.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. 
                                 •
                              j.
 
                                 Alluminis Zaccarini
                                 Vitrioli albi.
                              
                           
                           Aceti rubri. lib. ſs.
                        
                     
                     Let this bee calcined together in a great crewſible till u come to perfection, and that the vineger be conſumed, then let it be finely brought to powder, and ſo reſerue it to your vſe.
                     Or this.
                     Puluis ſine pari.P
                              •••
                           sh
                              •
                           e pare. Iohannes A▪ deu.
                     
                     Rec. 

                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Viridis aeris
                                 Auri pigmenti
                              
                           
                           Vitrioli combuſti ℥. iiij.
                           Alluminis zaccarini combuſti ℥. viij.
                         Et fiat puluis.
                     Emplaſtrum flos vnguentorum.Emplaſtrum flos vngue
                              •
                           
                           
                           
                              •
                           o
                              •••
                           .
                     
                     Rec.  
                           ana. ℥▪ viij.
  
                                 Reſinae
                                 Reſinae pini
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. iiij.
  
                                 Cerae albae
                                 Olibani
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Maſticis 
                                 &  Myrrhae
                              
                           
                           Adipis ceruini ℥. iiij.
                           Camphor. ʒ. ij.
                           Vini albi lib. iiij.
                           Terebinthinae ℥. iij.
                         Miſce, & fiat emplaſtrum ſecundum artem,
                     This plaſter I haue approued to bee excellent for wounds made with gunſhot, and I would aduertiſe all young practizers of Chirurgerie neuer to bee without it: for it hath many excellent vertues, which I wil not here nominate at this time, becauſe of being too tedious, &c.
                     
                        A good mundifying medicine called Lipſius, vſed by the Chirurgions in the Hoſpitali of S. Bartholmew, moſt ſpecially for Vlcers in the mouth.
                           
                              ••
                           pſium.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Mellis com.
                           Vitrioli albi.
                           Succi caprifolij lib. iiij.
                        
                     
                     Firſt boyle your iuyce and your Mel together till it come to the thickneſſe of Honie, and laſt put in your Vitrioll, and boyle it a little, and ſo reſerue it to your vſe.
                     Vnguentum in frigidans Galeni.Vnguentum in frigidans Galeni.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Olei roſ. ℥. iij.
                           Cerae albae. ℥. ſs.
                        
                     
                     Melt theſe together, and being well waſhed with Roſe-vineger and Roſe-water, reſerue it to your vſe.
                     Vnguentum Reſinae, which was alſo had in great price by the olde practitioners.Vnguentum reſinae, which doth mund▪ fi
                              •
                           
                           ▪ incarne▪ and ſta
                              ••
                           th the mucilage or gleeting humour, ſpecially about the 
                              〈…〉
                           
                           ▪
                        
                     
                     Rec. 

                           Reſinae ℥. v.
                           Mellis lib. j.
                           Terebinthinae ℥ .viii.
                           ana. ℥. i.
  
                                 Myrrhae &
                                 Sarcocollae.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     The mucilage of Fenigreke, and the mucilage of Linſ
                           •
                        ede▪ being made with white wine of each ℥. i. Miſce, & fiat vnguentum ſecundum artem.
                     A Cataplaſme for a windie tumor or ſwelling.
                     Rec.  
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Flo. Camo
                                       •
                                    illae
                                 Melliloti
                                 Anethi
                                 Roſ. rub. pul▪
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                           ana. m. ſs.
  
                                 Foliorum mal. &
                                 Abſynthij.
                              
                           
                           Furfuris. m. i.
                         
Boyle all theſe together in Lixiuio & vino rub. then adde thereto.

                           ana. q. s.
  
                                 Medullae panis, &
                                 Farinae fab.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Olei roſ. &
                                 Myrtini
                              
                           
                         Miſce.
                     A lyniment for wyndy tumors.
                     Re. 
                           ana. ℥. i
                                 •
                              .
  
                                 Oleorū. Camomil.
                                 Anethi.
                                 Lauri.
                              
                           
                           ana. q. s.
  
                                 Cerae albae.
                                 Aquae vitae.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     A preſent remedy to take away Warts.
                     Rec. 


                           ana. q. s.
                           Aceti fort.
                           Thymi.
                           Hiſopi.
                        

Stampe them in the vineger, and ſtrongly ſtrayned, make therof a lixiuium, with the aſhes of willowes, and often waſh 
                           •
                        he Warts, &c.
                     A common Powder to take away Warts that growe about Praputium.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Auri pigmenti.
                                 Sulphuris viui.
                                 Calcis viui.
                              
                           
                           Sabini. ʒ. j.
                        
Miſce & fiat pul. ſecundum artem.
                     
                        A very good ſpiced playſter, which my maiſter, M. Keble often vſed, and hee did therewith much good for paynes and aches.
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                        
                     
                     Rec. 

                           Cerae. ℥. xii.
                           Reſinae. ℥. viii.
                           Picis. ℥. i. ſs.
                           Olibani. ℥. iiii.
                           Reſinae pini. lib. i.
                           Adipis ceruini. ℥. ii.
                           Croci. ʒ. ii.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Mac
                                       •
                                    ris.
                                 Garſophilorum.
                              
                           
                           Vini rub. lib. ii.
                         Miſce, & fiat Emplaſtrum.
                     A good medicin for a pinne and a webbe in the eyes.
                     Re. 
                           ana. q. s.
                           Succorū Saluiae rub.
                           Feniculi rub. &
                           Trifolii.
                           Mellis com. &
                           Ouorum album.
                        
Let all theſe be well beaten together, and reſerue it to your vſe.
                     Or this.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. q. s.
                           Mellis com.
                           Succi Semperuiui.
                           Aquae Roſ.
                        
Then take tenne or twelue ſtreines of new layd egges, of a white Hen as néere as you can, then let them be well beaten in a ſwéete morter, till they be vnited in manner of an oyntment, then let all theſe be beaten together, and a little relented, and reſerue it to your vſe: and ſometimes you may adde to it Aquae celidoniae & eufragiae. q. s. This receit was giuen me for a ſecrete, of one I ſuppoſe to be a good occuliſt,

and ſome triall I haue had of late of theſe foreſayd remedies, &c.
                     The white Mucilage plaſter.
                     Rec. 
                           Ceruſſae lib. v.
                           Lithargiri auri lib. ij.
                           Olei com. lib. viij.
                           Rad. altheae being clenſed and picked from the pith. m. iiij.
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Sem. lini &
                                 Foenigraeci contuſ.
                              
                           
                           Aquae q. s.
                         And make hereof a Mucilage: then take of it lib. iij. Miſce, & fiat Emplaſtrum ſecundum artem.
                     An vnguent good for the Hemeroyds.Maiſter Keble.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Vnguenti roſ. ℥. ij.
                           Vnguenti populeon com. ℥. j. ſs.
                           Vitellum oui. .j.
                           Opij ʒ. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     A very good reſolutiue Cerot.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. ij. ſs.
  
                                 Olei Liliacei.
                                 Amigdal. dul.
                                 Medul. cruris cerui.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Mucilag. ſem. lini
                                 Foenigraeci &
                                 Altheae.—
                              
                           
                           Cerae q. s.
                        
                     
                     A mellilot plaſter greatly vſed of the common Chirurgions.
                     Rec. 
                           Reſinae lib. viii.
                           Cerae lib. ij.
                           
                              Seui ouini lib. ſs.
                           Succi meliloti lib. viij.
                           Vini rub. lib. ij.
                         Miſce, & fiat emplaſtrum.
                     Maiſter Francis Raſius Mundificatiue, the which he vſed here when he had the Earle of Suſſex in cure, and he did ſweare vnto me, it was his Fathers practiſe afore his time.Mundificatiuum. Franciſcus Raſius.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Butyri rec. lib. ij.
                           ana. lib. ſs.
  
                                 Cerae citrinae
                                 Reſinae
                                 Reſinae pini
                                 Picis Graec.
                              
                           
                           Viridis aeris. ℥. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     A plaſter agaynſt inueterat vlcers.Franciſcus Raſius.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Emplaſtride Ceruſſa optimè cocti. lib. ſs.
                           Mercurij extincti in aoua vitae ℥. iij.
                        
Fiat Emplaſtrum bonae conſtitutionis. ſecun. art.
                     A Liniment to ceaſſe payne, and cauſe ſleepe, being applyed vnto the temples.
                     Rec. 
                           Opij extracti cum aceto roſ. ℥. j.
                           Sem Hyoſciami albi ʒ. vj.
                           Nucis muſc. ʒ. v. pul ſubtiliſs.
                           Vnguenti roſ. ℥. ij. ſs.
                           Olei nucis muſc. gut.
                        
Fiat Linimentum.
                     
                        A moſt pretious Oyle againſt all inflammations, and toI. B. cauſe ſleepe alſo, and it will ceaſe the paines of the Goute in any part of the body.
                     Rec. 
                           Olei. com. lib. viij.
                           Vini albi. lib. ij.
                           Summitatum Hyoſciami &
                           Sem. eius virid. lib. iij. ſs.
                           ana. ℥. iiij.
  
                                 Vermium terreſtr.
                                 Gariophill.
                              
                           
                           Croci. ℥. j.
                           Opii. ℥. ſs.
                        
                     
                     Let theſe be bruſed and mixed together, and let it ſtand ſ
                           •
                         in the Sunne twelue daies, then boyle them to the conſumption of the Wyne and the iuice: then ſtraine it, and kéepe it to your vſe. But if you will make of this Oyle a liniment for wounds in the ioynts, and to ceaſſe payne, and for bruſes, or any ſharp and biting paine of virulent vlcers, then
                     Rec. 
                           Olei Praedic. ℥. iiii.
                           Olei Hyperic. ℥. i.
                           Olei Lumbricorum. ℥. ſs.
                           Gum. Elemni. ʒ. vi.
                           Terebinthinae lotae in lacte mulieris. ʒ. vii.
                         Miſce.
                     Mixe all theſe together, and make it in forme of a liniment: and if you will haue it more thicker to the forme of an vnguent, adde thereto

                           ana. ʒ. iii.
  
                                 Reſinae pini.
                                 Reſinae.
                              
                           
                           Vnguenti Roſ. ʒ. vi.
                           Cerae albae. ℥. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     A Plaſter good to reſolue knobs, and hard ſwellings.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           ana. lib. i.
  
                                 Terebinthinae puriſs.P
                                          ••
                                       n
                                          ••
                                       .
                                 
                                 Aphronitri.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. iiii.
  
                                 Galbani.
                                 Propolis.
                              
                           
                           Guttarum ammoniaci. ℥. viii.
                           Lixiuij. q. s.
                         Fiat Emplaſtrum ſecundum artem.
                     A Plaſter for the hard ſwellings in womens Breaſts.
                     Rec. 
                           Mellis deſpumati. ℥. ix.
                           Olei roſarum. ℥. vi.
                           Cerae citrinae. ℥. iiii.
                         Miſce, ſecundum artem.
                     An Oyle for Convulſions, proceeding through wounds in the nerues, or otherwiſe.I. B.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Olei com. lib. iiii.
                           Olei terebin. lib. i. ſs.
                           Saluiae. m. ii.
                           Florum Roriſmarini. m. i. ſs.
                           Vermium terreſtrium preparat. ℥. iiii▪
                           
                           Euphorbij. ʒ. iii.
                           Gum. Hederae. ℥. iiii.
                           Radic. Brioniae. ℥. i.
                           Iridis. ℥. ſs.
                           Olibani. ℥. iii. ſs.
                           ana. ʒ. ij.
  
                                 Maſticis.
                                 Cinamomi.
                              
                           
                           Cariophilorum.
                           Croci. ʒ. i.
                           Vini maluatici. lib. ii.
                        
                     
                     Bruſe the Sage with Roſemary flowers, and powder the reſt that are to be powdered: mixe all together, and put

them into an earthen veſſell well glazed, being cloſe ſtopt, and ſet them to macerate for tenne dayes in Horſe dung, or in Balneo, according to arte, then boyle them to the conſumption of the Wine, &c.
                     Vnguentum pro Spaſmo.Vnguentum pro Spaſmo.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. i.
  
                                 Axungiae cerui.
                                 Taxi.
                                 Vrſi.
                              
                           
                           Olei Laurini. ℥. i. ſs.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Olei vulpini.
                                 Caſtorei.
                                 Therebinthinae.
                                 Iuniperi.
                                 Lumbricorum.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ii.
  
                                 Vnguēt. Agrippoe,
                                 & Dialtheae.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     The Terebinthine waſhe in the water of Lylyes, then take Euphorbij. ℈. i. Cum modico cerae fiat vnguentum.
                     Theſe Oyles following are alſo very good for a convulſion comming by repletion and fulneſſe.
                     
                        Oleum Vulpinum.
                        Oleum Laurinum.
                        Oleum Rutaceum.
                        Oleum Chamomillinum.
                        Oleum Iuniperinum.
                        Oleum Terebinthinae.
                        Oleum Benedictum.
                        Oleum Philoſophorum.
                     
                     Theſe vnguents and Oyles do partly warme, ate
                              •
                           uate, and diſſolue cold and glutinous humors, that often followe ſharpe ſickneſſe: which perillous accident commeth, by reaſon the ſinewes is offended and hurt, which doth

torment the patient, as I haue ſéene in woundes made with Gunſhot, and alſo in the cutting and pricking of them, by reaſon of repletion, and vchement paine, that draweth matter to the part affected, the which matter, Vigo noteth vnto vs, is ſometimes conuayed to the brayne, by the ſinewes, and when the brayne féeleth the matter, it driueth it backe againe: by which expulſion, the ſinewes are filled with the aforeſaid matter, and ſo are inobedient vnto their accuſtomed mouings. For the appeaſing of theſe paynes, you ſhall finde great pleaſure in the foreſayd vnguents and Oyles, wherewich you ſhall rub and chafe well the ſpondles of the backe, ſhoulders and necke, and it is good to couer the necke with wooll, dipped in the ſayd▪Oyles. As touching diet, gliſters, &c. I leaue it vnto the learned in Phyſick and Chirurgerie, and ſo I will end this ſhort obſeruation, onely I will deliuer you the ſignes and notes of a convultion, which is, ſayth Tagaltius, a dull and difficult motion of the members, ſtretching of the neck, a drawing of the lips, as though the patient would laugh, a ſtraightnes of the iawes, téeth, and throte, a peruerting, & wrying of the eyes, & alſo of the whole face.
                     A digeſtiue to remoue aſchars.I. B.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Terebinthinae. ℥. iiii.
                           Vitell. ouorum num. ii.
                           Mel. Roſ. ℥. ſs.
                           ana. ʒ. i. ſs.
  
                                 Olei Liliacei. &
                                 Amigdalarum dulc.
                                 Pingued. caprin.
                                 Butiri rec. ʒ .i. 
                              
                           
                        Fiat, &c.
                     Vnguentum nutritiuum.M
                              ••••
                            Good
                           
                              •••••
                           .
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Olei Roſ. lib. i.
                           Aceti. lib. ſs.
                           Lithargiri. ℥. iii. or ℥. iiii.
                         Miſce, fiat vnguentum ſecundum artem.
                     
                        Arceus Balme or Liniment digeſtiue forA
                              •••••
                           . wounds in the head.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. j. ſs.
  
                                 Gummi Elemni
                                 Terebinthinae abietinae
                              
                           
                           Sepi caſtrati, antiqui & Liquefacti ℥. ij.
                           Pinguedinis porcinae antiquae
                           Liquefactae ℥. j.
                         Miſce, & fiat Linimentum.
                     Emplaſtrum de Gum. Elemni, for woundsAr
                              ••
                           us. of the head.
                     Rec. 
                           Gummi Elemni. ℥. iij.
                           ana. ℥. i
                                 •
                              .
  
                                 Reſinae pini puriſsimae.
                                 Gummi Hammoniaci
                                 Gummi Hederae.
                                 Cerae—
                              
                           
                           Terebinthinae ℥. iij. ſs.
                           Olei roſ. ℥. i. ſs.
                        
                     
                     Let al theſe boyle together, except the Gum Ammoniack, with one cuppe and a halfe of odoriferous wine, vnto the conſuming thereof, adde in the end the Ammoniack diſſolued in Uineger, and your Gum Hederae finely powdred: and being ſufficiently boyled: let if be wrought vp in Wine and aqua vitae, and ſo make it vp in roules, &c.
                     A plaſter of Betony for wounds of the head.
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                        
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Terebinthinae clarae lib. j. ſs.
                           Cerae albae ℥. v.
                           Reſinae pini ℥. vj. ſs.
                        
                     
                     Make hereof an Emplaſter according to arte, which being

done, let it bee laboured in white vineger, in the which it muſt be infuſed ſixe daies, adding thereto two parts of the iuyce of Betony, and one part of the iuyce of Uerueine, ſo let it lye till it bee throughly ſteeped, then let it bee melted, and infuſe it in the like quantitie of vineger, and other iuyces for other ſixe daies: then let it be molten agayn and laboured with womens milke, and ſo make it vp and reſerue it to your vſe, &c.
                     Another ſingular plaiſter for wounds in the head.A plaſter for wounds in the head. Vigo
                     
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Olei Roſati, Omphacini
                                 & Completi.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Olei Maſtichini
                                 Olei Myrtini
                              
                           
                           Pinguedinis Hircini. ℥. j. ſs.
                           Succi Betonicae ℥. j.
                        
                     
                     Let them all boyle together to the conſuming of the iuyce▪ then let them be ſtrayned, after adding thereto

                           Maſticis ʒ. x.
                           Gummi Elemni ʒ. vj.
                           Terebinthinae ℥. ii. ſs.
                           Cerae albae q. s.
                        
                     
                     Then let them boyle agayne at the fire a little, and ſo make a plaſter according to arte. This oyle Omphacinum afore ſpoken of, is meant the oyle made of vnriped Oliues. And the oyle that is called Complet, is that oyle which is made of the full riped Oliues.
                     Arceus Liniment for wounds in the head, that doth digeſt, mundifie, and incarne.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. i. ſs.
  
                                 Terebinthinae clarae
                                 Emplaſtri gummi Elemni.
                              
                           
                           Pinguedinis caſtrati. ℥. ij.
                           
                              Pinguedinis porcinae antiquae ℥. j.
                         Miſce, & fiat vnguentum ſecundum artem.
                     Vnguentum Mundificatiuum.Quercetani.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Vnguenti aurei ℥. i.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Terebinthinae
                                 Mellis Roſati.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 •
                              arinae fabarum ʒ. ij.
                           Boracis ʒ. j.
                           Pulueris praecipitat. ʒ. iii.
                         Miſce, & fiat vnguentum.
                     Vnguentum incarnatiuum Regis Angliae.Rex Angliae.
                     
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. iiii.
  
                                 Cerae albae
                                 Reſinae
                              
                           
                           Terebinthinae lotae ℥. i.
                           ana ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Thuris
                                 Maſticis
                              
                           
                           Olei ℥. iii. Miſce, & fiat vnguentum.
                        
                     
                     A drying water good to skinne vp an vlcer thatI. B. is hard to be cicatrized.
                     Rec. 
                           Aquae roſ. lib. ij.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Lapidis Hematites
                                 Alluminis
                                 Cinabrij
                              
                           
                           Mercurij ſublimat. ʒ. j.
                           ana. ʒ. ſs.
   
                                 Sanguinis Draconis
                                 Boli armoniaci
                              
                           
                           
                           ana. ℈. ij.
  
                                 Maſticis
                                 Thuris
                                 Sarcocollae
                              
                           
                        
Miſce in Balneo Mariae.
                     A Cataplaſme to ſuppurate.Andernacu
                              •
                           .
                     
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. i.
  
                                 Farinae triticeae.
                                 Farinae fabarum
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. vi.
  
                                 Farinae ſem. lini
                                 Farinae foenigraeci
                              
                           
                           Ficuum contuſarum ℥. i. ſs.
                           Axungiae veteris ℥. ii.
                           Croci. ℈. i.
                           Vitellorum ouorum nu. ii.
                         Fiat Cataplaſma. Andernacus.
                     Vnguentum Viride Andromachi.
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                     
                     Rec. 
                           Reſinae pini lib. ii.
                           Cerae lib. i. ſs.
                           Olei com. ℥. viii.
                           Aeruginis aeris. ℥. iii.
                        
                     
                     Relent your Oyle, Roſiu, and Ware at a gentle fire of roales, and at laſt adde to your Aerug. in ſine powder.
                  
                  
                     Now it followeth that I ſpeake of the order and reaſon of diet, which the patient wounded ought to obſerue, according as Tagaliius and Guido, with other excellent men, haue publiſhed and ſet downe for all vs to follow which practiſe Chirurgery, for the comfort & health of the ſieke and wounded patients.
                     IN the firſt ſeauen dayes, his diet muſt be thin and ſlender, enclined to cold and mo
                           •
                        ſtlieſſe, ſpecially, if the patient be yong and full bodied.
                     
                        You ſhall forbid Wyne to all wounded perſons, chiefly if he haue a Feuer, and incline to an Inflammation.
                     Let them auſtayne from all fleſh that is hard and tough, and from great Fiſhes, that engender euill iuice, from new and vnleauened bread, euill made and baked.
                     Alſo it is good to refrayne all chéeſe, and chiefly that which is old and ſalt: from Fruites, almoſt of all ſorts, from Garlick, Onyons, all ſharpe and ſalt things, and let him not taſte any kinde of hote Spices.
                     They may vſe Partridges, Pullets, and Birds that haunt the woods: let them haue ptiſanes of barley, and Almond Milke, and vſe potage made with fleſh of Ueale, ſimple, or prepared with Egges.
                     Let him haue Lettice, Purſlane, Borage, Bugloſſe, Spinage, and ſuch like hearbes in his brothes.
                     His drinke ſhall be water boyled, wherein is ſoked houſhold bread, ſuch as hath ſome part of branne in it, commonly called browne bread, or in ſtead of the ſayd water, let him drinke a ptiſane of Barley: or if he be weake, or old, then let him drinke tarte and ſtiptike Wine, delayed with plentie of water and ſugar.
                     His Supper muſt be but ſhort, yet nouriſhing.
                     It is good to vſe light and gentle rubbing or cha
                           •
                        ing the parts ſomewhat farre off from the wounded part.
                     Let him be quiet, for quietneſſe is their chiefe medicine, and ſtirring and walking contrarie, eſpecially, if they be wounded in the lower parts of the bodie.
                     
                        It is neceſſarie altogether to abſtaine from the vſe of carnall copulation.
                     And alſo to ſhunne ire, contention, anger, wrath, and all vehement motions of the minde.
                     After the ſeauen dayes, when the patient ſéemeth to be ſure and ſafe from inflāmation, and all other euill accidences, then let him vſe a more plentifull dyet, and by little and little let him returne to his former cuſtome, and then vſe ſome Wine, but méeke and gentle, and let him eate ſuch fleſh as do engender good blood, and be a mayntayuer of nature, and heate, and moyſture, and the ſtrength of the body, ſuch as are the fleſh of Hennes, Capons, and Mutton, eſpecially the Mutton of Weathers. And this dyet is neceſſary and commodious to wounded men, becauſe it maintaineth the naturall habit of the body, and doth not moue or ſtirre vp feuers, inflammations, nor fluxes. And to this dyet, ſaith Tagaltius, doth all the beſt Phyſitions and Surgeons agrée, as Galen, Hali, Raſis, Auicen, Brunus, Lanfrancus, and Guilielmus de Saliceto. Yet Theodoricus, and Henricus (ſayth Tagaltius) are of a contrary opinion, for they would haue Wine, and a hote dyet-to be giuen, and vſed immediatly vppon the wound receiued: for (ſay they) the weakenes of the faculties of the wounded perſon, is by and by to be ſtrengthned and confirmed, and that by the drincking of Wine, whoſe ſentence and iudgement, is repugnant to reaſon, as Galen 1. lib. Aphoriſ. 4. ſayth. It chanceth but ſeldome in ſickneſſes, that we ſhould ſtudie to reſtore the ſtrength of the bodie, more then it may receiue, for in ſo dooing, we ſhall increaſe and mayntayne the ſickneſſe: ſo that it appeareth by Galens words, that we muſt not alwayes haſte to increaſe the ſtrength, but it is ſufficient ſometimes to conſerue, and mayntaine the ſame, ſo that, from the firſt time that the wound is receiued, to the ſeauenth day, in the which time, inflammations vſe to come. Let the vſe of drinking Wine be altogether forbidden, vnleſſe through fluxe of blood, the

ſtrength be altogether infebled. Celſus ſayth, ye may refreſh the patient a little with Wine, but otherwiſe, it is an enemy to woundes. After the ſeauenth day, if nothing do let, you may vſe Wyne delayed with water: for if the wounde remayne without accidents till then, it is commonly afterward in ſafetie, therefore nothing I ſay héerein can be more neceſſarie for a yong practiſer in Surgery, then to endeuour himſelfe to knowe before what euil will follow, and to learne how to preuent and reſiſt the ſame. And thus much as cōcerning dyeting of your patient, which is very neceſſary as I ſay for all thoſe Surgeons which trauaile great and long voyages by ſea, as alſo in the warres by land, &c. which can not haue alwayes Phyſicions at their elbowes to counſell them, but it were very good, I know, if they had: but where no ſuch helps are to be found, I iudged it not amiſſe heere to admoniſh and ſet downe this foreſayde order of dieting of your patients, firſt of all collected for our comfort and helpe, by thoſe excellent learned men heere afore ſpoken of, &c.
                  
                  
                     A ſhort and briefe note for the maner of the purging of your patients being at the Sea, or in ſuch like places where the counſell of the learned Phiſition or Chirurgion is not to be had.
                     
                        YE ſhall vnderſtand, if the patient wounded, bee bound in his bellie, and not laxatiue; for remedie thereof you may vſe a Cliſter, or Suppoſitorie, or els giue the patient Caſsia, or Māna, or ſome ſuch gentle purging medicine. But if he bée of euill complexion or habit, his bodie being repleniſhed with euill iuyee, or if the wound bee greeuous and great, yea though his bodie were pure and cleane, yet thoſe gentle purgings will not then ſuffice, but we muſt vſe ſtronger medicines: ſo that there are two principall obſeruations in purging of the patients in ſuch wounds: the greatneſſe of the griefe, and the aboundance of the euill iuyce. But if the wound conſiſt in the vpper part of the bodie, then to purge downward, is the counſell of the learned:

and if the wound be in the lower parts of the body, to ſtay the fluxe of humors from flowing thither, it is meete and conuenient to withdrawe the ſame by purging or by vomit; which is to bee done with great diſcretion. Thus much I haue thought not amiſſe to note for generall obſeruations herein, and ſuch as I haue followed in myne owne cures, partly by my owne endeuour, and partly directed and ratified by the iudgements and informations in times paſt of diuers learned Phiſitions and Chirurgions.
                     
                        
                           depiction of man with many war injuries
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Neceſſarie medicines and Inſtruments, good for young practizers of Chirurgerie to bee furniſhed with which followe the warres either by Sea or land.
                     
                        IT is truely ſayd, there is no coyne ſo currant, but hath in it ſome counterfeyts, which maketh it ſuſpitious: ſo is there no arte ſo ſincere, no profeſſion ſo good, but hath alſo ſome counterfeyts which bréedeth it diſgrace. And none ſo much, I ſuppoſe, as ther is ſome in theſe daies, which take vpō thē the titles or names of farre traueiling or wandring Chirurgions, & ſuch like, which withMany good Ships are as it were become e
                              •
                           ges for ſuch vncleane birds the more is th
                              •
                            pitie. corruption of conſcience, being voyde of the good graces of God, and true knowledge in this noble arte, either in reaſon, iudgement, or experience, being likewiſe vtterly vnfurniſhed of all good methode or yet good medicines, vnleſſe it be ſome ſuch ſtuffe which a man would ſcarſe lay to a gald horſe back, with other furniture correſpondent to the ſame, neither being able to performe any good cure they take in hand, no more then they are able with one puffe of winde to turne about a Milſtone. All which is a plaine demonſtration of their great ouerſight in Chirurgerie, as by their cures at their comming home, is a ſpeciall token of their vilde ignorance. And therefore very hardly are ſuch able to declare or foretell the ende of their cures, but raſhly do promiſe that which they cannot performe, and ſo bring themſelues in the ende to ignominie and ſhame, and this worthie arte vnto great diſcredit. I haue therfore, as I haue many times ſayd, for the benefit of young practizers of the Arte, heere collected out of Ioſephus Quirſitanus and good Vigo, with diuers others, ſpeciall medicines and neceſſarie Inſtruments, wherevnto I haue added ſomewhat of myne owne collection, very needfull and neceſ
                        
                           ••
                        rie for all young practizers of Chirurgerie to bee furniſhed with, which followe and ſerue in the warres by land, or at ſeas in ſhippes, vnto whom I wiſh moſt happie ſucceſſe in all their cures, as I wiſh vnto my owne: as knoweth God, who ſeeth the ſecrets of all mens hearts, which guide you all with

his outſtretched arme, and bleſſe you alſo with his holie hand. Amen.
                     
                        Suppuratiues, or Maturatiues
                              
                                 〈…〉
                               Quercetanus.
                        
                        Vnguentum Baſilicon vtrumque.
                        Vnguentum Macedonicum.
                        Tetrapharmacum.
                        Vnguentum reſumptiuum.
                        The Emplaiſter of Mucilages, which may be diſſolued with Oyle Oliue, if neede require.
                     
                     
                        Mundifying or cleanſing Medicines.
                        Vnguentum diapompholygos Nicolai.
                        Vnguentum viride andromachi.
                        Emplaſtrum Diuinum diſſolued in Oyle of Roſes.
                        
                        Vnguentum Apoſtolicum Auicennae.
                        Vnguentum Aegyptiacum Auicennae.
                     
                     
                        Incarnatiues, or Regeneratiues.
                        Vnguentum Aureum.
                        Vnguentum ceraſ. Meſuae vtrumque.N. 
                                 〈◊〉
                              .
                        
                        Emplaſtrum de gratia Dei, & de farina.
                     
                     
                        Deſiccatiues or drying Medicines.
                        Vnguentum de minio.
                        Vnguentum deſiccatiuum rub.
                        Emplaſtrum de ceruſſa.
                     
                     
                        Vnguents for burnings with Gunpowder.
                        Vnguentum fuſcum Nicolai.
                        Vnguentum de calce viu.
                        Vnguentum Magiſtrale, of the Phyſitions of, Florence, deſcribed by
                            Weckerus. Medicines,

to repell and keepe backe.
                        
                        Vnguentum de bolo communi.
                        Vnguentum roſarum Meſues, &c.
                     
                     Alſo Vnguentum pro vſtionibus, after Paracelſus, whichParacelſus. was greatly commended to me by a Phiſition and Surgeon of good account, but as yet I haue not proued it.
                     Rec. 
                           Butyri. lib. j.
                           ana. lib. ſs.
  
                                 Olei nucum.
                                 Seui ceruini.
                              
                           
                           Medullae tauri. ℥. iiij.
                        
                     
                     Let this be melted at the fire, then put it into the water of Nymphae, three quarters of a pinte, and ſo make héere of an Unguent according to Arte, let the part affected bée anoynted herewith, till the payne be ceaſed, and the wound cured.
                     
                        Of Syrups theſe be conuenient.Vigo.
                        
                        Acetoſus ſimplex.
                        
                           A Syrupe of the iuyce of Endiue, or
                        De duabus radicibus, without vineger.
                        Mell roſarum in ſmall quantitie.
                     
                     
                        Of waters theſe ſhall ſuffice. ana. q. s.
                        Water of Endiue.
                        Hops.
                        Borage.
                        Wormewood.
                        Fumitory.
                     
                     
                        Of Electuaries, theſe they ſhall haue with them.
                        Diaphoenicon.
                        Elec. de ſucco roſarum, after Meſue and Diacatholicon.
                        Alſo Caſsia.
                     
                     
                        Pilles they muſt haue.
                        
                        Pillulae Hierae cum agarico.
                        Pillulae de fumoterrae, the greater and the leſſe.
                     
                     
                        Againſt the diſeaſe Opthalmia, they muſt haue
                        Aqua Roſacea.
                        And a ſief without Opium.
                        Oleum Roſaceum.
                        Myrtillorum.
                        Chamomillinum.
                        Oleum Omphacinum.
                     
                     And it is conuenient that they haue with them
                     
                        Farinae.
                        Fabarum.
                        Orobi.
                        Lini.
                        Foenugreci. and Aqua vitae.
                        Hordei.
                        Lupinorum.Clow
                                 ••
                              .
                        
                        Tritici.
                     
                     
                        Emplaſters.
                        Emp. deſpeciebus.
                        Emp. Diachalciteos.
                        Emp. Cum Gummis.
                        Emp. Sticticum Paracelſi.
                        Emp. Hyoſcyami Lutei, of my inuention.
                        Emp. Cumini, good for cold and windie ſwellings.
                        Emp. Flos vnguentorum.
                        Emp. de minio.
                     
                     
                        Unguents, &c.
                        Vnguentum Dialthaeae.
                        Vnguentum Album Raſis.
                        Vnguentum de peto of my inuention.
                        
                           Arceus Liniment for wounds in the head, and his plaſter for the ſame.
                        Alſo Vnguentum pro Spaſmo.
                        
                        Balſamum Artificiale.
                        Oleum Hyperic. cum Gummis.
                        Oleum Catulorum.
                        Oleum Lumbricorum.
                        Oleum Ouorum.
                        Oleum Scorpionis.
                        Oleum Amygdalarum dul.
                        Butyrum Recens.
                     
                     A Lotion for ſore mouthes, good for ſuch as haue the Scorbuto, as at Sea and other places I haue ſeene: for the perfect cure of it, I referre you to Wyerus, which booke Maiſter Hunton hath of late tranſlated into Engliſh.
                     Mythridatum, or fine Venice Triacle, Spermaceti, french Barley, Licoris, and Anniſeedes, very neceſſary to make Barley water, and Potus Antiochiae for wounds in the bodie, &c.
                     
                        For Cataplaſmes.
                        Flores Roſ. in pul.
                        Flores Chamomil. in pul.
                        Flores Melilot. in pul.
                        Rad. Altheae in pulu,
                     
                     
                        To rebate ſpungious fleſh, &c.
                        Mercury Praecipitat.
                        Mercury ſublimat.
                        Allumen roch.
                        Vitriolum. Acetum.
                     
                     
                        Alſo
                        Egges.
                        Towe.
                        Splints for fractured bones.
                        Tape to binde.
                        
                           Cupping or boxing glaſſes.
                        A Chafingdiſh of Copper, Braſſe, or Iron.
                        A Morter, and a Peſtell.
                        Blood Porrengers.
                     
                     
                        Powders to reſtraine great fluxes of bloud.
                        Galens Powder.
                        Gales Powder.
                        Or my Powder may ſuffice.
                     
                     
                        Small and long waxe Candles made of Tinne, Leade, Siluer, or Wood, &c.
                        A ſharpe Sawe.
                        A Catlin.
                        An Inciſion knife.
                     
                     
                        Néedles two or three, ſome of eight, tenne, or thirteene inches in length, hauing a decent eye in it, guttered like a Spaniſh néedle, fit to drawe a flamula, or peece of fine Lawne or linnen cloath through a member that is wounded, &c.
                        Small buttons, or cauteriſing yrons, meet to ſtay the fluxe of an arterie or veyne, if great neceſſitie do ſo require.
                        A Trepan.
                        A head Sawe.
                        An Eleuatorie.
                     
                     
                        A Dilatorium to open a wound, that a Darthead, Arrowhead, or bullet, may the better be taken out, with a Roſtrum Coruinum, or Rauens bill, or with a Roſtrum Anatinum, or Ducks bill, or with a Roſtrum Gruinum, faſhioned like a Storcks bill, or Cranes bill.
                     There bee in vſe of theſe two ſorts, one bowing, and the other ſtraight.
                     A Speculum oris, for the mouth.
                     A Syringe.
                     
                        As for ſtitching quills, and other inſtruments that a Surgeou ought alwaies to carrie about him, I leaue vnſpoken of. There are alſo many other Inſtruments I knowe, which are in vſe, but theſe may ſuffice for young practizers of the Arte, and vnto men of great knowledge and experience it is needleſſe for me to nominate the reſt.
                  
                  
                     A neceſſarie note or obſeruation for the cure of one Maiſter Buckland, dwelling (as he ſayd) at the ſigne of the George at Reading, a towne in Barkſhire, he receiued a puncture or pricke into the ſinewe or nerue of his right arme, by a moſt impudent and ignorant bloudletter, which did pricke the ſinewe in ſtead of the liuen veyne.
                     
                        THis Maiſter Buckland hauing a full and plethorick bodie, and therevpon enclined to ſicknes, made his iourney vp to London, only to take phiſicke, which he did by the counſell of Maiſter Doctor Symons, who was in times paſt one of his olde acquaintance. After his bodie was well prepared and purged, his Phiſition preſcribed him farther remedie by a bill, and amongſt other things, that the patient ſhould be let bloud to the value of eight ounces 
                           〈…〉
                         the liuer veyne, appoynting him thereunto alſo a 
                           〈…〉
                         dwelling in this Citie, called Maiſter Morland: but (as he ſayd) fortune owing him diſpite, by chaunce that Chirurgion was not at home, being called otherwiſe about ſome ſpeciall cures, and therefore it was ſayd his comming home to be vncertaine. With that a friend of Maiſter Buckland that did come to viſite him, and after ſpeeches had, vnderſtanding that he wanted one to let him bloud, ſayd: If it pleaſe you I will ſend for one that I do partly knowe, not only to bee a good Surgeon, but for letting of bloud, and drawing of a tooth, he is ſuppoſed to be as ſkilfull as any man in this towne. Now ſuch a one (ſayd he) that can ſo well let bloud, I would willingly

heare, and if it will pleaſe you, I will ſend my man for him in your name. In fine, a bad thing was eaſie to finde, for he was preſently brought. Then Maiſter Buckland (as you haue heard) being the ſicke patient, deliuered vnto this bloudletter the Phiſitions bill, which was written in Engliſh: but be anſwered and ſayd, Truely I can neither write nor reade: neuertheleſſe, doubt you of nothing, but I can and will do it as well as any man whatſoeuer. I dare make that compariſon (quoth he) ſo the patient did reade the bill vnto him, which did ſignifie that there ſhould bee eight ounces of bloud, taken from the liuer veyne on the right arme. O the liuer veyne ſir (ſayd he) I knowe it as well as all the Phiſitions and Surgeons in this towne: and ſo without any longer detracting of time, he went about his buſines, and did ſo be rubbe and chaſe his arme, as though he had béene labouring about his horſe heeles, and then bound it vp after his owne faſhion. All which being accompliſhed, in the twinckling of an eye, or turning of a hand, this toothdrawer, or bloudletter (as he called him) didIgnorance engendereth error. without all regard or ſkill, vnaduiſedly ouerſhoot himſelfe, and did thruſt the ſicke patient into the ſinewe in ſtead of the liuer veyne. Then preſently by the reaſon of the great ſenſibilitie and feeling of the prickt ſinewe, he fainted, or ſounded downe right, and much ado they had to keepe life in him: ſo they gaue him preſently to drinke Aqua vitae, &c. And were further conſtrayned to burne a card, being ſoulded vp round, and offered the ſmoke thereof vp into his noſethrilles. This done, he was layd vpon his bed, then all thoſe that were about the ſicke patient, did begin to finde great fault with his baſenes and want of ſkill, and condemned his handie worke. Well (ſayd he) I pray you be patient, the matter truely is as muchThe more the worſe. as nothing, for I haue had diuers that haue faynted thus, and yet were preſently well againe: but the fault that I haue committed, I will confeſſe, was, for that the Orifice was made too little, and in very deede the only cauſe was in himſelfe, for that he did not hould ſtill his arme, as he ſhould haue done. Then one of the ſtanders by anſwered, a blind ſhift is better

then none at all, you might as well haue ſayd, he had eaten his horſe becauſe his faddle lieth vnder his bed. Well (ſayd he) you ſpeake merily, I knowe that ſaying hath been vſed long, as an old ieſt, but I pray you al be contented and I will make him well againe vpon my credite within twiſe foure & twentie houres. To be ſhort, his words were but winde, for within that time and ſpace he had moſt of thoſe accidents which foretelleth death, for the wound did receiue or entertaine many humors, with extreame paine, inflammation, a Feauer ſhiuering, rauing, and oftentimes conuulſions. Then they counſelled together and determined to ſtay no longer vpon this fooliſh toothdrawer his vaine promiſes: for which cauſe they ſent for Maiſter Doctor Symons, and after his comming it was ſtraunge vnto him to ſee ſuch a ſodaine alteration, demaunded of them what the cauſe might be: Then briefly they deliuered vnto him all the euill that had happened, and the cauſer thereof. In the meane time, I was alſo ſent for: but heere omitting other ſpeeches had, I requeſted of them, that without any detracting of time I might ſee the hurt: ſo without carying I did lay all naked and bare, where I found the patient to haue thoſe euill ſymtomes before rehearſed, and nature alſo weakened. Then Maiſter Doctor Symons called for the fellow that had dreſt him. Here I am (quoth he) You haue not been circumſpect in all things which concerne the methodicall perfection of this your handie worke. I will aunſwere what I haue done (quoth he) Then ſayd he vnto him, what reaſon had you not only to commit a merueilous ouerſight in pricking of the ſinewe, but alſo almoſt as foule a fault in ſtopping or cloſing vp of the Orifice of the wound, or pricke of the ſinewe, which now by your vnſkilfulnes is hidden vnder the ſkinue, which at the very firſt you ought with all your induſterie and diligence to haue kept open. Well (ſayd he) I haue applied thereunto thoſe medicines which cannot be bettered, and are by me well approued to be good, either for pricks or cuts of tendons, ſinewes, or veynes, but yet did I neuer ſee accidents thus ſecretly ſteale into a wound. I pray you (ſaid I) what be

your medicines or remedics yt you haue vſed which are ſo good and haue ſo euill ſucceſſe. I tell you (ſayd he) they are no beggerly medicines, but the beſt I could buy for my monie: The one is Gracia dei, and the other is an Indian Balme, which I know is good, for well I wote it coſt me two ſhillings and ſixe pence the ounce at the firſt hand. Your remedies (ſayd I) may be profitable as they are vſed, although not for ſuch pricks of ſinewes. What is your reaſon I pray you (ſayd he) I neuer heard any man ſay ſo but you. Marie (quoth I) becauſe at the beginning of all ſuch prickes, you ought not to vſe neither conglutinatiues, nor incarnatiues, vntill the wound be paſt all daunger, and then ſuch medicines which haue propertie to incarne, and to couer the ſinewe with fleſh, may ſafely be vſed: neither are ſuch wounds reſtored again by Balmes, according to the firſt intention, but only in fleſhy parts. But this ſhifting fellowe anſwered & ſaid: You make here a greater ſturre before the patient and his friends, then there is cauſe. And what though he bee a little faint, he ſhall bee well agayne by Gods grace, if he will bee ruled by me but a little while, and I will ſtand to it for all your talke, it is but a ſmall pricke only in the ſkinne. But admit the ſinewe were cleane cut aſunder, which is, I ſuppoſe, a more worſe and daungerous thing then the pricke of a ſinewe: and yet (ſayd he) without compariſon or praiſe to my ſelfe I ſpeake it, and without all this buſines, I haue cured them when I haue had no ſuch ouerſeers or counſellers, but my ſelfe alone. Why (ſayd I) do you not thinke that a pricke in the ſinewe is more daungerous then that ſinewe which is cleane cut aſunder. No (ſayd he) you ſhall neuer make me beleeue that a prick by a ſmall poynted thing, as is a launcet, or a needle, can be ſo daungerous, as that which is cut aſunder by a razour, knife, or other ſharpe weapons. Now truely (ſayd I) I may well credite you in good ſooth that you can neither write nor reade, neither yet haue any good experience: for if you had, you would neuer thus beſot your ſelfe with ſuch rude iudgements and fond opinions: but you are partly to be excuſed, for you haue moe fellowes, whoſe knowledge

and ſkill is correſpondent with yours, as directly as the ſheepe doth followe the Ramme. Then he did begin to oyen the gates of infamie (as is the manner of ſuch miſchieuous miſcreants) but moſt ſpecially againſt a reuerend and ſkilfull Chirurgeon of this Citie of London, ſhamefully charging him that he had ſpoyled a Gentlewoman in the countrie, whoHe hath me
                              ••
                            ſelowes that will poynt at other mens faults, and forget their own. hauing (as this ſlaunderer ſayd) but a little pricke with a needle only in the ſkinne, and was in the ioynt of her fore ſinger of her right hand, and by that ſmall pricke in the ſkinne, ſhe loſt the vſe of that finger, which cure (quoth he) hath vtterly diſcredited him both with the Gentlewoman and her friends. I anſwered him and ſayd: That might haue been any other mans caſe, and I told him that my ſelfe had knowne the like ſucceſſe to happen in the cure of men of good knowledge, experience, and iudgement: and yet, in myne opinion, no fault nor error at all committed by them touching the method or manner of cure. Well (ſaid he) ſpeake what you pleaſe, I do know the pricke with a needle in the ſkinne is nothing ſo daungerous, as you make it, in any bodie whatſoeuer. But it is ſayd to be the manner of all you, to hide and excuſe one an others fault, and to ſpeake againſt ſuch as I am, becauſe I am a ſtraunger vnto you, and none of your companie, and therefore I am deſpiſed, and my medicines diſpraiſed. Why (ſayd I) cuery honeſt man and faithfull true Artiſt that is diligent in ſtudie, and by his ſtudying attayneth to knowledge and ſkill, and being examined, approued, and allowed, and a man that feareth God, and endeuoureth to the vttermoſt of his power and ſkill to diſcharge his duetie which is committed to his charge, according vnto thoſe graces and gifts which God of his great goodnes hath indued him with: ſuch men are our brethren and of our companie, whereſoeuer he dwell or abide: but contrariwiſe, deceiuers, intruders, and ſhifters, as you are, which without either reaſon or ſkill, do abuſe the arte and ſpoyle the people, we exclude ſuch perſons cleane from vs, and do account you all but as a ſort of Caterpillers in the countrie and Common wealth. Then I proceeded to his former ſpeeches

as touching the pricke of a needle in the ſkinne, and I ſayd vnto him: ſith you will not beleeue me that ſuch prickes are dangerous, I will ſhew you what Tagaultius ſaith being a learned man, and of great account in Phiſicke and Chirurgerie, he alſo citing Galen in the ſixth booke of his method, whoſe words in effect are theſe. Imagine (ſayth he) one come vnto vs, who hath but only a prick in the ſkinne with a needle, that man for the good diſpoſition of his bodie may eaſely bee cured, and to followe his accuſtomed buſines, hauing the part naked and bare, and without any medicine at all, and yet receiue no hurt: but if he haue a full and plethorike bodie, or a bodie of an ill conſtitution, called Cachochymia, in ſuch a bodie the pricke of a needle in the ſkinne is hard to bee cured. Then this counterfeyt aunſwered agayne, I care neither for Galen nor the other man you ſpeake of (meaning Tagaltius)Reaſons according to his rudenes. for (ſayd he) I haue done as good cures as the beſt of them both, and yet I heare they were a couple of good workemen. Then ſayd Maiſter Doccor: I am aſhamed of thy impudencie and boldnes, and for that cauſe did ſharply reprehend him: So he was commaunded to auoyd the place and preſence of the patient. Then with vnſeemly ſpéeches, which are not méet to be ſpoken of in this place, he departed, &c. And now I will come vnto the cure of the ſayd puncture or pricke of the ſinew: but firſt you ſhall vnderſtand, that the matter was ſo ſtopped in, that it could not by any meanes conueniently breathe out, and therefore I did open the ſkinne by inciſion directly vpon the pricke of the ſinewe, which I made of a ſufficient length, that the matter which was ſtopped in did the more freely and eaſely iſſue out: and that matter which did continually flowe foorth was ſome what cleere, thinne, and glutinous, like as though it had been a ſtime, or muſcilage: then I applyed vponNote that, old things bee enemies vnto the ſinewes. the ſayd puncture to mitigate the payne theſe Dyles following, made firſt actually hot, which I vſed continually vntill the forenamed accidents were remoued and taken away.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Oleorum Chamomeli
                                 & Lombricorum.
                                       
                                          〈◊〉
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Olei Euphorbij. ʒ. 
                                 •
                              . ſs.
                           Olei exvitellis ouorum. ʒ. ij.
                           Aquae vitae. q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     Since the time of this cure, I found the like profite for appeaſing of paynes in the cure of a woman, which alſo was pricke into the ſinewe, vnto whom I vſed theſe Dyles following, in the ſame order as the other afore rehearſed.
                     Rec. ana. ʒ. iij.

                           Olei Terebinthinae
                           Olei Roſarum.
                           Olei Lumbricorum.
                           Olei vitellorum ouorum. Miſce.
                        
                     
                     After I had (actually hot) applyed the aforeſayd Dyles, then I miniſtred therewithall, for more ſecuritie and ſpeedie helpe to appeaſe the paynes, this worthie remedie, which is of Vigo his deſcription.
                     Rec. Medullae panis, & Lactis vaccini confecti cum OleisVigo. Roſarum, & Chamomeli cum vitellis ouorum, & cum Croco. ana. q. s.
                     Boyle all theſe together vnto the thicknes of a plaiſter, the which I applyed warme vpon the ſayd puncture. Alſo vpon this medicament of Vigo, and likewiſe round about the whole member, where any payne or inflammation was, this excellent Cataplaſme of Valeriola.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Farinae fabarum
                                 Hordei.Valeriola.
                                 
                                 Lentium.
                                 Lupinorum.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Farinae Seminis lini.
                                 Foenugreci.
                              
                           
                           
                              Farinae Orobi. ℥. j.
                           Croci ʒ. ij.
                         Bulliant farinae cum aceto & mellis paruo. Fiat Cataplaſma.
                     Alſo I haue vſed this following in the like cure done of late, as I haue declared, with great profite and eaſe vnto the patient, &c.
                     Rec. ana. q. s.

                           Radic. althaeae
                           Farinae Hordei
                           Farinae fabarum
                           Farinae lentiumWeck
                                    ••
                                 .
                           
                        
Coquantur cum ſapa, vel lixiuio. Whereunto you ſhall adde ana. q. s.

                           Olei Roſarum
                           Olei Chamamelini &
                           Olei Anethini
                           Alſo Terebinthinae &
                           Croci parum.
                         Miſce, & fiat Emplaſtrum.
                     I haue thought it not amiſſe here to giue to vnderſtand, that Guido doth admoniſh vs, not to vſe at all thoſe pultiſes, or hot waters which are wont to cure inflammations, for that ſuch remedies in this cure, do rather putrifie and waſte away the ſinewes, &c. And ſith the chiefeſt thing in curing wounds of the ſinewes, is to appeaſe the payne, therefore I haue thought it good here to ſet foorth ſuch choſen medicines, as my ſelfe haue approoued, for the better directing of thoſe young ſtudents, which haue not been practiſed in the like maner of curing. Moreouer, whereas Guido with others doth wiſely declare, that conuulſions are euill, and for the moſt part vncurable, as it is moſt certaine and true, yet it ſo pleaſed God by theſe remedies hereafter nominated, he was in a reaſonable time and ſpace quite deliuered of that euill accident, by

annoynting morning and euening all the hinder partes of his necke, and both his ſhoulder blades, and downe all the ſpine of his backe, euen vnto his hippes with this Unguent.
                     Rec. 
                           Olei Caſtorei ℥. j.
                           Olei Iuniperi. ℥. ſs.
                           ana. ʒ. vj.
  
                                 Olei Lilliorum &
                                 Olei Vulpini.
                              
                           
                         Miſce.
                     This being accompliſhed, as is before declared, then I proceeded from time to time vntill the finiſhing of this cure, the which was done in the ende with that moſt excellent Balme, that is ſuppoſed to bee of Maiſter Halles deſcription, late of Maydſtone, which is now extant in this booke, with the which alſo I vſed this Unguent following.
                     Rec. Vnguentum aureum Heben. Meſu
                              •
                           .
                        
                           Cerae. ℥. v.
                           Reſinae quar. j.
                           Terebinthinae lib. j.
                           Mellis. quar. ſs.
                           ana. ʒ. ij.
  
                                 Maſticis
                                 Thuris.
                                 Sarcocollae.
                                 Myrrhae.
                                 Aloes.
                                 Croci.
                              
                           
                         Fiat Vnguentum.
                     This approued Unguent, and the aforeſayd Balme together, brought very ſpeedely fleſh vpon the hurt ſine we: and hauing left the vſe of the Cataplaſme, afore ſpoken of, then I did wrap the whole mēber round about cum Emplaſtro Diachalciteos, diſolued in Oleo Roſarū, & Lumbricorū: which did greatly ſtrengthen the weake member. And thus by Gods helpe by this manner of method he was reſtored againe to his

former health of the part wounded. And here I finiſh this ſhort note or obſeruation, the which I do moſt hartely deſire all young ſtudents to take in good part, and to accept of this vntill it ſhall pleaſe ſome learneder man of greater giftes and iudgement to publiſh a more profitable worke: the which hartely I wiſh, as knoweth God, who direct both you and me in all lawfull proceedings and practiſes in the arte.
                  
                  
                     The cure of a certaine ſtraunger which was wounded or thruſt through his thigh with a Rapier, by one of his owne countrymen, being combatting and fighting together. The cure thereof was ſomewhat hard and difficult, by reaſon he was further touched with the french diſeaſe before he receiued his wound, &c.
                     
                        IMmediatly after hée had receiued his wound or thruſt through his thigh, I was ſent for vnto this cure, the patient lying at a ſtraungers houſe in the Crouched Friers: ye ſhall vnderſtand he had a very ſtrong, fat, and corpulent bodie, and ſo a very bigge thigh, he was a man about thirtie yeeres of age: all which being conſidered, concerning the ſtate and ſtrength of his bodie, and the greatnes of the place wounded: then for the cure thereof I did ordayne a flamula made of fine Lawne, the which dipped in Oleo Hypericonis cum gummis, and with a néedle made of Whales bone, fit for ſuch purpoſes, I did drawe the ſayd flamula into the wound, and I did leaue both the ends thereof hanging foorth at the Orifices of this wound, putting alſo a ſmall tent in the dependant or loweſt part of the wound, and the largeſt Orifice which was at the inſide of his thigh, and there it did reſt for the ſpace of two daies, applying alſo thereto for the ſtaying of the bloud Galen his pouder, and aboue the wound I layd a very good defenſiue: after I did bolſter and roule it vp according as arte did leade me. The ſecond day at night he did require me to dreſſe him againe, for becauſe the night before he ſayd he was troubled with a feauer, as he ſuppoſed

it to bee, and was ſo perſwaded by other: and for that cauſe he entertayned a Phiſition, a countrie man of his, for to cure his Agewe, and alſo to ſee his wound. Now when the wound was opened, it was without tumor or any other euill ſymptomes, only I foūd a bloudy ſaines: for that cauſe I vſed next with the flamula a very good digeſtiue, the which I dipped in Oleo roſarum, & melle roſarum, ana. q. s. and left to vſe the Oyle of Hypericon: The next day in the morning he complayned of extreame payne which he had ſuffered all that night: then I opened the wound, and I did finde it as before, wherewith he was ſomewhat diſquieted in bodie and minde. Then I dreſt him agayne, and he was very quiet and well all that day, and at night the wound tended towards digeſtion, which was (me thought) very well to be liked of: but the next day in the morning it was more worſe then before, a ſtinking bloudie ſanies: and the next day at night the matter was indifferent, yet in the morning by no meanes I could procure concoct or digeſt matter: notwithſtanding, the beſt digeſtiues and other good medicines vſed. So the Phiſition and the reſt of hisHe was a yong Phiſitō, ſcarſe skilfull in the arte of Chirurgerie, though otherwiſe well learned. countrie men thought ſomewhat amiſſe in me, for that the patient his wound did proſper no better: And in like manner I thought ſomewhat in the Phiſition, for that he could not finde out the reaſon and cauſe of his ſuppoſed feauer. To come vnto the purpoſe, at the next opening in the preſence of his hoſte of the houſe, where he did lye, which was his interpretour, I deſired him to demaund of the patient, when and where his paynes did moſt afflict him. He anſwered, in the night time, and chiefly in his head, and alſo his ſhoulders, legges and armes, al which were very ſore grieued and tormented. Then I was the bolder to proceed in examination, and aſked of him if he had any breaking out in ſome particular parts of his bodie. He aunſwered no, but only a fewe Scabbes in his head, the which he did not perceiue, but ſince he was hurt and kept his bed: and further he ſayd, he was very ſore grieued with the Emoroydes or Piles, which for the baſenes of the place he ſayd he was vnwilling to acquaint any man with. Then I

plainly told him he was touched with the French diſeaſe. SoThey 
                              〈◊〉
                            neither 
                              ••
                           oroydes nor P
                              〈…〉
                           es. vi
                              •
                           let his correction, but the F. P. I being loth to giue offence, ſayd little more at that time, becauſe I perceiued hee had my words in diſdaine, vntill he had better conſidered with himſelfe. And agaynſt my next comming he cauſed the Phiſition to méete with me: So after he had alſo ſeane and heard the whole matter, he likewiſe confirmed my ſayings, that certainly it was the French diſeaſe. Why (ſayd the patient to the Doctor) doth our countrie yeeld ſuch fruite, and I being no Frenchman: He aunſwered, God plagueth moſt part of the world with that diſeaſe only for our ſinnes and wickedneſſe. So order was taken by vs preſently: & we entered him in cure for that ſickneſſe. But here it is to be noted, that in all this time I did neuer alter or chaunge mine intention of curing, neither did I leaue of the vſe of the flamula, vntill the wound was perfectly digeſted, which we could by no meanes procure, vntil he was entered ſixe daies in the diet: and then altogether I left of my digeſtiues, and the vſe of theSuch wounds are ſildom: voyd of accidents, vntill the 
                              〈◊〉
                            be perfectly di
                           
                              •
                           eſted flamula, and vſed but ſhort tents with good iniections, and alſo Oleum Hypericonis, with other conuenient remedies méete for this cure. In the end, when the patient did perceiue he was almoſt cured, he would (as it were) merely ſeeme to excuſe himſelfe: and being (as it ſeemed) partly aſhamed of his diſeaſe, proteſted vnto vs, with many incredible ſpeeches and vntrueths, that he did not vnderſtand how he ſhould come by the diſeaſe, no more then he did knowe, how, or whether the Ocean ſeas did ebbe or flowe, or not, vnleſſe it were by traueiling ouer the Alpes, or with drinking of Snowe water. Theſe his ridiculous reaſons I accepted as winde. It ſufficeth (I ſay) that he was cured. So he was glad of his health, and I nothing ſorie of his liberalicie. Yet he was to be borne withall: for I haue not heard of many that would willingly vouchſafe to confeſſe the originall and taking of ſuch infirmities. But what if he had? It is not our functions or callings (that be Chirurgions) to reueale the ſecrets of our patients, as we are taught by the ordinances of our elders and auncient fathers that went before vs.
                  
                  
                     
                     The cure of a man which receiued a notable wound in his head, with great fracture of the skull, and did moreouer fracture the bone of the thigh, called Osfemoris, by a fall out of a gallerie in the Beare garden, at that time when the Beare garden did fall downe, and did kill and hurt many.
                     
                        I Haue thought it good, afore I enter into the briefe note or obſeruation of this cure, partly to ſignifie vnto all young ſtudents in this arte, that ſuch great wounds in the head, with fracture of the ſkull, are holden generally of the beſt profeſſors and practizers, to be moſt perillous and daungerous. The bone being compreſſed vpon the panicle Dura mater: for which cauſe, at the very beginning of this cure, I did ſhaue or cut the haire away round about the wound: then with my finger I made further probation into the wound, and there I did manifeſtly feele a notable fracture or breach in the ſkull on the left ſide of his head vpon the bone, called Os Petroſum, which (as is before ſaid) was depreſſed vpō the panicle Dura mater. And for that the fracture of the ſkull was greater in length then the wound in the fleſh, for that cauſe, without detracting of time, I made inciſion, and ſo followed the fracture, vntill all the rift or crackt bone was wholy diſcouered. When I did ſee and behold the full length of the fracture or breach in the ſkull, and had rayſed vp the fleſh, then for that I could not at that preſent time proceede any further in this buſines, becauſe of the great fluxe of bloud, and the rather for that he had loſt a great quantitie of bloud before he was brought home to his lodging. All which being conſidered, I filled the wound with pleggets and runlets made of lint, and very ſine towe, wet in the whites of Egges, being mixed with Galen his powder. Then after, with good bolſtering and roulling, he remayned thus vntil the next day, and then hauing alſo a preſent regard vnto the preſeruation of the fracture of

his thigh, as hereafter I 
                           〈…〉
                         lie to ſet dow
                           •
                        e the true manner and 
                           〈◊〉
                         or 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         this great fracture and wound in his head. 
                           •
                        et amongst other things, I thought 
                           〈◊〉
                         good al
                           ••
                         to 
                           •
                        ore hert vnto you, that the patients maiſter, and other of his friends, did ſignifie 
                           〈◊〉
                         me that h
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         of 
                           •••
                        d account, and for that cauſe they were 
                           •
                        e more 
                           〈…〉
                         I would de
                           ••
                        e
                           •
                        e truely vnto them w
                           •••
                         d
                           •
                        ung
                           •
                        
                        ▪ I thought he was in, that they might alſo ſignifi i
                           •
                         
                        
                           ••
                        to other of his 
                           〈◊〉
                         in the countrie. Then I conſidered with my ſelfe, I was then to ſpeake before men of worſhip▪ wiſedome and learning, vnto whom I was to deliuer m
                           ••
                        e 
                           〈◊〉
                        . And calling to 
                           〈◊〉
                         remembraunce ſome part of the wiſe ſayings of Guido, Tagaultius, and others, whoſe good counſell herein is thankfully to be embraced and followed.
                     
                        When then ar
                              •
                            (ſay they) called before a Magiſtrate or head Officer, or any other graue and wiſe man, and that thou are required 
                              •
                           o deliuer thine opinion, ſen ence and iudgement vppou the perſon wounded, and to prognoſticat
                              •
                           , as much as arte requireth, it behoueth thee diligently and effectually to marke the wound or wounds, if there be many, and ſhall ſhalt truely call the ſame wound or wounds by their expreſſe and proper names, together with the place wounded. Then after it behoneth thee to conſider with thy ſelfe the cauſe or thy coniecture, and the reaſon of thy ſentence and iudgement by thee deliuered, wiſely and prudently, leaſt thou tayle in thy iudgement, and ſo ſhewe ſ
                              •
                           y ſelfe to be either 
                              〈…〉
                           rent, or els deceiued, &c. So briefly here I could them, that he was not without great daimger. partly by reaſon the 
                           〈…〉
                         was ſore ſhaken with the fall, and alſo for that the 
                           •
                        one was broken, and depreſſed vpon Dura mater, which were 
                           〈…〉
                         cauſ
                           ••
                         that did h
                           ••
                        der his ſpeech, and 
                           •
                         it could not be 
                           〈◊〉
                         at the 
                           〈…〉
                         or dreſſing, by reaſon of the great 
                           〈…〉
                        oud: 
                           •
                        owbe
                           •
                        t, I did hope of ſome amendment after 
                           •
                         h
                           ••
                         pearced the ſkull with the Trepan. Other ſp
                           〈…〉
                         I h
                           ••
                         as touching his vom
                           ••
                        ing, the greatneſſe of his wound, with the fracture of his ſkull and

                        
                           〈…〉
                         ſ
                           •
                        eake 
                           •••
                        e of hereafter in 
                           〈…〉
                         I cauſed them to hang all his chamber 
                           〈◊〉
                         about with Couerle
                           •
                        s and other hangings, and made it 
                           〈◊〉
                         darke, and without any light or ayre, but only by a candle: becauſe in this c
                           •
                        ſe ayre is very hurtfull. Then at the ſecond 
                           〈◊〉
                        , after 
                           〈…〉
                         e
                           •
                        ed the wound and taken away all 
                           〈…〉
                         wound was filled, for the reſ
                           •
                        rayning 
                           〈…〉
                         it did require with all expedition to make v
                           •
                        n
                           •
                         or way 
                           〈…〉
                         to come foorth, therefore I cauſed th
                           •
                        n ſtrong men ſtedfaſtly to ſtay his head with their hands▪ and 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        opped his eares with wooll, then I did ſet on the Trepan. and ſo pearced the ſkull through both the tables in two places: and then with an Inſtrument, called 
                           •
                         
                        Leuatorie, I rayſed vp the depreſſed bone, with great care and diligence, for feare of procuring further accidents: which being doue, preſently his ſpeech amended. And vpon Dura mater I found a good quantitie of congeled bloud, which preſently I remoued for feare of payne and inflammation. After the bloud with ſpeede was taken away, there was alſo very apparent to be ſeene a certaine blacknes vpon Dura mater: for the which cauſe I did put betweene Dura mater and the ſkull, in the 
                           ••
                        ead of a ſyndall that Vigo commendeth, a fine 
                           〈…〉
                        wne, dipped in Melle Roſ. and vpon the fracture of the 
                           〈…〉
                         I applyed actually hot Olei Roſ. & Aquae vitae, 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         with 
                           •••
                        t ſo filled vp the wound: and at other 
                           〈…〉
                         I vſed vpon pleggets of lint this Unguent, which is called Vnguentum caprifolij, that I found then 
                           〈◊〉
                         in Maiſter Gales ſecond booke of his Antidotarie: but ſince that time I haue found it in Wecker, and diu
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
                           •
                        thers.
                     Rec.Vnguentun
                              •
                            Capri
                              •
                           olij. Wecker. 
                        
                           ana. ℥. iiij.
  
                                 Terebinthinae
                                 Reſinae pini
                                 Cerae nouae
                              
                           
                           Olei Roſati ℥. viij.
                           
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Maſticis
                                 Thuris
                              
                           
                           Gummi elemnij. ℥. ij.
                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Caprifolij
                                 Betonicae
                              
                           
                           Vini optimi lib. x.
                        
                     
                     The Woodbine and Betonie being ſtamped, let them ſtand infuſed in the wine foure and twentie houres, then adde to them al the other parcels, except the Gummes, Frankenſence and Maſticke, boyle theſe on a cleere fire vntill halfe part of the wine be conſumed, and that it begin to waxe greene, then ſtrayne it, and let it coole: then boyle it agayne vntill the wine be conſumed: then ſtrayne it agayne, and adde to the reſt of the parcels in fine powder, then put it in a cold place and reſerue it to your vſe. After (as I ſayd) I had preſerued the wound with theſe remedies here rehearſed: then I applyed alſo ouer all the aforeſayd medicines, this plaiſter of Betony, and at laſt I annoynted his head round about the wounds with Oleo Roſarum, and ouer all this a good bed or cap of towe: and then with bloſterings and roulling I finiſhed this dreſſing, &c.
                     Rec. Emplaſtru
                              •
                            Betonicae.
                        
                           Gummi elemnij ℥. iiij.
                           Reſinae ℥. viij.
                           Cerae ℥. vj.
                           Gummi armoniaci ℥. iiij.
                           Terebinthinae ℥. vj.
                           Succi Betonicae ℥. x.
                         Miſce & fiat Emplaſtrum.
                     I was conſtrayned contrarie vnto the deſcription of this plaiſter, to enlarge and double the quantities of the receipt, becauſe I vſed much of it. And further, it is to bee noted, that from the beginning I alſo applyed vpon the wound warme ſtuphes with white wine and Aqua vitae. And thus I 

continued with this manner of dreſſing, vntill all the blacknes was cleane taken away from Dura mater, by the ſayd honie of Roſes. But if that blacknes ſhould not haue gone away, notwithſtanding the vſe of honie of Roſes, as I haue ſeene, it is then to be feared, and ſmall hope of health is to be looked for.It is ſuppoſed not to be good for to ouer buſie our ſelues in theſe wounds of the head in the full of the Moone, without great cauſe conſtrayne vs. And agayne, the wounded man was in the more daunger, for that he receiued his hurt very néere the full of the Moone, whereby this euill followed that Dura mater did riſe, and thruſt it ſelfe out of thoſe places of the ſkull, that I did perforat or pearce with the Trepan, the which I did ſafely bring downe agayne in this manner, with a fomentation or decoction made thus, &c.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. q. s.
                           Florum Roſ.
                           Chamameli
                           Melilotae
                           Aquae vitae
                        
                     
                     And theſe were all boyled together in fayre water, and laſt was added the Aqua vitae, and herewith did I for a good ſpace foment well or bathe the place: and then I applyed vpon Dura mater, this remedie following, and with a fine peece of Lawne orderly conuayed vnder Cranium, or the ſkull, perfectly to defend the panicle from being hurt with the ſharpe edges of the bone.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Olei Roſarum
                                 Mellis Roſarum.
                              
                           
                           Aquaevitae ℥. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     And ſometimes in like manner I vſed Oleū vitellorum onorum, which did pleaſure vs greatly ſometimes being vſed by it ſelfe alone. And at other times I mixed it with the remedie aboue written, I meane that oyle of Egs, which hath a fayre yellowe colour, and a pleaſant and ſweete ſauour: And 

                        
                           ••
                        po
                           •
                         th
                           •
                         foreſayd peece of 
                           •••
                        e Law
                           •
                        e 
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         a 
                           〈…〉
                         peece of a ſpunge ſteeped in the 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         with this order Dura mater was 
                           〈…〉
                         wought 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪ which to do in ſome bodies is wonderfull 
                           〈…〉
                         and 
                           〈…〉
                        : therefore it doth require great diligence▪ care, and 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        ud as touching the ſkaling and remouing of the fractured 
                           •••
                        es, it was ſafel
                           •
                         done in a reaſonable time, partly with the vſe of Olei Roſarum▪ & Aquae vitae. 
                        
                           ••
                        d ſometimes with Aqua vitae, & Vitriol alb. ana. q. s. But when I applyed the Aqua vitae, aud vitriol, I did firſt de
                           ••••
                         t
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         parts of the wound with drie lint, &c. for if it ſhould at any tune touch the fleſh, it wi
                           ••
                         cauſe great payne, neither may ſuch wounds bee diſquieted with any ſharpe or by
                           •
                        ing 
                           〈…〉
                        , leaſt the wounds (as I haue ſeene) ſhall receiue or entertaine a certaine ſtraunge malignitie, which doth greatly hinder the perfection and courſe of the cure. And often times I vſed Puluis Cephalicus, which is a very apt and a conuenient remedie for ſkaling of bones of the head. And with theſe foreſayd medice
                           •••
                        nes, A continued vntill there was good fleſh brought vpon L
                              •
                           ura mater, and the fractured bones being ſo looſed and borne vp, and in the place of theſe bones Nature ſupplyed and ordayned a good and perfect callus, or porus. And thus he was ſhortly after well and perfectly cured and w
                           •
                        de whole of the ſayd wound of his head. Moreouer, 
                           •
                        e ſ
                           ••
                        all f
                           •
                        rther vnderſtand, that in the time of this cute, we w
                           •••
                         
                        
                           ••
                        mpelled to vſe dirt, purging, and phlebothornie, the which I do but thus ſpeake of in a Word, for that it was done by the direction of a learned Phiſtci
                           •••
                         and ſo he was made perfect whole of this 
                           •
                        ound of 
                           •
                        is head, Now here I will alſo briefly touch 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the fracture of the bone of his thigh, and therefore I ende
                           •
                        ou
                           ••
                        d my ſelfe 
                           •
                        e
                           •
                         the right placing of this fracture, which was broken tranſnerſe or croſſe wiſe. It is to be further noted, that of fractured when they happen in bodies of euill diſpoſition and temperature, they often times reſiſt cure, and are long or euer they 
                           •
                        ée made whole: which note ye ſhall obſerue with all diligence and good conſideration. But this patient was a man of a

young 
                           〈…〉
                         bodie, and of a very good conſtr
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        ion. Then 
                           〈◊〉
                         (I 
                           ••
                        y) he was b
                           •
                        ought into his bed, and ſo orderly layd vpon 
                           〈◊〉
                         backe, 
                           〈…〉
                         being done, I viſited the fracture after this manner. Firſt 
                           〈◊〉
                         made two decent towe
                           •
                        s, and faſtened each towel
                           •
                        , 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the 
                           〈…〉
                        , 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         other belowe theStrong 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           , i. 
                              •
                           c. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ 
                           
                              •
                           ie in ſtrong bodies but 
                              〈◊〉
                            weake perſon
                              •
                            it is 
                              •
                           o 
                              〈…〉
                            de
                              •••
                           ed according to the
                              •
                            ſtrength. fracture. Th
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         two ſtrong men 
                           •
                        o aprehend and take 
                           〈…〉
                         of 
                           ••
                        ch towel
                           •
                        , end I pla
                           ••
                         my ſelfe very neere vnto the fracture: Then all things being rea
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        , I cauſed them 
                           〈…〉
                         to extend o
                           •
                         ſtretch out the member: which being ſuffi
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           •
                         perfourmed, I did 
                           •
                        l
                           ••
                        ate or lift vp that part of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                         was depreſſed. And agayne, I did alſo depreſſe downe 
                           •
                        he other part of the fractured bone which was borne vp 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                        euated: which being reduced and counited together, ar
                           •
                         
                        
                           •••
                        hely reſtored, as n
                           ••
                        re as I could, according to natures form
                           •
                        r vnion, and being thus well ioyned, I did curiouſly keepe cloſe the diſſe
                           ••
                        ered bones together, and then I cauſed the two men which 
                           •••
                        ended the member, by little and little to releaſe the
                           •
                         hands, whereby the patient found himſelfe greatly eaſed of his paynes, the which we did vnderſtand by his relation vnto vs. After this I did take a linnen cloath, ſo large, as did not only comprehend the fracture, but alſo couered ouer ſome part of the whole and ſound member: ſhe which cloath I did wet in water and vineger, and then I did ſyred vpon the ſame this remedie here preſcribed.
                     
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                        Rec. ana. q. s.
                           Albuminis ouorum
                           Olei Roſarum
                           Boli A
                                 ••
                              oniaci
                           Farinae volatilis
                         M
                           •
                        ſce.
                     Some excellent men do alſo vſe to wet the ſayd cloath only in Albumine onot
                              ••
                           , & 
                              〈…〉
                            Roſarum, ana. q. s. being well beaten 
                           〈…〉
                        , and afterward being compreſſed 
                           •
                        ut againe, and ſo applye it 
                           ••
                        to the part affected. And I my 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        aue alſ
                           •
                         appro
                           •
                        ued it good: but I vſed th
                           •
                        
                        ▪ foreſayd re
                           ••
                        die with great proſite, as I haue declared, and 

therewith I compaſſed the member rounde three or fourtimes: then with a conuenient rouller made of ſoft linen cloth, which alſo I wet in water and vineger, called Poſca, I did begin my roulling or ligature directly vpon the fracture, and ſo roulled it vp twiſe or thriſe about the fracture, and then roulled it downwards, and in like manner aſcending vpwards agayne aboue the fracture. Then after the ſame order, as before, I did ſo roule it agayne with an other rouller of the ſame breadth and length, that is to ſay, two yeards long and foure fingers broade: then according vnto the good direction of Horatius Morus, and others, who ſayth: Your manner of roulling muſt neither be too ſtraight, neither yet too looſe: for by ouer looſe binding the bones may be moued: and by too ſtraight or ouer hard girding, is often hindered, and letteth the diſtribution of nouriſhment into the part, and ſo is hindered the engendring or breeding of the ſodering humour, wherewith the bones is knit and vnited, which is made, as it is truely ſayd, of good nouriſhmēt inclining to groſſenes. Now, to come vnto the manner and order of placing of the ſplints, which was ſet vpon the ſayd roullers, which ſplints were made of light willowe wood very plaine and ſmooth: and being blunt and round at both endes, well wrapped about, and alſo bolſtered with towe, which I placed vpon the member round the breadth ofSp
                              ••
                           nts alſo made with the 
                              ••
                           abbards of ſwords I haue 
                              •••
                           d, with like 
                              ••••
                           ite vnto 
                              〈…〉
                           ent. a finger betweene euery ſplint, and ſometimes further of or neerer, as cauſe required. Then with good ſtrong tape I did moderatly and gently binde them well together: which being done, I layd or placed the member as ſeemely and decently as poſſible might be in a double linnen towell roulled vp at both the ends, with a good quantitie of great Ruſhes, ſuch as our Chaundlers vſe to put in their watching Candles, and I did make thereof a bed to lay or place the fractured member in, whereby he could by no meanes any way mooue his broken legge: but ſafely and quietly reſted, as though it had been layd in that famous Inſtrument, called of the learned Gloſſocomium, which Inſtrument ſerueth to extend or to ſtretch out a fractured member, and alſo ſerueth for the vſe afore declared.
                     
                        The manner, order, and true vſe thereof, was firſt reuealed and plainly ſhewed vnto diuers Chirurgions of this Citie of London, (when I was my ſelfe in preſence) by Maiſter Doctor Foſter, the Reader of the Chirurgerie Lector in the Phiſitions Colledge. And to conclude, after I had ſafely layd in his legge, as aforeſayd, then he reſted ſo reaſonable quietly for the ſpace of fourtéene daies: and then vpon a ſodaine, without any reaſonable cauſe knowne, there did begin to riſe a verie paynfull Itch, with an inflammation: then I followed the direction of Wecker, and ſomented the member firſt with warme water, to this end and purpoſe that the humour which was encloſed might the more eaſily euaporate and breath out: which done, I annoynted the member round about with Vnguentum populeon, & Vnguentum album, ana. q. s. then I vſed alſo this plaiſter.
                     Rec. 
                           Emplaſtri Diachalciteos ℥. viij.
                           Olei Myrtillorum. ℥. j.
                           Succi granatorum ℥. ſs.
                           Albumin. ouorum nou. ij.
                         Miſce.
                     After I did roule vp the member agayne in the ſame manner and order, as is before declared. And thus, by the vſe of theſe remedies, his Itch and inflammation was remoued and taken away without further trouble, and in a reaſonable time he was made whole alſo of the fracture of his thigh. And for that it ſtood vppon me to haue great care and regarde of the health of this wounded man, I thought it nothing hurtful vntoIn matters 
                              •
                           
                           ▪ danger ſh
                              ••
                            not to aske counſell, leaſt when it is too late thou do then repent thee. my credite to require counſell: And hereunto I did diuers times call (to viſite my patient) my approoued good friend Maiſter Baneſter, whoſe counſell vnto me herein was not a little profitable. To conclude, after I had cured and healed him, both the patient and his friends ſeemed to be ſomewhat diſcontented, and vſed ſome words, but to ſmall effect, which kind of ſpeeche is compared, by a learned man, vnto mightie

waters, that drowne the people and doth it ſelfe no profite And forſooth the chiefeſt matter was (beſides that they were. 
                           •
                        oth to part from their monie) only for that his fractured leg was ſomewhat ſhorter then the other: but I told them agayn, that much might be done in young perſons, which in aged oftentimes did not ſo happely fall out, as we do wiſh and looke for. For example, calling then to mind that a fewe yeres paſt, a youth, being about the age of tenne or eleuen yeeres, whoſe name was called Martine Aude, he did commonly reſort vnto 
                           •
                         Brewers houſe in Biſhops gate ſtreate, where he alſo did dwell: In the ſame Brewhouſe was a horſemill grinding of malt, and there this ſayd youth, with other reſorted to play, and ſo running about the mill after the horſe, did by chaunce vnawares go ſo néere the mill, that ſodainly the milſtone did take 
                           〈…〉
                         of his coate, and ſo did drawe him into the mill, and the mi
                           •••
                        ne did runne ouer his thigh and fractured the bone Os femoris in diuers peeces: then by reaſon of his noyſe and crying, the fellow that did leade the horſe, very ſodainly ſtaie
                           •
                        , and ſo the mill, otherwiſe all his whole bodie had been drawne in and cruſhed or broken in peeces. Then I was ſent for, and likewiſe Maiſter George Baker, Chirurgeon: which being both together, we placed agayne the fractured bones, and alſo applyed thereto conuenient remedies. And ſo here to make an end without further circumſtances, he was by vs in a reaſonable time perfectly c
                           •
                        red. And now he liueth at this day, being a very ſtrong and luſtie man, without lamenes or any other imperfection of that legge. Here I will conclude this brief obſeruation, which I haue publiſhed for young practizers, which are, as I haue ſayd, fauourers of learning and louers of arte, as you ſhall perceiue by the courſe of my writing: but not for the learned, or men of great knowledge and experience: neither, to my remembraunce, I haue in this whole diſcourſe, by bayne deluſions publiſhed any ſtraunge paradoxes, or new found remedies, which (as ſayth Eraſtus) a man of many great gifts, iudgement and experience, who (as it is thought) was neither ambitious, nor affectioned, willeth that al ſuch

remedies ſhould bee ſhunned, and not vſed: his meaning is, except thoſe which are well approoued and beſt in effect, and are found plentifully deſcribed in the bookes of famous men which were before our time, as I haue in this booke many times repeted, &c.
                  
                  
                     The cure of a Marriner, which had two of his ribbes fractured or broken with a violent blow of a capſten barre in one of her Maieſties Shippes, which bruſed him very 
                           •
                        ore: at the ſame preſent time he was throwne downe vpon the carriage of a great peece of Ordnance, which bruſed him agayne very greatly in other parts of his bodie: Therefore ſuch as will take vppon them to attempt the like cures, ſhall not vtterly bee deceiued of their intent and purpoſe.
                     
                        I Thinke it good, without any longer diſcourſe, ſo briefly as I can, here to publiſh and plainlie expreſſe the truth of my practize in this cure, and ſo with all faithfulnes, induſtrie and diligence, to procéed vnto the reſt, for the commoditie of ſuch as are not vnthankfull quarrel pickers, who, in the burning flames of their wicked affections, mooue ſpeeches more curious then neceſſarie, ſpeaking euill of good, and good of euill: whereas wee are otherwiſe taught to embrace the good and to hate the euill: ſuch is the nature of the wicked which delight in their vngodlineſſe. Blame me not (good reader and louing brethren) though I ſpeake ſo much, and ſo oftentimes, almoſt in euery place throughout this booke, of the manifold abuſes of ſcoffers and ſcorners, who daylie more and more increaſe in troupes, and are puffed vp, not only agaynſtSome dead, and ſome aliue. me, with moſt haughtie, ſtout, and ſtately countenances, but alſo agaynſt diuers good men, that are farre my betters, and indued with many goodly gifts both in learning and knowledge in this a
                           ••
                        e of Chirurgerie. And I knowe full well, it

will bee hard for a man of ſo weake a wit, and ſlender capacitie, to purchaſe any fruitfull acceptation of quarrelling aduerſaries, being ſo wickedly addicted. Though herein I confeſſe my ſelfe, and my practiſe which I haue publiſhed, to bée nothing in reſpect, as before I haue ſayd, but that I haue receiued from the head ſpring of knowledge, reuealed vnto vs by others 
                           •
                        ound diſcourſes and writings, wherin I haue ſpent ſome part of my dayes in the reuerent ſtudie and practiſe of the ſame, partly for the aduauncement of the arte, and edification of others, being yong practizers: yet could I neuer, vntill this day, once hope to be vnburthened of euill ſpeakers, ſpecially of the raſcall ſort. And it is a wonder of the world to ſee, what blemiſhes or deepe ſcars of vntruthes they fixe in mens faces, as hereafter more at large I will declare, and yet lye continually watching to intrappe with deadly purſute, making a ioyfull and pleaſant mellodie of their villanie and knauerie, to the ende wee ſhould winne ſmall credite of the godly: although we ſeeke, by all meanes poſſible, good people ſhould be no longer deceiued by lewd perſons, wherwith both towne and countrie is ſore peſtered: vnto whom I wiſh better grace, and that they may leaue of their wicked wayes, ſo that all good artiſts may bee duetifully reuerenced, and the lewd and ignorant ſuppreſſed, and inforced to liue in honeſt conuerſation. And thus I leaue them here, vntill I come to the concluſion, for that I haue promiſed in my preface, not to ſhunne any ſuch rotten rootes as they come, or chaunce to lye in my way. And I wil now enter into the manner and order of this cure, which happened about that time when the Emperours daughter paſſed the narrowe Seas to marrie with Phillip King of Spayne: I ſeruing in one of her Maieſties Shippes, it chaunced then a great tempeſt and wind to ariſe, ſo that the waues or billowes of the Sea went very loftie and high, wee riding then at an Anker néere the French coaſt, and the Marriners being greatly buſied about the winding vp of their cables and Ankers: but whether it were by ſome 
                           〈◊〉
                        , or by reaſon of the ſtorme and tempeſt, I knowe 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ but vpon a ſodaine

the capſten turned about with great force and violence, and did bruſe and hurt diuers, ſpecially one Ralfe Cowdale the Bo
                           •
                        ſwaynes ſeruant of the Ship, who had two of his ribbes fractured and broken by the force of the ſayd blowe of one of the capſten barres, he was therewith throwne downe vppon the carriage of a great peece of Ordnance, which bruſed him agayne in other places of his bodie: ſo the patient did lye as a man fordead, voyd of ſence and vnderſtanding, and whether I dreſt him or not, he ſayd he did not knowe. But after he was agayne reuiued, there followed perillous accidents, as a pleuriſie, ſpitting of bloud, and great dolor and paynes, which (as Guido declareth) be very daungerous: and the rather for that one of his ribbes was ſo fractured, and in ſuch ſort, that a little fragment or ſmall peece of the ribbe did ſeperate it ſelfe, and being without all hold vnto any part of the ribbe, did continually without ceaſing ſtill torment and vexe the patient with vehement pricking vpon the panicle that couereth the ribbes: neither could I bring him to any eaſe, vntill I did make inciſion directly vppon the fracture, according vnto the length of the ribbe, and ſo downe vnto the bone, and there I did take out that ſpell or fragment of the bone, which was in bignes, thicknes and length like vnto a Barley corne, ſharpe at both endes like vnto the poynt of a néedle. Then after I had made the inciſion, and taken out that ſmall peece of the ribbe, I put into the ſaid wound Oleum Hypericonis cum gummis, and then vppon the ſame (after it was reduced, for the ſpeedie vuiting or knitting together of the fractured ribbe) this following.
                     
                        Keble.Rec. ana. q. s.
                           Olei Roſarum
                           Albuminis ouorum
                           Bol. Armoniaci, &
                           Farinae volatilis
                         Miſce.
                     
                        The which I did ſpred vpon a double cloath wet in water and vineger, and ſtrongly wrong out agayne: but you ſhall vnderſtand, for that there was not at that time in the Nauie any one Phiſition to ayde and aſſiſt vs, I my ſelfe did giue him this drinke.
                     Rec. 
                           Vini maluatici ℥. iiij.
                           Olei oliuarum dul. ℥. j.
                           Spermatiſceti gra. xij.
                         Miſce.
                     After he had receiued this drinke, within one houres ſpace he did caſt moſt part of this drinke vp agayne, with a good quantitie of clotted bloud: but at night I gaue him the ſame drinke agayne, and in the like manner for the ſpace of three dayes, all which time he neuer did caſt any more, but he did therewith auoyd by ſpitting much bruſed bloud. And here it is to be further noted, that after the ſayd peece of the bone of his ribbe was taken away, he did not complaine but very little of any griefe in that part, but did take as quiet reſt, as a man in his caſe, but for that he was troubled with a cough, which he had taken before he receiued his hurt: and for the more ſpeedie cure of his fractured ribbes, I did giue him to drinke for the ſpace of tenne dayes morning and euening this drinke following, which he did take after he was let bloud, and had receiued a ſoluble purge gently to looſe and cleanſe the bellie, for the diuerting of humours, and alſo did partly take away his paynes by the helpes of locall medicines here alſo ſet downe. And this is the deſcription of the ſayd drinke, the which he did take at twiſe being warmed.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Aquae conſolidae maioris &
                                 Aquae oſmundae Regalis
                              
                           
                           Vini albi ℥. iiij.
                           Mellis com. ℥. iij.
                           Succi Liquiritiae ʒ. j.
                           Theriacae opt. q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     
                        Then after with good bolſtering and roulling I finiſhed this order of dreſſing. In the meane ſpace I cauſed him to keepe himſelfe quiet, without turning or mouing of his bodie, as time and place did permit and ſuffer: ſo he reſted fiue daies, and then I did dreſſe him agayn, chiefly becauſe of his wound, although in all that time he neuer complayned of payne, and then I opened the wound and found it in a manner whole: then I dreſt him as before, and let him ſo reſt fiue dayes: the tenth day being expyred, I chaunged my courſe of dreſſing, and vſed theſe remedies.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. iiij.
  
                                 Emplaſtri Diachalciteos
                                 Emplaſtri de minio
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Olei Roſarum, &
                                 Olei Myrtillorum
                              
                           
                         Miſce.
                     Theſe plaiſters did wholly confirme and conſolidate the fracture of the ribbes, and I cauſed him alſo to be annoynted in certaine other places of his bodie where he was greatly bruſed, with theſe reſolutiue and diſperſing medicines, &c.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Olei Roſarum, &
                                 Chamaemeli.
                              
                           
                           Olei Spermatis ℥. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     And many times likewiſe I vſed Vnguentum Dialthea, & Oleum Laurinum, & Vnguentum Vulpinum, and with this plaiſter following was diſſolued all the contuſed bloud vnder the ſkinne.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Emplaſtri de muſcilaginibus
                                 Emplaſtri meliloti
                                 Emplaſtri flos vnguentorum
                              
                           
                           
                           ana. ʒ. vj.
  
                                 Olei Chamaemeli, &
                                 Olei Roſarum
                              
                           
                         Miſce.
                     The fifteene day being expired, I opened the wound agayne, where I did finde that perfectly healed, and the fracture alſo very apparant to haue receiued conſolidation: then I dreſt him, as before is declared. And with this manner of method I cured him within the ſpace of ſixteene dayes. Now in the knitting vp of this note or obſeruation, briefly compact together, it is to be remembred, that in the time of this cure I vſed ſuch diet as the place did afoord, which was ſparing enough in the higheſt degree, with phlebothomie, and euacuation of the bellie, &c.
                  
                  
                     The cure of a certaine man that was thruſt through his bodie with a ſword, which did enter firſt vnder the cartilage or griſle, called of the learned Anatomiſts, mucronata cartilago, &c. The poynt of the ſword paſſed thorowe his bodie, and ſo out at his backe, in ſuch maner, that he which wounded the man did runne his way, and did leaue the ſword ſticking in his bodie: ſo the wounded man did with his owne hands pull out the ſword, whom after I cured, as ſhall be declared, &c.
                     
                        A Speciall note or obſeruation of a certaine daungerous and deſperate cure worthie of admiration, which I cannot let paſſe, of a certaine traueiler into the Eaſt and Weſt Indies, he being a very ſtrong and valiant man, who (as I ſayd) receiued a wound through his bodie, that entered in vnder Mucronato cartilago, which, by the wonderfull worke of God, the ſword eſcaped the liuer, ſtomacke, and the inteſtines or guts, neither any euill accidents happened vnto him all the time of his cure, but only the grudging of a feauer, which was ſhortly preuented with bleeding and looſing of the bellie by ſoluble gliſters. Immediatly

after the hurt I was brought vnto this cure, and alſo one Maiſter Doctor Wotton: but after I did behold the manner of his hurt, and ſeeing the weapon ſo embrued with bloud, I did in my minde greatly lament the miſerable eſtate he was in, and I told thoſe that were in preſence that I greatly doubted there was no way of cure, but that death would preſently followe: and ſo in trueth I refuſed to dreſſe him, ſuppoſing he would dye vnder my hand. Then the wounded man deſired me, as euer I loued a man, that I would dreſſe him and take him in cure: for (ſayd he) my heart is good, although my wound be great. Then I called to my remembrance, that Celſus (a learned man) counſelleth vs, that in no wiſe wee ſhould meddle with him that cannot be preſerued, nor to deale with him that is ſtaine alreadie. Yet to counteruayle this, I had read in diuers other good authors, that wee ought to attempt all that may be done, either by arte or reaſon: but firſt warely to foretell what daunger the patient is in, before ye ſhall either make or meddle with him, that ye may defend your ſelues from ſlaunder of euill ſpeakers: for (ſay theſe excellent men) many by a wonderfull and merueilous manner do eſcape death and are cured, whereas if we ſhall leaue the wounded man deſtitute of all ayde and helpe, and then he dye, wee ſhall worthely bee eſteemed wicked, and without all charitie and humanitie, &c. But oftentimes it falleth out, that many good men are vnwilling to attempt ſuch cures, becauſe of the frumpes, quippes, and taunts of thoſe, who (as I haue before ſayd) ſpeake euill of good, and good of euill. For if at any time it ſhall ſo fall out that ſome one paltering cure chaunce toNote. eſcape vncured, as I haue declared in other of my writings, yea though the fault be in the diſorder and ill diſpoſition of the patient, yet a man ſhall get more diſcredite and infamous reproaches thereby, then he hath reaped credite by all the moſt famous cutes he hath done all the dayes of his life. I anſwere agayne, I ſuppoſe no man that feareth God will willingly do that which redoundeth vnto his patients hurt, and his owne diſcredite. But wee are in theſe dayes ſo embayed with the

ſlaunders of blind buzzards and vaunting varlets, who with the fragments or ſcrapings of their beggarly practizes, do ſteale more credite for the curing of a Blayne, or a Byle, a cut finger, or a k
                           ••
                        ed heele, then a right ſkilfull and honeſt artiſtThis manifeſt 
                              〈…〉
                            needeth no witneſſes. can, or ſhall do with all the beſt cures he hath done al the daies of his life. But to returne, after much intreating, I preſented my ſelfe vnto this cure, and then with two ſhort tents artificially made, the one before, and the other behind his backe, which I applyed into the wound, with Galen his powder, mixed with Hare haires and the whites of Egges, and with pleggets vpon the ſayd tents, and defenſiues round about the wound, both behind and before: and ſo with artificiall roulling and bolſtering he reſted. Then forthwith I was counſelled by the ſayd Doctor and others, to giue him ſome excellent wound drinke, ſuch as by our owne practiſe we had approued. Then I tould him of the ſingular vertues which I had heard and ſeene of a certaine drinke called Potus Antiochiae, which was firſt put in practiſe in London by one Maiſter Archenbole, a very ſkilfull Chirurgeon, which drinke (as I ſayd) is called the drinke of Antiochiae, and was made then by him, and Maiſter Yates, with others: but I haue neuer heard, or knowne of a certaine trueth, that it was euer made before or ſince by any other: the more is the pitie. But this preſent yere (God willing) both my ſelfe, and (I ſuppoſe) others that knowes the excellencie of it wil not be without it. The ſtrange cures which the ſame drinke hath done, it is wonderfull to heare. But I do confeſſe this wounded man was cured chiefly with this drinke. And fiue yeares after he was made whole, he did come to London, partly to ſee me and to giue thankes, in the preſence of Maiſter Baylie, Maiſter Beden, with others, and there agayne did ſhewe the places that was wounded, both where the ſword went in, and where it did come forth: ſince which time I did neuer beare of him, neither do I know whether he liueth or not: ſo I did get, by the helpe of Maiſter Beden, ſo much of this drinke as cured the man, and the ſame night he was hurt, I did giue him of it to drinke. The manner

and order of the miniſtering and making of it, is as followeth.
                     Rec. 
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Bugulae
                                 Fragariae
                                 Conſolidae mediae
                                 Conſolidae minoris
                                 Conſolidae maioris
                                 Raphani ruſticani
                                 Rubi
                                 Vrticae foeminae
                                 OſmundaePotus Antiochiae.
                                 
                                 Canabis
                                 Saniculae
                                 Craſſulae
                                 Tanaceti
                                 Anagallidis maſculi
                                 Auriculae muris
                                 Violarum purpurearum
                              
                           
                           Gariophyllatae rootes and leaues. m. v.
                           Geranij cretici. m. v.
                           Betonicae m. v. rootes and leaues.
                           Pedis columbini. m. iij. rootes and leaues.
                        
                     
                     
                        Rubiae Tinctorum of the rootes, the third part in weight of all the hearbes before rehearſed, firſt waſh all the hearbes cleane, then after ſtampe them in a ſtone morter: which done, put them in a newe earthen pot well nealed, and put in alſo a gallon of good white Wine: then ſet them on an eaſie fire of coales, and let it boyle very gently, till the one halfe be conſumed: then ſtrayne it into a fayre cleane veſſell, and adde to it of the beſt and pureſt clarified honie one pottle, ſo that there be of each an equall quantitie, then boyle them together (as it is ſayd in the auncient copie) the time and ſpace ye may ſay the Pſalme of Mercie: which copie was written, as it is recorded, aboue two hundred yeares agoe. And here ye ſhall vnderſtande, that I haue beene very diligent in attayning

vnto the true deſcription of this famous drinke. And I haue had diuers auncient copies, but none ſo true as thoſe which Maiſter Thorny did friendly ſend me, and alſo Maiſter Iarat, who hath been very willing to ſhewe me his booke, wherein this drinke was alſo deſcribed: and moreouer, hath readily aſſiſted me to giue euery hearh his true and proper name, which was ſomewhat obſcure in the auncient copies, as alſo hath ſhewed and found out the hearbes themſelues each one in his time and kind: which drinke (as my author ſayth) muſt bee finiſhed and made before Midſomer. And being perfourmed, it is to bee kept in a glaſſe veſſell well ſtopped, and it muſt bee giuen bloud warme one ſpoonefull at a time morning and euenening, firſt and laſt in well water, three ſpoonefulles at a time, being ſodden and kept vpon purpoſe. And I know this drinke hath been vſed to the profite of many, after it was ten yeeres olde. As touching the reſt of this cure, it was performed by locall medicines, as digeſtiues, mundificatiues, incarnatiues, and deſiccatiues, &c.
                     
                        Digeſtiues Rec. 
                           Terebinthinae lotae in Aqua vitae
                           Vitellorum ouorum num. ij.
                           Syr. Roſ. ℥. j.
                           Maſticis ʒ. j.
                           Croci q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     I vſed at euery dreſſing with this digeſtiue to take of

                           Olei Roſarum ℥. j.
                           Mel. Roſarum ℥. ſs. Miſce.
                        
And dipped the tents and pleggets in it, being firſt made warme. After it was perfectly digeſted, then I did mundifie it wich this mundificatiue, and ſuch like, &c.
                     
                        Mundificatiue Rec. 

                           Terebinthinae ℥. vj.
                           Mel. Roſarum ℥. iiij.
                           
                              ana. ʒ. iiij.
  
                                 Myrrhae
                                 Iridis
                                 Ariſtolochiae
                              
                           
                           Farinae hordei q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     After the wound was well clenſed, then I vſed this incarnatiue with great profite.
                     
                        Incarnatiue. Rec. 

                           Olei com. ℥. iiij.
                           Cerae nouae ℥. j.
                           Terebinthinae ℥. ſs.
                           Colophoniae ʒ .ij.
                           Picis graecae ʒ. j.
                           ana. ʒ. j.
  
                                 Thuris
                                 Maſticis
                              
                           
                           Croci ℈. j.
                         Miſce.
                     He was cured by theſe ordinarie remedies and ſuch like in effect, which are daylie put in practiſe of all good artiſts, who haue traced in the ſteps of the olde and auncient fathers and chiefe maiſters of Chirurgerie. And as it was of late declared, by Maiſter Doctor Foſter, in a learned Lector, that the reaſon why in theſe dayes wee do not attayne to do thoſe famous cures, which were done by the worthie Grecians and Arabians, and other auncient fathers, is, for that wee do not vſe thoſe old and auncient remedies, which they did daylie put in practiſe, to their great credite, worſhip and gayne.
                  
                  
                     The cure of a young man which receiued a wound into the right eye with the poynt of a dagger.
                     THere was committed vnto my cure a young man wh
                           •••
                         receiued a wound into his right eye with the poy
                           •••
                         a dagger, ſo that Cornea, or the hornie membrane 
                           ••
                        
                        
fall flat vpon the chriſtall humour, by reaſon moſt part of the white humour Albumineus iſſued out of the wound. He had been in cure with a certaine Surgeon three dayes, and then I was called vnto the cure: I found him greatly payned with inflammation, and he had alſo a ſharpe feauer, and wanted ſleepe, &c. for which cauſes, by good aduiſe and diligent circumſpection, he was appoynted to be let bloud, and he receiued alſo gliſters, and a very thinne diet was adminiſtred vnto him, vntill all theſe accidents were remoued. But for the more ſpéedie mitigating of his paynes, there was vſed in like manner vpon his neck and ſhoulders, cupping glaſſes, and on his fore head and temples this repellent medicine.
                     Rec. 
                           Emplaſtri Diachalciteos lib. ſs.
                           Olei Roſarum ℥. ij.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Succi plantaginis, &
                                 Solani
                              
                           
                           Albumina ou. num. ij.
                           Aceti Roſ. q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     And ſometimes this. Rec. 

                           Olei Roſarum ℥. ij. ſs.
                           Omnium ſandalorum ℥. ij.
                           Bol. Armeniae ℥. ij. ſs.
                           Albumin. ou. num. ij.
                           Vini granatorum q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     And vnto his wound in the eye, I did droppe in this reme
                        
                           •
                        i
                           •
                         
                        
                           •••
                        med.
                     Rec. 

                           Mucilag. ſem. cidoniorum extractae in aquae Roſ.
                           ana. q. s.
  
                                 Tragaganthae
                                 Lactis mulieris &
                                 Albuminis oui 
                              
                           
                        Miſce.
                     
                        Then ouer all I applyed thicke pleggets of fine towewell wet in this ſame next following, being alſo warmed a little.
                     Rec. ana. q. s.
                           Lactis mulieris
                           Vitellorum & Albuminis ou.
                           Succi ſemperuiui, &▪
                           
                           Olei Roſarum
                         Miſce.
                     With this manner of dreſſing I continued ſixe dayes, I was conſtrayned three times a day to dreſſe his eye, and alſo once agayne at midnight
                           •
                         for ouer as the medicine did growe warme, then the inflammation and paynes increaſed. After I had got the victorie ouer the payne and inflammation, then there did manifeſtly appeare a certaine quantitie of matter, as it were impriſoned betweene Cornea and Vnea, the which I did remooue and take this away with:
                     Rec. 
                           Aquae Roſarum ℥. ij.
                           Vini albi. ℥. j.
                           Syr. Roſati ſolutiui ℥. ſs.
                           Sacchari candi ʒ. ij.
                           Succifoeniculi ℥. ſs.
                           Albuminis oui. q. s.
                         Miſce.
                     After the matter was remoued, then I chaunged this courſe and vſed theſe remedies following, wherwith the eye was deliuered from all the foreſayd accidents.
                     Rec. 
                           Tutiae praeparatae ℥. j.
                           Aloes cicarrinae ℥. ſs.Guido.
                           
                           Camphorae ʒ. j.
                           Aquae Roſarum lib. j. ſs.
                           Vini granatorum lib. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     
                        Powder that which is to bee powdered, and mixe all theſe together, and ſeethe it vpon the coales and reſerue it vnto your vſe. Laſt of all I finiſhed this cure with
                     Rec. ana. q. s.
                           Mellis virginei
                           Sacchari candiWecker.
                           
                           Tutiae praeparatae &
                           Aloes
                         Miſce.
                     Often I vſed this alone of it ſelfe, and ſometimes diſſolued it in Aqua Roſarum, and at ſundrie times I vſed Collerium album, Sine opio, diſolued in Lactis mulieris & aquae Roſarum, ana. q. s. and thus he was cured and healed of this wound of his eye. I could here ſet downe other ſpeciall cures of wounds in the eyes done ſome by my ſelfe, and ſome being ioyned with other Surgeons in this Citie, as Maiſter Baneſter, Maiſter Baker, with other. But this may ſuffice for a briefe note or obſeruation of this cure.
                  
                  
                     The cure of a certaine Clothier, dwelling neere the North parts of this land, which was daungerouſly wounded 
                           •
                        oure ynches in breadth aboue the left knee, in ſuch ſort, that the Rotula, or round bone of the knee did hang downe very much: whom after I cured, as hereafter ſhall be declared, &c.
                     
                        NOt long ſince, a certaine Clothier, with two of his neighbours, very earely in the morning, betweene foure and fiue of the clocke, did take their iourney from London towards the countrie where they did dwell. They had not traueiled fully two miles, but they were ſet vpon by certaine robbers and theeves, who wounded this man very daungerouſly, as is before 
                           •••
                        l
                           •
                        ted, and there he was taken: but his neighbours, being better horſt, carried all their own and his monie away with them, which (as it was reported) did amount together to the ſumme of foure hundred pounds, which by that meanes was ſaued. So preſently being

wounded, he returned to London, vnto whom I was required to go with al ſpeed, for he had bled aboundantly. Then after I had taken out the bloud which was congeled in the wound, I did prepare, without tar
                           •
                        ance, a ſharpe ſquare poyntedBloud may not be ſuffered in a wound. ſpecially if it be congealed. needle, with a ſtrong euen and ſmooth ſilke threed, well waxed, therewith I did take fiue ſtitches, one good ynch and more diſtant betweene euery ſtitch: and I did begin my firſt ſtitch in the very middeſt of the wound: neither did I thinke it good to make the ſtitches too thicke, becauſe it doth oftentimes ſtirre vp accidents, as payne, inflammation, &c. Neither muſt the ſtitches be ſet too thinne, for then they will not ſufficiently hold the ſides of the wound together. So when I had orderly perfourmed the ſtitching of the wound, leauing a decent parte for the wound to purge at: thē I applied thereunto Oleū Hypericonis cum gummis, and I ſtayed the bléeding with Galen his powder, which in ſuch wounds I will preferre before all other. I placed moreouer aboue the wound, a very good defenſiue, to repeale and kéepe backe euill accidents from the ſayd wound: then with good bolſtering and roulling, I ſafely ended this firſt preſeruation. All which being thus finiſhed, it was then demaunded of me, about what time I would vndertake to cure him, for they ſayd he was a man of great trade, and did kéepe many poore at worke, & could by no meanes long be abſent from his buſines. Moreouer, they would further vnderſtand of me, if I would warrant to cure him, & that without a mayme or imperfection vnto his traueiling. To theſe their demaunds, I aunſwered, that I would make no warrants at all, neither could I ſet any certaine day or time when he ſhould be whole: but I tould him, I would do as much as arte did permit me, to the vttermoſt of my knowledge and ſkill: And as touching the wound it ſelfe, I iudged it very daungerous, but not deſperat and deadly, nor yet altogether without perrill, partly by reaſon the wound was aboue the knee, and there the muſcles being ſo ſtraungely cut at the very heads of them, and therefore in daunger to bee depriued, to loſe the action and vſe of that member, for that the muſcles

were the inſtruments of voluntarie mouing. And moreouer, the daunger was the greater, becauſe the liggaments which binde the ioynts, were likewiſe ſeperated and cut, whereby enſueth grieuous accidents, very hurtfull and dangerous: which euilles oftentimes foreſhews preſent death. All which to them was ſmall pleaſure to heare, and therefore ſayd vnto me, they would conſider of my ſayings: and ſo I departed, yet expecting my comming agayne to the ſecond dreſſing: but I was preuented, as hereafter ye ſhall heare: for in the meane time they had conference with many other Chirurgeons, and ſome were of mine opinion, and ſome were not. At the laſt, there was brought vnto them a man, which by his owne report vnto them, was a great traueiler, and by his diligence in traueiling, he had attayned vnto great learning and ſkill in Phiſicke and Chirurgerie: yet (as hereafter it ſhall appeare) in all the whole time of his traueiling, he neuer learned to ſpeake well. I truſt no good man will here take occaſion to miſlike my ſayings, as ſome reaching wits haue moſt iniuriouſlyMany good men are ſubiect to iniurious reports, the ſubtile ſeedes of enuy. imagined: for God doth know, I ſpeake not in all this whole diſcourſe agaynſt any good and honeſt Artiſt, whether he be traueiler or not traueiler. And therefore, if any carpe at me as they haue done, ſecretly and openly, know them by that marke what he is. I ſpeake agaynſt none, but thoſe that abuſe all places where they come, and are alſo ſeducers of others, bearing the names of farre traueiling Chirurgeons, and are nothing leſſe. I do greatly commend and do well allowe, and accept of all thoſe traueilers, which by their traueiling do endeuour themſelues to do good in the countrie and Common wealth where they liue and do dwell, and are fauourers of thoſe good men, which ſeeke with all diligence to put to ſilence the ſlaunderous tongue and hidden hatred of ſhameles abuſers of the arte & good Artiſts: who although I know they are ſuch as be drowned in darknes, yet their poore captious heads of late kéepe a wonderfull ſtirre, as though they had been able to haue builded Caſtles in the ayre. And I thinke in deede there is no way for any man to eſcape the venimous

tongues of ſuch malicious beaſtes. Now, as touchingCommendations of certaine trauellers, and of their traueiling honeſt traueilers, I reade that Hippocrates himſelfe, though he were a learned man, yet after he departed from his ſtudie, being firſt eighteene yeares of age, and brought vp in the Schooles of Athens: at the laſt he gaue himſelfe to traueiling, through diuers countries and kingdomes, ſearching (as it is ſayd) what they did knowe of the nature and properties of herbes and plants, and what experience hee had ſeene of them, that he did write downe and commit to memorie. It is reported, that twelue yeares he did thus trauell: after which time he returned, and did come vnto the Temple of Diana in Epheſus, where he tranſlated all the tables of medicines that were there before preſcribed many yeares, and put in good order that which was confuſed, and added many things which he had found out by experience. And he was the firſt that put this arte in good order, as in thoſe hiſtories doth more at large appeare.
                     Now, after his good example and order of traueiling, or by any other honeſt and lawfull meanes, that may redound to the good of our countrie and Common wealth, as is before rehearſed, I do not miſlike, but commend it greatly. Crauing here pardon for my ſo many digreſſions, I will now returne my ſpeeches agayne vnto the forenamed magnificent Chirurgeon. This fellowe, as I ſayd, being brought vnto them, there they did ſignifie vnto him, who had preſerued and dreſſed him, with the manner and order of his dreſſing, and al ſuch ſpeeches which I had deliuered vnto them, as concerning his wound, and the daungers that I ſayd might followe. Now, in the very forefront of his talke, he ſayd: Whatſoeuer I had ſayd he eſteemed it little, if the hurt were no worſe then heNeuer truſt a warrenter. Nor a boſting bragger. A runnagate fugitiue. Nor a lying quack ſaluer. could conceiue and gather by their talke and information, he would warrant to cure him, ſo that the marrowe of the bone were not touched with the weapon. Al theſe words were pleaſant vnto them, and very thankfully receiued. But to come vnto the ſubſtaunce of this cure, (may it pleaſe the friendly Reader here to commit to thy memorie, that in my abſence,

before I did come vnto the ſecond dreſſing of this wounded man, as after it was reported vnto me, he did in ſcornfull maner take off all my medicines from the wound, and likewiſe did moſt fooliſhly cut open all the ſtitches which I had made, ſaying vnto them all, I was in a wrong boxe, as concerning this cure: forſooth colouring his opinion vpon Marianus his author: for the fellowe will be oftentimes breathles with alleadging of authors, whē his mouth is full of lyes, who would haue all wounds lye open without ſtitching. I anſwere, that all good Authors generally commaunde to ſtitch wounds of neceſſitie, otherwiſe it would cauſe a great deformitie. But if he had ment ſmal wounds in the face, &c. or bruſed wounds, where ye ſtitches will rot out, or in venimous bitings, or where the wound that is ſtitched tendeth to impoſtumation, there to cut open the ſtitches I holde it profitable. But to proceede, ſhortly after he repented when it was too late, and he was conſtrayned to confeſſe his fault, and (as it is ſayd of a learned man) to excuſe himſelfe with noddies had I wiſt.
                     So he proceeded about his buſines, and did powre into the wound his Oyle or Balme, and next applyed his plaiſter, and then did bolſter and roule it vp after his owne faſhion and good liking: which being thus finiſhed, he gaue him in the morning to drinke a moſt rare Quintiſence: the incredible vertues of it, and the reſt of his onely remedies ſhortly you ſhall heare. After his dreſſing was thus finiſhed, then I was ſent for vnto the patient, and forthwith without delay, they did ſignifie vnto me what he had done, and that I ſhould not neede to prepare any thing for the patient, for that was done already by one that had warranted to cure him, and that without any mayme, and in a ſhort time: for he was one that by his great learning and long trautile, had attayned to ſuch rare and ſingular remedies, as no other man in this part of the world had the like for their wonderfull vertues. And new (ſay they) ſith neither you, nor other more could not warrant him, wee thanke you for your paynes, and that you tould vs ſo, and therefore wée will trouble you no further at

this time. Well (ſayd I) if that be the cauſe I care the leſſe: but he that is now your Chirurgeon, whatſoeuer he bee, that hath made you all theſe great promiſes, he might yet haue ſtayed till I had come vnto you, for that you were without payne, or any other griefe, ſo that I might haue taken off mine owne medicines, and to haue ſcene in what ſtate and manner I had left it. Then riſeth out of his Chayre, flering and gering this myraculous Surgeon, gloriouſly glittering, like the man in the Moone, with his bracelets about his armes, therein many precious Jewels and ſtones of Sainct Vincent his Rockes, his fingers full of rings, a ſiluer caſe with Inſtruments hanging at his girdle, and a gilt Spatula ſticking in his hat, with a Roſe and a Crowne fixed on the ſame, ſtanding vpon his compariſons, and ſayd vnto me, that he would open the wound, and if it were before my face: for (ſayd he) my buſines lyeth not in London, but abroade in the Countrie, and with ſuch perſons, that I cannot, nor will not tarrie for you, nor for no other whatſoeuer. And now here he did begin to bragge and boaſt, as though al the keyes of knowledge did hang at his girdle. For he ſayd, he had attayned vnto the deepe knowledge of the making a certaine Quintiſence, which he learned beyond the Seas of his Maiſter, one Bomelious, a great Magitian.
                     This ſhameleſſe beaſt letted not to ſay, that if a man did drinke of his Quintiſence continually, euery day a certayne quantitie, the vertues thereof was ſuch, that a man ſhould not dye before the day of the great Judgement, and that it would preſerue a man in that ſtate he was in at thirtie yéeres of age, and in the ſame ſtrength and force of witt, although a man were a hundred or ſixe ſcore yeeres of age. Moreouer, his plaiſter was aunſwerable vnto this, and forſooth hée called it the only plaiſter of the world, and that he attayned vnto it by his great traueile, coſt and charge, and that it was firſt ſent from God by an Angell vnto a red hill in Almayne, wherewas in times paſt a holie man which wrought great merueiles only with this plaiſter, and he neuer vſed any other

medicine but only this. His precious Balme or Oyle he ſays no man had but only he, and t
                           •••
                         it was as rare a thing to bee had or found, as to ſee a blacke Swanne, or a winter Swallowe. And he called it the ſecrete of the world, which is his common vaunting phraze: but God knowes the medicines were no ſuch things, but only ſhadowed vnder the vizard of deceipt, and a bayte to ſteale fame and credite, and to catch or ſcrape vp monie, or ware: for all is fiſh that commeth into his net. Then this gawdie fellowe, with his peerles ſpeeches,
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            muſt ſtand as 
                              ••
                           awe▪ for his countenance 
                              〈◊〉
                            credite. ſayd, that he had done more good cures with his ſayd Quintiſence, his only plaiſter, and his precious Balme, then any one Surgeon in England had done, or could do, with all the beſt medicines and remedies they haue. And moreouer, ſayd, that he had ſpoken nothing but that which he would ſtand to, and proue it. And that he did knowe that it was not neceſſarie for vs that be common Surgeons (as it pleaſed the bragger to call vs) to vſe ſuch a number of medicines as we do: for the beſt manner of curing (ſayd he) conſiſteth not in the number and multitude of medicines, &c. In deede (ſaid I) I know the beſt manner of curing conſiſteth not in the number and multitude of bragging words: and therefore I tould him, inCaſt away your Chirurgicall Inſtruments, your plaiſter boxes and ſaluatories, if Chirurgerie may as it were thus bee 
                              •
                           ent o
                              •
                            thruſt vp in a bottle 
                              〈◊〉
                            a bagge. his infected iudgement, he did followe Theſſalus, the ringleader of theſe rude and ruſticall reaſons: For he ſayd in like maner, if all thoſe things which Galen had ſuperfluouſly written were omitted, the arte might be learned in ſixe moneths. But if that (ſaid I) were true yt you ſpeake, I ſuppoſe then the arte might be learned in ſixe dayes, if it did conſiſt but only of your drinke, your plaiſter and Balme. And therefore I tould him he was deceiued in his ſuperexcellent ſkill, and that he was contrary vnto all the beſt learned Authors both old and newe, who haue publiſhed many excellent and approued inuentions, according vnto the cauſe and nature of the effects which daylie do afflict the bodie of man: for which cauſes they haue ſet forth great varietie of many ſingular and approoued medicines: Some of them haue propertie to repell, and ſome do atract: ſome will appeaſe paynes, and ſome do reſolue: ſome do mollifie:

ſome do ſuppurare, and ſome which do mundiſie: ſome incarnate, and ſome that doe cicatriſe and conglutinate. Tuſh (ſayd he) it is not your manuiſts, nor your old baſillicon mens practiſe, that is as playn as a packſtaffe, can be anſwerable vnto mine, & I will neuer vſe any other remedies, but as I haue before ſpoken of. Then I tolde him moreouer, that Baſillicon made after ſome mens deſcription, is as good an Vnguent as could be vſed in the arte of Chirurgerie, for ſo
                           •
                        ne cauſes. And here further I aſked him what his meaning was by old baſillicon men. He anſwered, it was a word which he had learned amongſtHe learned it of ſlaunderers like vnto himſelfe, only to diſcredite ſome perſons enuied. ſome Chirurgeons about London. Then I told him agayn, yt there were in London many reuerent & ſkilfull▪ Chirurgeons, although perhaps ſome of thē haue been greatly abuſed and defaced with falſe accuſations, by certayne noyſome Serpents, lewd Sycophants, and alſo ſlaunderous libelling knaues, who haue béen rubbed on the gall for their vild tungs and abuſes. Amongſt which ſort of gald backt Jades, one ragged colt of the ſame breede (which neuer wiſe man thought to be worth the drawing out of the myre) hauing as he openly ſhewed a guiltie conſcience, and would needes, forſooth, thruſt himſelfe in to make one of that number, and being ſomewhat poreblind, played the part of Will Sommer, taking Rowland for Oliuer, did ſtrike him that was next him. But of this motlicote and the reſt, who now like ſcrich Owles, hide themſelues in dennes and deſerts for feare of the light, and ſo to bée knowne. And of ſuch wicked and vngodly falſe ſpeakers andThe fruites of ſhameles malice. backbyters, wee ſhall ſay more of them at large hereafter, if time ſerueth. The which to do I would be loth if the perſons were modeſt: but here is no hope in them, becauſe they are impudent: and yet God doth knowe, I had rather derogate from my owne labours, then I would deface others without iuſt cauſe: for that charitie forbiddeth to publiſh any man in print, to the hurt of his good name and credite. But as for theſe factious fellowes, poſſeſſed with the curſed ſpirit of enuie, ſcornefulnes and diſdaine. Notwithſtanding their picked ſpeeches, as ſmooth as a Slickſtone, I think them, whatſoeuer they be,

                        
                           ••
                        fi
                           •
                         members, to ſhroude themſelues vnder the ro
                           •
                        ffe of any good or godly ſocietie: for all ſuch hatefull perſons, with their deuouring tongues, may bee compared vnto furious Dogs, which alwaies bite and barke at ſtones. But theſe deſpightfull and enuious perſons haue neuer ſpared any whatſoeuer: For I reade that Plato, though he were a great learned Philoſopher, doth confeſſe, that he was neuer at any time in ſuch hazard and perrill of his life, being in armes at the beſeeging of Corinth, amongſt his knowne enemies, as he was in Greece by Xenophon, and other his owne ſchollers his ſuppoſed friends. And the only cauſe hereof, as it is ſayd, was hatred and enuie: truely it had been good for ſuch vntimely fruite if they had periſhed in the bloſſome. But all thoſe whoſe vngodly behauiour is ſo trecherous vnto their good friends, can by no meanes poſſible bee truſtie and faithfull vnto men, of whom they haue neuer been beholding vnto for benefites receiued. This may ſeeme ſtraunge, chiefly vnto thoſe godly perſons, which haue neuer been vexed, troubled or moleſted, with the perilous ſtormes and tempeſtes of ſuch vnknowne pernicious libellours, which haue oppoſed themſelues, and haue priuilie ſpred abroad falſe libels, rumors and ſlaunderous reportes, hoping to inioy the fruites of their labours. They haue ventured to make ſhipwracke of other mens good names and credite: ſo that it is vnknowne vnto me, as yet, what thing a man can ſo well do, or what life he ſhould leade, but that theſe beaſtlike men would take occaſion by ſurmiſing of euill, to quarrell or cauell at it. And I ſuppoſe, if time and oportunitie did ſerue, their cunning conueiance is ſuch, though now perhaps they will for a time lurke and 
                           ••
                        ere, like fraudulentBeware of 
                              ••
                           aude in frendly lookes. Foxes, and diſemble with the craftie Crocodile: yet is their naturall inclination at all tymes comparable in crueltie vnto the furious and mercileſſe Tiger, or Tigers whelps: which euilles are infinite and hard to be auoyded: as hiſtories witneſſe of the one, ſo experience daylie manifeſteth the other. A matter of ſuch importance, and in my iudgement, a thing not to bee permitted or ſuffered in any good gouernment or

Chriſtian common wealth. But to leaue theſe peſtilent wée
                           ••
                         and ofſcommes of the earth, and to returne vnto my former matter, from the which I haue digreſſed. And here it is to bée noted, that I departed from the aforeſayd bragging counterfeyt, and fountayne of miſchiefe, and as I thinke, the only ſcoffer and ſcorner of the world, who defaced ſome good men that were abſent, and extolled ſuch as was like vnto himſelfe: but within ſeauen dayes after, where he promiſed a mountayne, it prooued a molehill. And his precious medicines of ſuch great admiration that would do all things, did here receiue a merueilous diſgrace. For they could not worke that effect he looked for: and he that was afore a ſecrete ſupporter of the Trumpets of ſedition, & a deceiuer of others, by procuring of domeſticall hatred, now he is, as it were, glad to creepe & craule away by owle light, praying thē moſt humbly to hold him excuſed, & to ſpeake the beſt of him. And why▪ forſooth he was preſently to go into the countrie to attend vpon no ſmallNote. perſonage, & there of force he muſt remayne during pleaſure. A ſtale blind ſhift, hatched vp in the dungeon of deceipt, as eaſie to be eſpied, as the noſe on a mans face. Now agayne, he whoſe ignorance was ſhadowed with impudencie, and maliciouſly hidden vnder ſmooth and fayre promiſes, and glorious boaſtings, and by that meanes, at his owne pleaſure, would lay heauie ſlaunderous burthens vpon other mens ſhoulders, is himſelfe found out, and his owne doings hath bewrayed himſelfe what he is. But it is a moſt true ſaying of a learned man: If our auncient fathers in times paſt ſhould haue been abaſhed at the ingratitude and ill diſpoſition of ſuch hatefull abuſers, wee ſhould at this day haue been in profound ignorance,To be hated for doing of good, is not to be eſteemed▪ but to be reprooued for euill, is the reward of euill. and little difference betweene vs and brute bea
                           ••
                        es. To make here an end of this couſoner, it was giuen me to vnderſtand, that ſhortly after his departure out of London, he had intelligence by ſome of his ſtraglers, that the cure was committed agayne into my hands: and he alſo hearing by them, that I had promiſed to note his abuſes, and did meane to diſplay

his doings vnto the world: For which cauſe he was malcontent, & conceiued a great diſpleaſure & indignation againſt me, & ſayd, I did but heape coales vpon myne owne head: and therefore he, or ſome other of his bréed, ſhould very ſhortly, either by booke, letter, or libell deale againſt me in diſdainful maner: as did heretofore ſome ſuch like craftie Crowders, voyd of humanitie, or the good graces of God, wherby they made them ſelues knowne of what ſect they were. Their meaning in déed was to pinch me priuilie, ſo that hereafter, they imagined, I ſhould be afraid to publiſh, or to touch their fraudulēt dealings openly, becauſe of their rayling & lying ſpeeches, wherewith they haue purſued me with all malice. But be it knowne vnto all ſuch braſen faced raſkals, whatſoeuer they bee, either of towne or countrie, I little eſteeme of them, they do but lay abroad their owne nakednes vnto the world, and it is coreſpondent vnto the courſe of their life, which in the end will prooue vnto themſelues little praiſe, leſſe profite or benefite.
                     And now finally to returne and ende, and ſo to come vnto the cure, here you ſhall vnderſtand, the ſeauenth day being expired, at ſixe of the clocke at night I was ſent for, and very earneſtly requeſted that I would take the paynes to come agayne and to ſpeake with the patient. And to ſay the trueth, he ſayd vnto me, with no ſmall griefe of minde: now I perceiue the difference betweene ſuch hatefull abuſers of your arte, and other good men: neuertheleſſe, I pray you to holde me excuſed, for that lewd fellowe that hath hid his head and gone his way, and hath left me in this miſerable caſe, he was firſt commended vnto me by friends of myne, which did giue me to vnderſtand, where he had done a great cure vpon a gentleman that lay about the Strand, which gentleman after he brought vnto me, but his hurt was but a ſcratch in reſpect of my wound. But if it were true (quoth he) that he had euer done the like cure, yet I perceiue, for all his vnſauerie eloquence, one Swallowe makes no Summer: and vnto me (ſayth he) he hath ſhewed himſelf to bee one of the vileſt wretches that liueth, and the deepeſt diſembler: with other ſpéeches

had according to his life and liuing. And now to come (as I ſayd) vnto the cure, the ſeauenth day being expired, at night it was ſtrange to ſee, that the wound, which at the firſt he found without payne, or any other euill accidents, ſhould in ſo ſhort a time be ſo oppreſſed with the aboundance of euill humours, which did offend both in quantitie and qualitie: notwithſtanding his celeſtiall Quintiſence, his only plaiſter, and precious Balme, of ſuch great efficacie, whoſe vertues at the firſt, he did perſwade, could not be comprehended in fewe words. Although he had a very apt and able wit, and thereby did open the gates into the wide fields of his magnificent ſkill, as I haue before rehearſed, yet did he leaue his worke filthie and vncleane, like vnto himſelfe. But ſo neere as I could, I did followe nature as our guide, and applyed vnto the griefe ſuch milde and familiar remedies, as are here ſet downe, the which I vſed vntill the foreſaid accidents did decay and vaniſh away, and after cured him as followeth.
                     A Fomentation.
                     Rec. 
                           Vini albi lib. ij.
                           Aquae vitae ℥. iij.
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Myrrhae &
                                 Aloes
                              
                           
                           Reſinae pini ℥. iiij.
                         Miſce.
                     All theſe were boyled ouer a Chaffingdiſh of coales, and with warme ſtuphes I fomented and bathed the wound.
                     Rec. 
                           Terebinthinae lotae in Aqua vitae ℥. vj.
                           Vitellorum ouorum nu. ij.
                           Olei Hypericonis ℥. j.
                           Olei Lumbricorum ℥. j. ſs.
                           Mel. Roſarum ℥. ij.
                           Maſticis ℥. ſs.
                           Hordei q. s.
                           Croci ℈. j.
                         Miſce.
                     
                        With the ſayd digeſtiue I alſo vſed this decocted Balme, which did take great effect in this cure, being vſed with the ſame digeſtiue:
                     
                        A ſingular decocted Oyle or Balme.Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. iiij. ſs.
  
                                 Olei Terebinthinae
                                 Olei Roſarum
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. iij.
  
                                 Olei Lumbricorum
                                 Olei Maſticis
                              
                           
                           Olei Sem. lini ℥. iij. ſs.
                           Vermium terreſtrium ℥. j.
                           Terebinthinae clarae ℥. iiij.
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Maſticis
                                 My
                                       ••
                                    hae
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. ij. ſs.
  
                                 Gummi elemni
                                 Ammoniaci
                              
                           
                           Sarcocollae ʒ. j.
                           Croci ℈. j.
                         Miſce.
                     Let your Gummes bee diſolued in vineger, and then adde thereunto Centaurij maioris, m. j. After the herbes bee bruſed, boyle all together in a faire veſſell vntill it come to perfection, and ten dayes after ſet it in the Sunne, & for wounds in the ſinewes and ioynts it is approued to bee merueilous good, as it was well approued in this cure, with other. After I had firſt dipped the pleggets armed with the digeſtiue in the ſayd Balme, then I layd thereupon:
                     
                        Emplaſtrum T
                              •••
                           pharmacum. M
                              •
                           ſ
                              ••
                           .Rec. 
                           ana. lib. j.
  
                                 Lithargyrij ſubtiliſsime triti
                                 Aceti vini
                              
                           
                           Olei veteris lib. ij..
                         Fiat Emplaſtrum ſecundum artem
                     And then I anoynted the member round about the wound with Olei papaueris, & Olei Roſarum, ana. ℥. j. Miſce. Which being performed and done, then I layd ouer all this Cataplaſme, and ſo rouled it vp according to arte.
                     
                     
                        Cataplaſma Clowes.Rec.
                           ana. m. ij.
  
                                 Fol. Roſ.
                                 Maluarum
                                 Violarum
                              
                           
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Florum Chamaemeli &
                                 Meliloti
                              
                           
                           Lactucae m. ſs.
                        
Boyle all theſe in ſufficient quantitie of milke, and when they be tender, ſtampe them, and then take:

                           Rad. altheae m. ij.
                           Sem. lini m. j.
                           Sem. Foenugraeci m. ſs. Miſce.
                        
Make hereof a Muſcilage with white wine and water, then put in of this muſcilage ℥. vi. and mixe all together, then laſtly adde:

                           Vnguenti populeonis ℥. ij.
                           ana. ℥ j. ſs.
   
                                 Olei Roſ. &
                                 Olei Chamaemeli
                              
                           
                           Medullae panis. m. j.
                           Farinae hordei q. s.
                           Vitellorum ouorum num. ij.
                           Croci ʒ. ſs. 
                         Miſce, & fiat Cataplaſma.
                     Thus by this manner and order of curing, with conuenient diet, purging and phlebothomie, in a reaſonable time his extremeDolor and pa
                              •
                           nesis as it were a ventoſe or cupping glaſſe, in drawing matter to the affected place. taging paynes was greatly appeaſed, and the inflammation ceaſed. After that the wound did tend towards digeſtcon, and the patient agayne well comforted, then becauſe the wound was very large and wide one part from another, I did frame certayne drie ſtitches, which greatly pleaſured him, in bringing the borders and ſides of the wound together, and all the accidents being remooued, I left off the Cataplaſma, and in the place thereof I vſed Emplaſtrum Diachalciteos, diſolued in Oleo Roſarum, & Oleo Myrtilorum, &c. And ſometimes in like manner I vſed for a defenſiue

to take of Albuminis ouorum, & Alluminis Rochi, made in very fi
                           •
                        e powder, & ſo well laboured together, ana. q. s. and applyed it ab
                           ••
                        t the member, and it did alſo profite vs very mu
                           ••
                        : ſince which 
                           •••
                        e I haue ſeene it often put in vſe in the 
                           〈…〉
                         C
                           ••
                        ntries for a common defenſiue for all wounds 
                           〈…〉
                         wich gu
                           •••
                        ot, by one Audrian, Graue Hollocks Chi
                        
                           ••
                        rgeon, a very learned and ſkilfull man, which thing is alſo very well knowne to bee true by Maiſter Goodrouſe, one of her Maieſties Chirurgeons, with others. And after I did leaue the vſe of the digeſtiues, in the place thereof I applyed Vnguentum apij, ſometimes mixed with the yolk of an Eg, and alſo Vnguentum Reſinae, a notable vnguent for wounds 
                           〈◊〉
                         the ioynts, which vnguents are before in this booke deſcribed. And herewith I in like manner vſed the aforeſayd decocted Balme ℥. ii. and added alſo therewith of Lipſius ℥. i. Miſce.
                     This excellent mundiſicatiue ſtayed alſo the thinne gly
                        
                           •••
                        g humour that flowed from the ioynt: which remedies be publiſhed in Folio 70. But by reaſon there of ſome ouerſight, the doſes are left out, with other faults in the forepart of the booke, which paſſed vnawares, and cannot bee holpen vntill the next impreſſion.
                     Rec. 
                           Mellis com. lib. ij.
                           Vitrioli albi ℥. iiij.
                           Succi caprifolij lib. iij. Miſce.
                        
                     
                     The order of making is before deſcribed. Now, after the wound was perfectly mundified, and all accidents remooued, then by the counſell of a learned man, both in Phiſicke and Chirurgery, I was required to vſed Vnguentū Nicotianū, which (he ſayd) had wrought wonders aboue beliefe. But I found not that effect in it that he and I looked for. Neuertheleſſe, I acknowledge it to bee a medicine not to be diſprayſed. But this Vnguent, ſince it was firſt knowne, is greatly bettered

by Ioſephus Quercetanus, with others: ſo I left of the vſe of Vnguentum Nicotianū, after this deſcription here following. And I vſed with great profite vnto the patient Vnguentum Baſilicon magiſtrale, hereafter alſo publiſhed.
                     Rec. Fol. Nicotiani lib. j.
                     Let the leaues be well ſtamped, and after ſtrayned out, as ſtrongly as poſſible may be, then adde thereunto:

                           ana. ℥. iij.
                           Cerae nouae
                           Reſinae &
                           Olei com▪
                           
                        
                     
                     Let all theſe boyle together vnto the conſumption of the iuyce, then adde Terebinthinae Venetae ℥. iij. Boyle all together a little, and reſerue it vnto your vſe.
                     
                        Vnguentum Baſilicon magiſtrale.Rec. 
                           ana. ℥. ij.
  
                                 Olei Chamaemeli
                                 Olei Roſ. completi
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. j. ſs.
  
                                 Olei maſticis
                                 Olei de Terebinthina
                                 Olei de ſemin. lini
                              
                           
                           Terebin. clariſsimae ℥ .iiij.
                           ana. ℥. ij. ſs.
  
                                 Sepi vitulin.
                                 Caſtrati
                                 Hirci
                               
                           
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Roſmarini
                                 Betonicae
                                 Caudae equinae
                                 Centaureae maior.
                              
                           
                           Vermium tereſtrium lotorum cum vino ℥ .iij.
                           Rubiae tinctorum a little bruſed. ʒ .x.
                           ana. m. j.
  
                                 Hypericonis, foliorum &
                                 Sem.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. x.
  
                                 Maſticis
                                 Gummi elemni
                              
                           
                           
                           ana. ℥. j. ſs.
  
                                 Picis naualis
                                 Reſinae pini recentis
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. iij.
  
                                 Serapini
                                 Galbani
                                 Armoniaci
                              
                           
                         Miſce.
                     Diſolue theſe three
                           •
                         Gummes in vineger, and bruſe the other things, and ſo let them reſt, and after boylethem all together with a 
                           •
                        iath of odoriferous wine, then ſtrayne them ſtrongly, and put to the ſayd ſtrayning

                           ana. ℥. ij. ſs.
  
                                 Lithargyrij auri, &
                                 Argentei
                              
                           
                           Minij ℥. ij.
                         Miſce.
                     Boyle theſe together agayne with a ſoft fire: afterward ye ſhall augment the fire vntill the ſayd oyntment bee blacke in colour: which done, make hereof an vnguent with ſufficient newe waxe, &c. This vnguent is commended of Vigo, and many other excellent men, to be ſingular good for all wounds of the ſinewes: and alſo in other wounds it is of merueilous efficacie. And ſith it is thus manifeſt vnto our eyes, that many famous cures hath been done by this worthie vnguent, truely I ſee no cauſe why wee ſhould withdrawe our ſelues, and to leaue the vſe of it. Now here it is to be noted, if in all this time the fleſh offered to riſe ſpungious, then I did rebate and take it away with Mercurie praecipitate, and ſometimes with Allume combuſt in Aceto Roſ. And with the ſayd vnguents I alſo vſed this approued Oyle, called Oleum Apariſij.
                     
                     
                        Oleū Apariſij. Note this for a ſpeciall Oyle for all wounds generally.Rec. 
                           Olei communis veteris lib. iij.
                           Terebinthinae Abietinae lib. ij.
                           Vini albi veteris & electi lib. ſs.
                           Olibani triti lib. ſs.
                           Frumenti purgati ℥. iiij. vel ℥. vj.
                           
                              Hypericonis lib. ſs.
                           ana. ℥. iiij.
  
                                 Valerianae
                                 Cardui Benedicti
                              
                           
                         Miſce.
                     Infuſe the herbes, being bruſed, in white wine ſixe or eight houres, then adde thereto the wheate and oyle, and ſo melt them at an eaſie fire, to the conſumption of the wine. After ſtrayne them, and then put to the Turpentine and Olibanum, and ſo boyle it at a ſoft fire to perfection. I was greatly troubled in the drying or ſkinning vp of his wound, notwithſtanding the vſe of Vnguentum deſiccatiuum, & Vnguentum deminio, or any other whatſoeuer, vntil I had vſed therewith this remedie following.
                     Rec. 
                           Aquae vitae ℥. iiij.
                           Alluminis ʒ. iij.
                           Camphorae ʒ. j. ſs.
                         Miſce.
                     Thus by Gods helpe and good medicines, I finiſhed this cure with Deſiccatiues and Conglutinatiues, and he was agayne recouered: but the motion periſhed, for he had the imperfection of a ſtiffe knee, which conſtrayned him to vſe a leather ſtrappe faſtened vnto the toe of his ſhoo, and agayne made faſt vnto his bodie, and ſo he remayneth vntill this day.
                     Here were time and place to induce me to publiſh many other obſeruations, but I will not willingly moleſt the Reader with being too tedious. And I do confeſſe, I haue ſhewed my my ſelfe to be more willing, then able to perfourme this work I haue taken in hand. Neuertheleſſe, I wiſh you much ioy and felicitie in al your ſtudies, with increaſe of knowledge, whereby you may aduaunce your fame, and credite vnto your Arte and profeſſion, Amen.
                     
                        Apply thyſelf and vſe thy wit,
                        to Lady learnings lore,
                        She'le garniſh thee with wiſedome great,
                        and knowledge more and more.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The concluſion, of a wicked brood of beaſtly abuſers of Phiſicke and Chirurgerie, daylie more and more increaſing, to the vtter vndoing of many: as here briefly ſhall be declared.
                     
                        IN this my collection (gentle and vertuous reader) I meane by Gods permiſſiō, and your courteous patience, here truely and faithfully to deliuer vnto thy viewe, the manifold and iniurious abuſes of a diſordered number of proulling women, daylie practiſing Phiſicke and Chirurgerie, within this Citie of London, and the liberties of the ſame, whoſe knowledge and iudgements (I ſay) is fallible and vncertaine, whereby they are the cauſes of many hidden miſchiefes. Therefore, without further proteſtation, I will as briefly as I can for examples ſake, as it were, poynt at a few, in reſpect of the reſt: which abuſers are bred and crept in amongſt vs through ſufferance, with whom, notwithſtanding I muſt bee temperate and milde in this my writing, and not to ſpeake all I knowe: for their number is great, and they haue many friends that ſpred their fame farre. There is (I ſay) knowne to be in London, which daylie do practiſe Chirurgerie, of ſtraunge women borne beyond the ſeas, called of ſome, cunning or wiſe women, more in number, then there are of Surgeons lawfully allowed and admitted, according vnto the lawes and ſtatutes of this Realme, being fit men to do her Maieſtie ſeruice in their Arte. There be alſo in like maner at this preſent to be found in London, beſides thoſe aforeſayd, of our owne Countrie women, that hath neither wit, nor arte, which daylie practiſe Phiſicke and Chirurgerie, I will ſay little of their dealing in Phiſicke, becauſe it is alſo openly knowne, farre more in number then there is of the ſtraunge women. But all theſe abuſers practiſe Chirurgerie, without any penaltie and puniſhment, and the moſt part of theſe haue huſbands of diuers honeſt trades and occupations, and thereby

are very well able to liue and maintaine themſelues, according to their calling. Yet all that will not ſerue the turne: for my good miſtris his wife, will needes become a Phiſition and a Surgeon: and (forſooth) he muſt followe her preſumptious minde to paynt her out in ſ
                           ••
                        kes & veluets in the higheſtSuch 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                            cannot be enough 
                              •
                           poke
                              •
                            of. degree: for that carrieth credite to her cunning, and brings in mouie plentifully. A thing greatly to be lamented, or rather pitied, that theſe blind and ignorant women ſhould be thus foſtered and ſuffered: for they are and will be the cauſers of many euils, whereby her Maieſtie ſhall haue great want of ſufficient and ſkilfull Chirurgeons to be found in England able to do ſeruice in the time of warres. And vnleſſe God of his mercifull goodnes do moue the hearts of godly Magiſtrates for ſp
                           ••••
                         redreſſe, they will bee the only ouerthrowe of Chi
                        
                           〈…〉
                         in this land. For it is come to paſſe at this day, 
                           〈…〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                        n being of any credite or account, that hath brought 
                           〈…〉
                         in learning, the which is greatly to be required in a good Chirurgeon, but he refuſeth to put him to be an apprentiſe vnto the Arte of Surgerie. And why? Becauſe there are in theſe dayes, in towne and countrie, ſuch a number of abuſers that practiſe Chirurgerie, which are the onely doers and cauſe of all theſe euills. It may ſeeme vncredible, that there is not at this preſent time of ſufficient and able Chirurgeons to bee found in London, ſcarſe halfe the number which were lately employed, in her Maieſties ſeruice, with Generall Norice & Sir Fraunces Drake: And yet the greater fort of thoſe yt are gone, are very poore men, and ſo poore in deede, that ſome of them went out very ſlenderly furniſhed: ſome with a little Chirurgerie ſtuffe in a ſchollers ſatchell: other ſome in budgets, & bagges, being very vnfit furniture to ſerue in her Maieſties ſeruice. Unfortunate and vnhappie ſhall that Souldier be, that taſteth of theſe Surgeons wants. And the chiefe cauſers of theſe euills, are thoſe abuſers aforeſayd. Moreouer, what a pitifull thing is it to heare, that at their departure from their poore wiues and children, leauing them in ſuch extreme neceſſitie, 
                           〈…〉
                         they arriued at the firſt Port, their wiues and children complayned, and craued 

to haue ſome ſuccour & releefe. But who hath ſuccoured or relieued them, that is beſt knowne to themſelues. And if their neceſſitie be ſuch at their going out, what will be their ſtate in time? Or els, if by fortune of warres ſome of them be cut off, then theſe poore women and children may liue in great miſerie. And the cauſers of theſe euilis bée theſe abuſers, aforeſaid. Alſo I cannot in this place paſſe ouer in ſilence, ſith it is comeDiſordred ſhifters and abuſers of Chirurgerie. vnto my memorie, a newe litter of abuſers of Surgerie, and the profeſſors thereof, and they are ſtart out of their kenell of late, deuiſing amongſt themſelues a trade neuer ſeene, nor heard on before: and theſe do hunt after hurt and wounded met, and al other perſons whatſoeuer, be it maiſter or miſtris, manſeruant or mayd, &c. if they bee affected with any kinde of griefe belonging to Surgerie. With all ſuch perſons they will take acquaintance, although (peraduenture) they neuer ſawe ſome of them afore: and then like pettie foggers, or counterfeyt brokers, craftely will inquire what Surgeon looketh on them: and if they ſay they are vnprouided, then they will caſt a figure, & offer them their ſeruice preſently to fetch the only man in the towne. This proffered ſeruice many takes very kindly, and promiſing to acquite his courteſie if he will performe his ſayings. Then without further ado, packs away this pettie fogger, deuiſing where he may make his beſt market. And in the ende, finding a fit man for his purpoſe, he begins to babble for his brokerige after this manner. There is a friend of mine (ſayth he) and one of my old acquaintance is wounded and hurt, &c. and for very good will I am come to you before another, becauſe I knowe you are a ſkilfull man. Neuertheleſſe, I am a good fellowe, as you knowe, and therfore I will looke to haue a ſhare for my paynes, becauſe I bring the cure vnto you. What is your meaning? (ſayth he) It is thus, if you do make three pounds of the cure, I will then haue of it twentie ſhillings, and you ſhall haue twentie ſhillings towards your medicines, and twentie ſhillings more for your paynes: and yet you may ſay I do befriend you: for I haue had diuers times the one halfe of others. An old ſaying, need makes the old wife trot: The good man had rather giue

part of the fruites of his labour vnto this proulling fellowe, wherein he hath no right, then he would ſit ſtill, and want to ſuſtayne himſelfe and his familie. Theſe iniuries are moſt grieuous that bring thus with them innumerable of inconueniences. And remedie there is none to bridle ſuch pillers and poullers. O Lord, what a ſort of theſe euils follow immediatly one after another! Conſider, I beſeech you, how Chirurgerie in theſe daies is promoted & aduaunced, when ſuch men, which haue a long time practiſed this profeſſion with credite and good liking, are conſtrayned, for want of maintenance, to giue ouer the Arte cleane, and now forced to liue by other kind of trades. And the cauſers of all theſe abuſes, are the abuſers in this booke publiſhed.
                     Thus courteous and louing Reader, I haue waded into the very bottome of mine abilitie, but yet I confeſſe I ſtill find nothing anſwerable vnto my well meaning: yet alwaies I reſt in this hope, that that which I haue here in all my diſcourſe ſpoken without offence vnto any good man, may the eaſ
                           •
                        ier be paſt ouer without any griefe to me at all: but if any do here at picke quarels, or maligne my doings, marke them well (as I haue before ſayd) and you ſhall perceiue them to bée ſome of thoſe galdbacke Jades which I haue touched to the quicke.
                     Now laſt of all, only it reſteth, that if it ſhall pleaſe God that theſe my labours bee ſo happie, as to content my louing Patrones (I meane, all the true profeſſors of Chirurgerie whereſoeuer) referring the view vnto their good conſiderations, cenſures, and iudgements, expecting all your friendly ſupportation: and thus I leaue you in the Lord, who knoweth that all our labours are done in vayne, except he in mercie proſper them.
                     Amen.
                  
                  Finis
                  
                     William Clowes,
Maiſter in Chirurgerie.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     VVhē valiāt Mars, with braue & warlike band,
                     In foughten feeld with ſword & ſheeld doth ſtād,
                     May there be miſt a Surgeon that is good,
                     To ſalue your wounds, and eke to ſtay your blood▪
                     
                  
                  
                     To cure you ſure he will haue watchfull eye,
                     And with ſuch wights he meanes to liue and dye,
                     So that agayne you muſt augment his ſtore,
                     And hauing this, he will requeſt no more.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        THE SVRGEONES CHEST
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     VVith willing minde good Reader I thee craue,
                     To weigh the toyle, and carefull paynes men haue
                     VVhich once begins to do ſuch VVorks as this,
                     May ſometimes erre, and runne his pen amiſſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        depiction of surgical instruments
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     With heart I craue, reade, viewe and ſee,
                     If better you haue, impart it with me.
                  
                  
                     Nowe ſlaunderer ſay thy worſt,
                     with malice and defame:
                     In God I onely truſt,
                     all glory to his name.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        depiction of surgical instruments
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A TREATISE OF THE FRENCH POCKS, WRITTEN by Iohn Almenar a Spaniſh Phiſition.
                  
                     
                        Chap. 1. Of the beginning and definition of this diſeaſe.
                     
                        IT is concluded by certaine wiſe men, that this diſeaſe which amongſt the Italians is called Gallicus, that is to ſay, the French diſeaſe, ſhould now bée named Paturſa, which is by interpretation, a diſeaſe filthie and Saturnall. It is a filthie diſeaſe, becauſe it maketh women to bee eſtéemed vnchaſt, and irreligious. It is Saturnall, becauſe it tooke the beginning from Saturne when he entred into Aries, hauing the reſt of the heauenly aſpects helping thereunto. And albeit that influence haue ceaſſed, it is not neceſſarie that the diſeaſe ſhould ceaſſe, becauſe many infected bodies remayned, whereby others haue bene infected: Hereof it may be concluded, that this diſeaſe ſhall continue many yeeres, and therefore let men take heede that by other mens example it may bee ſayd of them: Happie is he whom others daunger make warie. The diſpoſition which proceeded of the celeſtiall influence making impreſſion into the bodies, did burne the humours in reſpect of Aries, which ſigne is hot and drie, and after this burning cold and drie humours were engendred on Saturnes part, which ſigne is by nature colde and drie. Theſe colde and drie or melancholike

humours caried to diuers places bring diuers paines, and in the ſkinne bring forth diuers kinds of puſtles or wheales. It may be thus defined. The French Pockes orThe Defini
                              
                                 ••••
                              
                            Paturſa is an vniuerſall or popular ill diſpoſition in the parts of the bodie, conſiſting principally in the liuer and veynes, and their humors, whereof enſue theſe accidents, to wit, paynes and wheales in all the bodie. The efficient cauſe is touched, when it is called vniuerſall or popular, that is, proceeding from the influence of the heauens: the formall, when it is called an euill diſpoſition: the materiall, when it is ſayd to be in the parts: Alſo the difference is touched, when it is ſayd that paynes doe enſue it, &c. Concerning the ende, the bodily Phiſition intermedleth not: but the ſpirituall Phiſitions affirme them to bee ſent for the puniſhment of ſinne. Wherefore they which would bee deliuered, and eſcape this, let them take heede of ſinne, and applye their mindes to God: for only God cureth infirmities, as Meſues ſayth in his treatiſe
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪
                         
                        de Appropriatis. Of this definition doe followe many and profitable conſequences. Firſt, that this diſeaſe is one, and not many, as ſome haue inſufficiently affirmed, becauſe there could not be giuen one definition of it, neither had it alwaies one only efficient cauſe, neither would one kinde of cure agree, neither had it one name: which is abſurd, as partly hath appeared alreadie, and ſhall more plainly be ſhewed hereafter. The ſecond conſequence is, that they are deceiued, which thinke they haue found the head or fountaines of this diſeaſe, to bee the paine in the ioynts and puſtles in the face, becauſe the former definition agreeth not vnto them. Moreouer, all the paynes are not in the ioynts, neither are all the wheales like red puſtles in the face. Therefore neither this diſeaſe nor the cure of it can be referred vnto them, as it ſhall be hereafter ſhewed. The third conſequence, that they which cure onely wheales, or onely looke to the paynes, doe cure imperfectly. For who can cure perfectly the h
                           •
                        ada
                           •
                        h, or the drineſſe of the tongue, or thirſt, which come from a Feauer, vnleſſe he firſt 
                           •••
                        e the Feauer. For the accident followeth the diſeaſe, as the

ſhadow doth the bodie, Gal. lib. 3. de accident. And therefore the paynes cannot bee cured as the puſtles, except the diſeaſe be firſt cured, becauſe theſe are either accidents, or conioyned ſickneſſes, which follow the principall, and doe preſuppoſe, it muſt be firſt cured, as Auicen teſtifieth tract. 1. ſen. 3. and in many places. The fourth conſequent, if any doe ioyne the cure of the Empiricks with thoſe which thinke they cure orderly, as the annoynting of the Empiricks, and the purging of the Phiſitions, yet the cure is inſufficient, becauſe by thoſe medicines the il complexion which is fixed in the parts cannot be remoued. And this was the cauſe, that many haue thought themſelues cured, when they were not. And if any haue bene cared, it was, by reaſon that the humors were throughly purged by ſolutiue medicines and vnctions: which auoyded, nature was ſtronger and ſuperiour to the diſeaſe and that euill complexion, and expelled it. This had not ſo fallen out, except the nature had bin ſtrong, and the impreſſion little: but where the ſtrength was weake, and the impreſſion ſtrong, this diſeaſe could not be expelled. This difference in the ſtrength of nature, and the impreſſion hath bene the cauſe, that ſome haue bene cured without medicines, ſome with medicines, others could not by any meanes be cured. Now wee will ſhewe that way which both reaſon and experience hath taught to heale all, not onely by remouing with medicines the humor which procureth actuall payne and puſtles, and hath abilitie prepared to the ſame, but alſo that euill complexion which infecteth the humors (they being firſt purged) as order requireth, wherin the treaſure of this cure conſiſteth. I could inferre many other conſequences, but becauſe it is tedious to vſe many words in things not auaileable to the cure (as Galen ſayth) 1. de regim. acut. This ſhalbe ſufficient. It remayneth to determine of the cauſes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the cauſes of the french Pockes. Chap. 2.
                     THere is a twofold kinde of cauſes, becauſe ſome are firſt, ſome corporall: and thoſe of two ſorts, partly antecedent, partly conioyned. That which is firſt, or originall in this diſeaſe, is twofold, whereof the firſt is the onely influence or corruption of the aire, from whence we muſt charitably thinke, that it infected thoſe which were religious. The ſecond is conuerſation, as by kiſſing, and ſucking, as appeareth in children, or by carnall copulation, as it hath happened to many, & very often, but by other meanes, and chiefly by the influence or corruption of the aire, very ſeldome. It may be alſo cauſed by other meanes of conuerſatiō, which I leaue to thy conſideration. It is ſufficient to knowe by experience, that this diſeaſe is contagious, and by probabilitie of reaſon wherin it is like to other contagious diſeaſes, it may be ſo accōpted. Hereupon Auicen ſaith in ye 2. of his 1. concluding his treatiſe of the diſpoſitions of ſickneſſes. Some there are which paſſe from one to another, as the Leproſye, Seabs, Pocks, peſtilent Feuers, rotten apoſtemes. Now of the autecedent cauſes, there are foure kindes, as there are foure humors, which may be the matter of this diſeaſe through their ill diſpoſition, whereby they are apt to receiue the impreſſion heereof: to wit, blood, choler, fleame, melancholy. The conioyned cauſe is double, one is the cauſe of the diſeaſe, and it is the humor which being firſt infected or altered by the originall cauſes, infecteth the partes and other humors, and therefore it is ſayd, the firſt originall cauſes moue the antecedē
                        
                           •
                        . But the couioyned cauſe of the accidents is that h
                           ••••
                         which immediately procureth paynes and whea
                           •
                        es. But h
                           •
                        ere it may be demaunded, whether the euill 
                           •••
                        litie in the humor, which is the autecedent cauſe, may be a diſeaſe. It ſeemeth it cannot, ſith a diſeaſe affecteth a li
                        
                           •••
                        g thing, but the humor liueth not. Whereto it may be

anſwered, that the humor which is in the lyuer and veynes▪ infected with this euill quality, may be the ſubiect of a diſeaſe, ſo it be graunted that that ill qualitie haue not attaynted the part, becauſe it may hinder digeſtion in the liuer and veines, and ingender corrupt humors: therefore by the definition of a diſeaſe, it appeareth to be a diſeaſe. Now to the argument, it is anſwered, that it is ſufficient that a liuing thing be the ſubiect of denomination, or be that which is named diſeaſed, it muſt not be that wherein the diſeaſe is ſettled, yea that is moſt ſtable, that the humor is the ſubiect wherein the diſeaſe is ſettled. And if it be ſayd, how can the humor be an antecedent cauſe, and yet a diſeaſe be in it as in a ſubiect. I anſwere, it is an antecedent in reſpect of the paynes and puſtles, becauſe it is apt to flowe to the places of paine and puſtles: it is a conioyned cauſe, in as much as it cauſeth an ill complexion in the member: it is the ſubiect of a diſeaſe, in reſpect it hath a diſpoſition, whereby the action of the member is hurt, wherevpon it is called diſeaſed. If you conſider theſe things well, you ſhall comprehend all the difficulties which may be incident to the definition.
                  
                  
                     Of the ſignes of the french Pocks. Chap. 3.
                     THe ſignes are, hurt in the yard, eſpecially corroding, heauineſſe of the head, and payne in the necke, which by little and little are ſpread towards the ſhoulders and ſpade bones to the ioynts, firſt in the armes, then in the legges, and ſometime in the muſcles and ſinewes which are in thoſe parts, the payne increaſeth in the night, and decreaſeth in the day. The cauſe is, that nature is then retyred home, and ſtronger, as alſo in regard of the moiſtneſſe and coldneſſe of the night, the matter is increaſed. In the day, nature is drawne from the ſenſe heereof, and doth not ſo much moue the humors, partly being weake, partly occupied in other actions. I will ſhew the ſignes of the cauſes

reſpecting the payne and puſtles, as others alſo in the tree of ſignes heereafter ſet downe. If the payne be ſharpe, and quickly ariſing, and the puſtles little, of a citron colour, vlcerated, and the ſkinne rough, they come of choller. If the paine do ſlowly come forth, the puſtles broade & whitiſh, they are of fleame. If they haue great itching, and ſome heate, they proceed of ſalt flegme. If they be black and ſmall, not very paynefull, they are of melancholy. If they be red, and not paynefull, they are of blood. You ſhall find theſe ſigues intermedled if you view others: for as corruption ſeldome happeneth in one onely humour (ſayth Galen. 1. regim. acut.) euen ſo you ſhall ſeldome finde the ſignes foretelling one onely humor. Therefore you muſt gather all the ſignes in your minde, and comparing them together, attayne to that which is principall, and according to that humor diſpoſe your cure.
                     
                        The Prognoſtications.
                        MElancholick perſons are moſt fit for this diſeaſe in regard of their likeneſſe, according to Ariſtotle. 2. de generat. Things which haue affinitie, do eaſily change. Auicenna ſayth, 21. There is an eaſier conuerſion into proportionable things, then into contraries. They eſpecially are apter which are melancholick by burnt choler, then cholerick: thirdly, ſanguine perſons through the abundance of their humors: Phlegmatick perſons are leaſt ſubiect. Amongſt theſe, they which haue thinne bodies are apt, but eſpecially ſuch as are full of ill humors, and vſe melancholick meates, as pulſe, olde fleſh, and ſuch like. When this diſeaſe is new, it is curable, but when it is old, it is hardly cured, and the older the worſe, becauſe that ill diſpoſition taketh déeper roote. Therefore they which haue this diſeaſe, let thē ſéeke preſent remedie. They which haue many puſtles and little paynes, are more eaſily cured then they which haue the contrarie. They which haue nodes or knots, are more hardly healed. Yong perſons (if other things concurre) are

more eaſily cured then others: wherevpon Galen ſayth, It is not poſsible that the aged ſhould be healed rather then youth. 2. prognoſt. It remayneth to ſpeake of the ture.
                     
                  
                  
                     Of the cure of the French Pocks. Chap. 4.
                     WE ſuppoſe the cure of this diſeaſe to conſiſt in theſe 7. things. Firſt, in ſolubleneſſe: ſecond, by diminutiue purging: thirdly, digeſtion of the matter: fourthly, perfect purging: fiftly, alteration of the parts: ſixtly, comforting of them: ſeauenthly, correcting the accidents. But becauſe an error committed in the ſixe things not natural doth more hurt, according to Serapion 5. practicae 2. Cap. And Auicen ſayth, that euery ill complexion is not cured by the contrarie, but good dyet many times ſufficeth: therefore firſt wee muſt ſet downe the order in the 
                           ••
                        xe things not naturall. Wherevpon, albeit they which are ſound, keepe order, yet that is called conſeruatine, and this curatiue. Sithens therefore all cure is by contraries according to Galen 3. Artis. and Auicen 4. 1. and this diſeaſe is very drie, the order of diet muſt be inclyning to moyſtneſſe. And becauſe in regarde of the eſſence it is hot, comming of aduſtion, and in reſpect of the humors colde, becauſe the humors are colde and drie: the order in things actiue muſt be temperate, and in paſſiue muſt incline to moyſture. And although in conſideration of opening, digeſting, and attenuating the humors, it is requiſite to appoynt hot things, neuertheleſſe there muſt be mingled with them colde, and comfortable to the liuer and veynes. Therefore in actiue things let the ayre incline to heate, but in paſſiue let it be wholly moyſt. Let it be ſweete, and moued with the winde. In Sommer this may be done by ſtrowing the leaues of Willow, Umes, 
                           •
                        lagges, Ruſhes, Roſes, Uiolets, mingling Bayes with them and other ſweete herbes, and ſprinckling them with water. In meate and drinke the dyet muſt

not be ſlender. For Hippoc. ſayth: Thinne and ſtrayt diet in long diſeaſes, are hardly endured. Let therefore his bread be neither hote, nor aboue thrée dayes old, well ſodden and leauened. His Wine white, cleare, of a meane temper betweene ſwéet and harſh, mixed with ſodden water, or with the water of Bugloſſe, Borrage, and ſuch like, eſpecially in the declining of the diſeaſe, for at other times much matter might be caried to the places affected. Therefore if there be variable paines, let him drinke Claret Wine vntill the declining. Let his fleſh be Capenets, fleſhy, but not fat, and Chickens, 
                           •
                        idde, Veale, Lamb of a yeare olde: the fleſh of Pheaſant, Partridge, and little Birds, although they may be permitted, yet houſhold fleſh is better, becauſe it is more moyſt. Amongſt Fiſhes, may be allowed ſuch as liue in rockes, haue ſkales, liue in good water, and of them may be a diſh prepared with Almond milke, the cummin ſéeds, and a barley ptiſane. Amongſt Hearbs, Borage and Bugloſſe are the beſt, according to the old verſe.
                     
                        Borage good, how ſweet is thy food:
                        Thou art greene euer, decaying neuer:
                        Borage doth ſay, I reioyce alway.
                     
                     Alſo Spinage, and in proceſſe of time, Fennell, Parſley 
                           •
                        ingled with Lettuce and Spinage, and of theſe hearbes and cychory may be made a ſalade with vineger of Grapes. All pulſe and hearbs (except chiches) are to be auoyded. All meate made of Milke muſt be eſchued, yet perhaps Milke may be permitted, if the lyuer be not inflamed, nor ſtomack, ſo that the corruption of it is ſuſpected. Héereupon, ſayth Auicenna, in the cure of the Leproſie, Milke is one of the fitteſt medicines. Now in reſpect of the affinitie this diſeaſe hath with that, it may be heerein permitted. Sodden or potched Egges agree well. Spices to comfort, but very little, and eſpecially Cinamom may be graunted, therefore this powder may be vſed in meate: Take Caroway ſeedes, Amſſ
                           •
                        eds, Ameos, Parſley, Smalladge, Marioram, Betony,

Cummin, Calamint, Penniroiall, Hyſope, Spicknard, P
                           •
                        pper, of each ℥. i. Maioram, Balme, Baſill, Graines, Gal
                           ••
                        
                        gall, Liquirice, of eache ℥. i. This powder is ſit for them which haue a weake ſtomacke and a cold brayne, it reioy
                           •
                        eth the heart, quickneth the ſenſes, and wonderfully comfor
                           •
                        eth the memorie. Temperate fruites are not vnméete. In actiue things, fruites moderately hoate and moyſt are co
                           •
                        tienient. as ripe ſwéet Mulberies, ripe Grapes, ſwéet Apples, Dates, and ſuch like, which muſt firſt be roaſted vnder hoare coales: alſo, Almonds, Damaſke Prunes, & dried Peaches ſmothed, infuſed in wyne of Pomgranats, are good. Let his ſléepe be moderate, for too much hurteth, according to Hippocrates, 2. aphoriſ. Notwithſtanding, it is leſſe hurtfull to incline to ouermuch ſleepe then ouermuch watching: but be carefull to make his ſleep tēperate, for Auicen in ye 3. of the 1. ca. 9. ſaith, Moderate ſleepe ſtrengthneth nature. Let him auoyd ſleeping in the after noone, vnleſſe he haue not ſlept by reaſon of payne in the night. Moderate motion after meate, when the firſt and ſecond digeſtion haue auoyded their ſuperfluities, is good. Neuertheleſſe, it is ſafer to offend in too much reſt, then too much motion, eſpecially reſt is requiſite in taking of medicines, therefore the Empiricks keepe them in their beds, for then is nature wholy employed to expell the diſeaſe. Anger, rage, ſorrow, feare and care muſt be auoyded. It auayleth to be merrie, to reioyce, to hope well of health, to be confident, to vſe frendly and louing company. Carnall copulation muſt be moderate, and after the third digeſtion. The belly muſt be ſoluble, if not by nature, then by arte, each other day taking this cliſ
                           •
                        er: take Mallowes, Fumitory, Mercurie, of each one handfull, Borage halfe an handfull, make a decoction, whereof take ſufficient, and adde foure ounces of Oyle, two drammes of ſalt, let it be miniſtred faſting.
                     For the firſt intention, take of Caſsia newly drawne, and the Lenitiue electuarie, of each fiue drammes, with Sugar make a ball to be eaten: theſe may be tempered with Fumitory water, or ſuch like. You may giue alſo Manna & Caſsia,
                        
of each ſixe drammes, and temper it with the other, for them which are rich: or make this clyſter: Take Beetes, Mallowes, Camomill flowers, of each one handfull, boyle them, then put to them ſi
                           •
                        e drammes of Hiera Picra, Caſsia, and Sugar, of each one ounce: foure ounces of common Oyle, two drammes of ſalt, let him take it faſting.
                     For the ſecond i
                           •
                        te
                           ••••
                        n, which is the diminiſhing of the matter, take Violets, Borrage, ana. ʒ. iii. Liquirice ſliced, Raſins ſtoned, ana. ʒ. ii. Prunes, Sebeſten, of each fiue in number, Senna leaues, Epithymu, ana. ʒ. i, ſeeth thē all: take heereof ſo much as will temper Caſsia newly extracted, Elect. Indi. of each i. ʒ. ſs. or as much of confect. Hamech. make a ball with Sugar, or temper them as is ſayd before, or, Rec. Pill. faetidarum, de fumoterrae, ana ℈. i. make three pilles with honny of Roſes, and giue them after Supper, or earely in the morning.
                     Concerning the third intention which is the digeſting of the matter, take ſyrupe of Fumitory and Bugloſſe, of eache ſixe drammes, of Cychory water, Endiue, Hoppes, of each one ounce, and vſe this fiue dayes: afterward, giue the Purgation before ſet downe, and then take another ſyrupe: take ſyrupe of Stichades. i. ℥. of Fumitory, ℥. ſs. Borrage water, Hops, and Endiue, ana. ℥. i. When ſire or ſeauen daies are paſt, let him take the ſolutiue medicines, and then a ſtronger ſyrupe, to wit, de Epithymo, with Fenell water. Take the rootes of Smallage, Feuell, Parſley, Bugloſſe, Ru
                           •
                        cholme, Aſparagus, (the pith being taken out) Maydenheare, Borrageflowers, Balme, Doder, Polypody, Thime, Raſi
                           •
                        s, of each equally, boyle them, and ſtrayne them, adding a little Vmeger, and ſome Sugar, let it boyle once againe, heereof let ye patient drinke one great draught warme, if he loath this decoction, giue him theſe waters with Sugar: take the water of Ceterach, Fenell, Borrage, Bugloſſe, Fumitory, of each one ounce, giue it to drinke with a little Sugar. But becauſe the matter is ſo rebellious, that it cannot be digeſted by inward medicines, there muſt be

things outwardly applyed, which may helpe to digeſt it, ſo that although the matter be neuer ſo ſtubborne, yet by inward and outward meanes it may be ouercome. And do not maruaile at the applying of outward medicines to digeſt 
                           〈◊〉
                        . For Gilbertus ſayth in the cure of the compound 
                           •
                        ectian Feuer, it is requiſite to digeſt the matter by fomentations, plaiſters, and ſuch like: therefore keepe this order, that in the firſt and ſecond day, the patient take the ſyrupe: on the third day, annoynt him with the oyntment afterward deſcribed, in all parts, applying a little of the vnguent lightly vpon the legges, armes, ſoales of the feete, and palmes of the hands, and this to be done when he goeth to bed, and let him take his ſyrupe in the morning, ſo that, in the ſixt day he hath taken ſixe ſyrupes, and hath beene three times annointed, and then giue him a ſolutiue medicine, and the humors which ought to be expelled by the mouth, ſhall be diuerted to the lower partes, and ſo ſhall he eſcape the hurt in the mouth. The dayes following, vſe it in like ſort, ſtrengthening the digeſtion, and alſo the vnguent, by adding Triacle & Quick
                        
                           •
                        iluer. You may alſo foment thoſe places, with the decoction of Melilot, rootes of Holyhock and ſuch like, vſing this in the morning, thus there ſhall be three wayes to digeſt the matter, ſyrupes, vnctions, and fomentations. Now followeth the deſcription of the vnguent. Take three pound of butter,The Oyn
                              •
                           
                           ment. one pound of ſwines greaſe, neither too new, nor too old, one ounce and a halfe of Triacle of tenne yeeres olde, one ounce of Mithridate, two ounces and an halfe of Quickſiluer, Lytharge of gold, common Salt, of each one ounce, make heerof an oyntment, incorporating with them as much water of Fumitorie and Scabioſe, as can 
                           〈◊〉
                         mingled. This Oyntment is the proper 
                           〈◊〉
                         of this diſeaſe, and the laſt and greateſt ſecret amongſt thoſe things which are outwardly applyed. Amongſt inward meanes, the principall and greateſt is the water of diſtilled Triacle, as ſhall appeare.
                     The fourth intention, which is the auoyding and purging of the digeſted matter, is firſt in a potion. Rec. Electuarij lenitiui,
                        
                        Caſsiae newly extracted, ana. 
                        ʒ. iij. Electuarij Indi minoris. Confect hamech ana. 
                        ʒ. j. giue it with water, or the aforenamed decoction in the morning, and let him ſleepe one houre after. Theſe medicines may be tempered with water of Bugloſſe and Endiue, or Fumitorie, and ſuch like, or adding in ſteade of Caſsia, ſixe ʒ. of Manna, for rich perſons. Or let this medicine be prepared for the rich. Take Liquorice ſliced, Raiſins, of each ʒ. ii. Sebeſten foure in number, Borrage, and Bugloſſe flowers, of each halfe one handfull, foure Senna leaues, one ʒ. of Tamarinds: let them boyle in ſufficient water of Borrage and Fumitorie. Take two ounces of this decoction, & infuſe in it foure ſcruples of Rhewbarh, two ſcruples of Agaricke, foure graines of Spicknard, let them infuſe eight houres, then ſtrayne them forth, and put to them Electuar. lenitiui. 
                        ʒ. vj. Electuar. Indi minoris, Confect hamech. ana 
                        ʒ. j. ſs. Let him take this potion. This is but ſet downe for example ſake. Theſe Pilles are conuenient; de Harmodactyll. de Fumoterrae, ana ℈ j. Foetidar. ℈. ij. Make Pilles with ſirrupe of Stichados for one time: let the patient take them in the morning▪ and ſleepe vpon them three or foure houres. All theſe things are ſet downe for examples: for it is the Phiſitions duetie to varie or alter according toO
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           . neceſſitie. Theſe Purgations are to be taken in the ſixt day, as is before ſhewed, and the ſame order to be kept.
                     For the fift intention, make a bath, or ſteuph, with ſweete  water, wherein ſeeth Mallowes, Holyhockes, Melilot, Cha
                        
                           ••••••
                        , Roſes, red Dockes, Fumitorie: this muſt bee done the day after the purging. For hereby commeth conuenient alteration, becauſe moyſtneſſe is moſt requiſite. When he begenneth to ſweate, let him take of this▪ water following. Take of the rootes of Holyhocks, Fu
                           ••••
                        ne▪ r
                           •
                        d Docks, Elecampane, of each one pound, cut them ſ
                           ••
                        tall, and put them into foure pounds of Ma
                           ••
                        ſey to be mollified during one day and a night, afterwarde adde one ounce and an halfe of Treacle, being tenne yeeres olde or more: put it into a Limbecke, and 
                           •
                        et the water diſtill, whereof take three ounces, with two ounces

of Bugloſſe water in the beginning, as is aforeſayd. Let this ſtuffe be often vſed after the ſixe or ſeauen daies be ended: and let him drinke this water, which is the beſt and ſingular, and the greateſt ſecret and laſt refuge in this diſeaſe.
                     The ſixt intention, which is the comforting of the parts is thus performed. Rec. Laetifican. Galeni ℥. iij. Diamuſc▪ dul
                           
                              •
                           is 
                        ʒ. vj. aromatic. gariofil. 
                        ʒ. ſs. Electuar. regum 
                        ʒ. j. Conſeruae Bugloſſae, Cidonior. Boragin. ana. ℥. j. Syrupi de pomis q. s. Fiat Electuarium. Hereof let him take ʒ. ii. or a ſpoonefull, or take Andromachus Treacle of tenne yeeres olde ℥. i. Mithridate ℥. ſs. ſeedes of Citrons, Bole armoniake, of each ʒ. i. Incorporat theſe together, and with Muſked Roſewater make an Electuary, wherof let him take the quantitie of one Haſell nut, or a dragme: alſo if he bee weake, this reſtauratiue con
                           •
                        ection may be made. Take ſwéete Almonds, Haſell nuttes, of each one ounce, fiſtick nuttes half an ounce, ſixe dragms of the common colde ſeedes, Penidior, brawne of a Capon, of each three ounces, with Roſewater make morſels or l
                           •
                        zenges. Hetherto auaile cordiall bagges, which it were too long to rehearſe.
                     For the ſeauenth intention, which is the correction of the  accidents in the paynes: if they be intollerable, take a Lillyroote, Henbane ſeedes, of each ʒ. iii. one ounce of red Lead, the marrowe of an Hart and a Calfe, of each two ounces, as much Oyle and Waxe as will ſuffice: make an oyntment, and applye it. Or if neceſſitie doth require, a little Opium may be put to it. But becauſe theſe ſteupefactiue medicines ought not to be applyed, but in great extremitie: For (Auicen ſayth) ſleupefactiues are to be ſeared. And Meſues ſayth: If you can eſchue it, it is not good to giue thē: leaue them aſmuch as you may, & trie firſt thoſe which aſſwage payne, & do plainly giue eaſe, as Dill, Camomill, Melilot, Holihocks, yolkes of Egs, womans milke, and ſuch like. For puſtles vſe either the formerAn oyntment▪
                         oyntment, or this. Take Turpentine, Goates fat, of each one ounce, red Lead, Gold Litharge, burnt Allom, of each one ounce, oyle of Bayes two ounces, ſo much Waxe as will ſuffice,

make an oyntment.
                     For vlcerated Puſtles, Fiſtulaes, Canker, Rec. Fuliginis nitri, Litharg. Tartar. roſted in Colewort leaues vnder the coales, Gold ore, Pepper, Frankincenſe, yolkes of Egges, of each ℥. iiii. the roote of Elecampane, Dockes ſodden in ſtrong Lees, of each ʒ. ii. the iuyce of Fumitorie, of Docks, of wormwood, Celandine, Elecampane, great Beanes, Sothernwood of each ℥. iii. white Hellebor, Sope, Brimſtone, of each ʒ. ſs. let all the iuyces boyle, be ſkumde, and ſtrayned, and after the Docke, and Elecampane rootes bee beaten, and put in, afterward the Sope, then the powders ſpecified firſt, then put to it common Oyle, Swines greaſe, and Waxe, of each ʒ. ii. Quickſiluer extinct in Swines greaſe ℥. i. make an oyntment, which is of miraculous force in theſe caſes. For the nodes or knots, take rootes of Holyhocks, ſeeth them in white Wine, and beate them with Capons greaſe, and applye them: or take the mucilages of Linſeedes, and Holyhocks, of each ʒ. ii. Spike oyle, oyle of ſweet Almonds, Camomill, of each ℥. ſs. one ounce of Butter, Gum Arabick, and Dragagant, of each ʒ. i. make an oyntment which hath marueilous force to reſolue and mollifie. To this purpoſe ſerueth a Serecloth of mucilages, the iuyce of Hyſſope, and ſuch like. Alſo the oyntment vſed for Scabbes auayleth in this caſe. Take foure ounces of Turpentine well waſhed, two ounces of Butter waſhed, one dragme of Salt, Succi critrangulorum, yolkes of Egges, of each 3. in number, one ounce of oyle of Roſes, mingle theſe to an oyntment. I could here write many other appertinent medicines, but becauſe the principall cauſe being remoued, the reſt is eaſely cured, theſe ſhalbe ſufficient.
                     Now, for the hurt in the mouth (if it fall out) take white and red Roſes, of each hal
                           •
                        e a handfull, Camomill, Sage, of each a handfull, boyle them in white wine, and ſtrayne it, put to the expreſſion two dragmes of Allume, ſyrrupe of Mulberies, Honie of Roſes, of each halfe an ounce, two ounces of Wine▪ of Pomgranats, mingle them, and let him herewith waſh his mouth often, or▪ in 
                           •••
                        ad of wine the water of Plantaine,

Nightſhade, Scabioſe, or Houſeleeke may bee added, & fiue graynes of Camphyre, or halfe a dragme of Philoniū
                         may be put to it, as the payne requireth. But theſe ſtupefactiue medicines are to be taken heed of. The peeces of greene Gowrdes holden in the mouth are profitable. It is good to waſh the mouth with milke, mingling with it the water of Nightſhade, or water Lillies. I could adde many mo: but becauſe no hurt ſhall befall the mouth, if you deale as I haue ſayd before, I ceaſſe, and come to ſhewe the way how to auoyde this diſeaſe.
                  
                  
                     What cautions muſt bee obſerued to eſcape the French Pockes. Chap. 5.
                     
                        THey which are carefull to eſcape the French Pockes, let them firſt eſchue ſinne. For it is commonly ſayd, Aduerſitie followeth Iniquitie: eſpecially let them beware of ryot. For it is ſayd in the third of Iob, Ryot is a deuouring and conſuming fire. And the ſpirituall Phiſitions doe ſay, that diuers diſeaſes followe diuers ſinnes, as the quotidian Feauer commeth for pride, the Gowte for ſlouthfulneſſe, the Leproſie for ryot, and ſo of the reſt.
                     Seeing therefore this diſeaſe is likened to the Leproſie, it is to be aſcribed to Ryot. But becauſe theſe things perteine to an other Phiſition, this ſhalbe ſufficient. Therefore wee counſaile on our behalfe, that men beware to conuerſe much with them that are infected, principally from carnall copulation with an infected woman: for this diſeaſe is contagious. Therefore ſaith Auicen in the 2. of the 1. in the concluſion of his treatiſe of diſeaſes. Some diſeaſes paſſe from one to an other, as the Leproſie, Scabbes, ſmall Pocks, peſtilent Feauers, yea rotten Apoſtumes. Sith then this diſeaſe is neere to the Leaproſie or Scabbes, it muſt be thought contagious.
                     
                        Moreouer, ſuch things as do engender ill humors, eſpecially melancholy nouriſhment, muſt be auoyded, as was ſhewed in the order of the ſixe things not natural. And if it happen the yard be hurt by carnall copulation, it muſt be helped preſently with this waſhing. Take Roſemary, Sage, Camomill, of each one handfull, boyle them in white Wine, to which being ſtrained, put two ounces of the Wine of Pomgranats, halfe an ounce of hony of Roſes, waſh the yard or infected place with this, after ſpreade vpon it this powder, Rec. Litharg. auri, ceruſſae, ireos nucū cupreſsi, ana. 
                        ʒ. i. make them into powder, and apply it after the waſhing, and if this powder be too ſtrong, put to it Maſtick, Myrrh, Frankincenſe, of eache one dramme. But for more ſecuritie, when man or woman hath companied together, let them wipe themſelues cleane with a cleane lumen cloath, and beware the womens cloathes, for they are infected: and thisA good caueat of a bawdie Spanyard. done, yet for more ſecuritie, let him or her waſh the place with warme water, or white Wine, for becauſe of the frication of the parts, ſome ſlyme ſticketh to the yard, which cauſeth infection to the yard and the bodie, therefore the vſe of this order will be good to auoyde that infection & filthyneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Certayne difficulties are diſſolued which may be propounded touching this diſeaſe. Chap. 6.
                     
                     IF the reaſon be demaunded, why this diſeaſe beginnethDoubt, 1. in the ſecret parts 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſome fooles annſwere, that it commeth by reaſon the humors in that place are moſt méete to be corrupted: but if this were a ſufficient reaſon, almoſt all diſeaſes ſhould haue there beginning in that place. Therefore it muſt be ſay
                           •
                        , that betweene thoſe parts, and the qualitie of this diſeaſe, there is ſuch conformitie, and this came by meanes of that 
                           ••
                        fluence: for euery thing worketh not vpō euery thing, but a certaine vpon a certaine. Ariſt. 1. phyſ. ſo this diſeaſe is readier to be firſt taken in the yard, then in

the necke, head, ſhoulders, and not in other places. ThereforeDoubt. 
                              •
                           . the influence at that time was an enemy to the head and yard. And if it be demaunded why it hath the termination by the mouth? it may be aunſwered, that this procéedeth of the propertie of Quickſiluer, which doth drawe humors to thoſe parts: or better thus, that Quickſiluer by his heate doth warme, and make thinne the humors thus prepared, to expell them by the vppermoſt parts: therefore Paulus affirmeth it to be hoate and moiſt in the fourth degrée, to whome, I doo rather ſtick then to Auicen, who maketh it cold in the ſecond degrée. And if it be demaunded, why the mouth doth ſtincke? it may be aunſwered, that this commeth of the Quickſiluer, whoſe fume hath propertie to make the mouth ſtinck as Auicen ſaith, can. 2. cap. 2. Heereupon alſo commeth paine in the head, and hurt in the mouth, as it may be gathered of the nature of it, vnto this may be added the burnt, putrified ill humor, which may make the ſame accidents, and therefore it is no maruaile if there be ſo great paines. Now the eſpeciall remedie is, that when the humor beginneth to be expelled by the mouth, it be diuerted by medicines miniſtred vpward and downeward, to bring it to the lower parts. If it be demaunded, wherefore ſome perſons being apt to melancholick diſeaſes, both in regard of complexion and ill order, are not infected? I ſay that perhaps their bodies are more firme, and conſequently do more hardly receiue an impreſſion then others, or by ſome other propertie, which in diuers bodies is found to be diuers, as ſaith Auicen. 1. 1. And if it be demaunded  why Quickſiluer helpeth, or is more auailable thā other medicines, except the diſtilling of Triacle before mentioned? it muſt be aunſwered, to come of his propertie, or rather manifeſt qualitie, becauſe it is hoate and moyſt in the higheſt degrée, and the diſeaſe cold and drie. That the diſeaſe is cold and drie, it is proued, firſt, becauſe it is Saturnall, as hath beene ſhewed: ſecondly, becauſe it is found by experience, that hoate & moyſt things helpe: alſo, becauſe it hath affinitie with the Leproſie, which is a cold and drie diſeaſe, and with

other melancholick diſeaſes: againe, becauſe it is a long diſeaſe: for Auicen ſaith, 1. 3. cap. 2. That ſickneſſe which is prolonged, is wholy cold: and it is confirmed, becauſe we ſee this matter to putrifie ſeldome, or to cauſe a Feuer: heereupon, ſayth Galen: Nothing doth properly corrupt of cold or drye, 2. Booke of Complexions. Therefore this muſt be ſayd ſo to be, becauſe the diſeaſe is cold and dry. If it be demaunded, why ſome medicines ſeeme to helpe in  the beginning, but when they are continued, they ceaſſe to helpe? it is ſaid, that this commeth of a double cauſe, whereof the one is in nature, the other in the diſeaſe, in regard of nature which by continuance doth loath, and reioyce in nouelties: in regard of the diſeaſe, becauſe albeit in the beginning the medicine is contrarie to the diſeaſe, yet in proceſſe, the contrarietie ceaſſeth through cuſtome: therefore, ſayth Auicen, There is no paſsion from a thing accuſtomably vſed. 4. 1. Heereupon, we ſée ſome beaſtes to be contrarie, and enemies at the firſt meeting, but by vſuall conuerſation, that enmitie ceaſſeth, then they become tame, and the ſtrife is ended between them: this muſt be alſo accompted amongſt the qualities. And if it be ſayd on the contrarie, that the agent and patient being duely ſituated, of neceſſitie an action muſt follow, it is aunſwered, that in this caſe there is action, but ſo ſmall, that it is of no force. Or it may be aunſwered, that by cuſtome, the diſpoſition of the patient is altered, wherevpon it doth follow that change of medicines (ſo that they be not from the purpoſe) is very profitable: as Auicen ſayth in the place alleadged. If it be demaunded whether bloodletting is  agreeable to this diſeaſe, I aunſwere, that in the beginning, and before the matter be diſperſed to the greeued places, whereby it is mingled with the blood, eſpecially if it be ſcattered in the ſkinne, then (I ſay) it is conuenient, if other particulars concurre: but in proceſſe, it is not conuenient, except the ointments and other medicines haue been applied, becauſe that when nature hath endeuoured to expell humors, being helped with medicines, ſhe hath mingled ſome parte

thereof with the blood: wherefore cupping is leſſe diſliked, but with this caution, that the cold humors be not made more crude, nor the hoate more inflamed, according to Auicen 4. 1. Beware thou bring not thy patient to one of theſe two things, either to the boyling of cholerick humors, or cruditie of colde humors. In this caſe cruditie is more feared, then boiling, and therefore it is ſeldome conuenient, and by experiēce it hath hurt more, then it hath helped. If it be demaunded  how theſe paynes in this diſeaſe are to be called? I aunſwere, they are extenſiue or ſtretched, whereupon, ſayth Auicen, The cauſe of extended payne, is either windyneſſe, or an humor that ſtretcheth the nerue or muſcle, as if it drew it to the extremities. Neither is it true which ſome thinke, that this is a breaking payne, becauſe they thinke the matter to be betweene the bone and the ſkinne, grounding themſelues on the ſaying of Auicen, The cauſe of breaking payne, is windineſſe betweene the bone and the skinne, which couereth it. Auicen ſpeaketh not of the ſkinne immediatly couering the bone, for that is vnſenſible,In this, and perhaps ſome poynt or two moe, the Authors iudgment fayled him: as in ſome things we fayle all. but he ſpeaketh of thoſe which do not immediatly cleane to the bone, as the ſkinne couering the ribbes, or ſkull, and ſuch like. Sith therefore this paine is not in thoſe places, it ought not to be ſo called. If it be demaunded, to what puſtles the puſtles in this diſeaſe are like? I aunſwere, to thoſe which are called of Auicen, puſtles in the face, who ſayth, that Aſafati is a high banke of vlcerous puſtles. Neuertheleſſe, there are oft times puſtles in theſe like others, as thoſe which reſemble nodes, fiſtulaes, cancers, burning, ants, and all others, as the diligent viewer may iudge: but becauſe the diſputation about names appertaineth not to a Phyſition as Auicen ſayth, 4. 1. 5. I purpoſe not to be long in this matter, as others haue done, who not knowing the nature and cauſes of a diſeaſe, and by conſequent not the cure, haue only trifled about names, whoſe works I knowe not to what end they haue beene printed. If it be demaunded, why the paines  are increaſed in the ſecond or third day of the vnction? It is

anſwered, becauſe then the humors are moued, and alſo made thinne in their curing, or digeſtion, which commeth by the benefite of the vnction, according to the Aphoriſine. 2. part.
                     
                     Feuers and paynes are more increaſed in the labouring to ſuppuration, than when matter is fully digeſted. And therfore it is a moſt ſingular ſecret, to miniſter thē ſolutiue medicines, that, before the humor be purged at the mouth, it may bee caried downward: and by this meanes the mouth ſhall not bee hurt, as I haue often tryed. Or if he haue Puſtles, or vlcerated places, there muſt drawing medicines be applyed, that the humor may be there auoyded, & bee diuerted from the mouth. Hervpon is inferred, that that is the more true opinion which ſayth Quickſiluer is hote, than that which ſayth it is colde, ſith by it the humour is made thinne and moueable, as hath beene ſhewed. But contrariwiſe, Vincentine Aiax Siculus a learned young man, ſayth: Quickſiluer cauſeth cold diſeaſes, as Palſies, the falling ſickneſſe, and ſuch like: as ſaith Auicen can. 2. therefore it is colde. For like is engendred of like, as it is in the Phyſicks. To this it is anſwered, that this might bée true, if of it ſelfe it procured theſe diſeaſes, but it cauſeth them accidentally, to wit, by weakning, ſith it is contrary in nature to the ſinewes and brayne, becauſe it is hote and moyſt: and the naturall complexion is helped of the like, and is hurt by the contrarie, as it is 3. Art. Galeni: The more hote partes haue neede of more hote medicines. Therefore the braine and ſinewes, through their weakeneſſe, engender colde humors, and alſo doe eaſely receiue them. Thus the ſolution is plaine, becauſe it cannot bee that any thing ſhould bring forth a thing diuers from it accidentally, as heate colde, and colde heate, &c.
                     It was alſo demaunded oft by a wittie young man Franciſcus  de Carmino, whether Quickſiluer bee fit in this diſeaſe, ſeeing by conſent of all Authors it is an enemie to the ſinewes, and this diſeaſe moſt commonly is in the ſinewes. He ſayth further, The report of all is not vayne. 7. Ethic. But almoſt all ſay that Quickſiluer is contrarie, and doe therefore 
                           ••
                        allow vnctiōs, &c. To theſe I haue anſwered, that Quickſiluer

is agreeable for the reaſons before alleadged. But I anſwer to the firſt argument, that although it may haue ſome hurt in it, yet when it is corrected (as is ſhewed) it is not ſo much but the helpe is more. Or it may be ſayd, that therefore Quickſiluer is contrarie to the ſinewes, becauſe the conſtitution of it is contrary to the naturall cōſtitution of the ſinewes: but in as much as the ſinewes are diſtempered to colde and drie, and that ill temperature is remoued, vntill they come to their good temperature, it may be ſayd it is abſolutely neceſſarie. Therefore ſome things in ſickneſſe are good, which in health were vnmeete, and would bring the bodie to decay. To the ſecond reaſon I ſay, that it muſt bee noted that Ariſtotle ſayth: It is not altogether vayne. For he would not haue it to be vtterly falſe, for it is true in part, in as much as Quickſiluer hath ſome hurt in it. Yet it is not therefore to be reiected vtterly, eſpecially when it is corrected. For Galen ſaith, 9. de tuenda ſanitate. It is hard to finde ſuch an helpe as hath no hurt in it.
                     
                     It was further demaunded by him, why the paynes are  more increaſed in the ioynts, than in other places, ſith by motion they ſhould rather be reſolued? And this was one Iames Roger, a ſubtill youth. Vnto this it is anſwered, ye emptineſſe in the place is of more▪ force to gather, than the motion to reſolue. Wherevpon, ſayth Auicen▪ Fen. 2. 
                              •
                           an. 1. The largeneſſe which is in the ioynt is fit to receiue matter flowing vnto it.
                     
                  
                  
                     The declaration of the tree of ſignes. Chap. 7.
                     
                        AL the ſignes of a diſeaſe are taken, either from things not naturall, or from things naturall, or from things beſide nature. From things not naturall thus, in what ayre the patient remayneth, what meate, drinke, what exerciſes hee vſeth, what ſleepe, what watchings▪ hee

hath. From naturall things thus, what age he is, what is his cuſtome, what his profeſſion, his ſtrength, his complexion, &c. From things beſides nature in three ſorts, of the action hurt, the qualitie altered, the excrements chaunged. From the action hurt three waies, whether it bee the animall, vitall, or naturall. The animall is double, ſenſitiue, and motiue. The ſenſitiue is double, inward and outward. An example from the motiue faculties thus, whether and how the whole bodies or the parts can be moued? Examples from the outward ſenſitiue facultie, how he heareth, ſeeth, ſmelleth, taſteth, as, what payne he feeleth, what he taſteth in his mouth. Examples from the inward ſenſitiue faculties thus: what imaginations he hath, what iudgement, what memorie, what dreames. Concerning the vitall faculties, let them bee inquired in the ſixe things not naturall. From the naturall actions in two ſorts wee gather obſeruations, from the eſtate of miniſtring parts, or things miniſtred. Example of the firſt is, how his appetite is, his retentiue facultie, his digeſtiue, his attractiue, his expulſiue: to witte, how the partie goeth to the ſtoole, maketh water, hath ye courſe of flowers, vſeth venery, & ſuch like. Examples of things miniſtred are, how he is nouriſhed, and enquiring of all other actions, whether the action bee diminiſhed, corrupted, or vtterly loſt. From the qualitie chaunged, as, how his breath ſmelleth, what ſweate, what vlcers, what wounds, what matter, what is the colour of his tongue, eyes, and whole bodie, what moyſture, drineſſe, roughneſſe, ſmoothneſſe, hardneſſe, ſoftneſſe in the tongue, bellie, and reſt of the bodie. From the excrement chaunged, as, what bee, and how much are the excrements of the eyes, noſe, eares, mouth: what vomiting, belching, vrine, ſtooles: what filthineſſe in the head and feete, what ſweate in the whole bodie: yawning, ſtretching, loathing, may bee referred to the naturall actions which expell, ſith they proceede of nature labouring to expell. From things not naturall thus, that he vſed a dyet increaſing blood, or being practiſed in delectable things, as a Muſition, or Player, or becauſe hee vſed ſuch meate and drinke as engender

blood, to wit, potched Egges, ſtones of Cockes, ſtrong wine, and ſuch like. From naturall things, becauſe he is full of fleſh, of a ſanguine complexion, young man. From things beſides nature, and firſt from the action hurt, as, heauineſſe in the eyes, head, beating in the temples, ſtretching, yawning, loathing, much and deepe ſteepe, troubled ſences, ſlow imaginations, wearineſſe without labour, great pulſe, ſwift and faſt, fulneſſe of the veynes or arteries. From the changed qualitie, as, redneſſe in all the bodie, chiefly in the veynes of the eyes, fulneſſe of them, ſwelling in the mouth. From the chaunged excrements, as vryne groſſe and red, darke and red, roſie red. In egeſtions there appeareth no ſigne: the ſpettle is ſweete, ſometime mingled with blood: blood iſſueth out of ye noſe, or the gummes, or by menſtruall flux, or by the Emroydes, or other places▪ much ſweate ſtinking like to a Goate, & red wheales: alſo to theſe may bee added, that the partie dreameth, he ſeeth red things, or blood ſtreaming, and that he ſwimmeth therein. Therefore 4. Collect. it is read of Galen, that he commaunded one to bee let blood, who dreamed hee was waſhed in a tunne of blood: others not conſenting, inioyned him exerciſe, ſo the partie dyed.
                     The ſignes of Choler from things not naturall, as he vſedSignes of Choler. vehement exerciſe in hote ayre, he vſed hote and drie meates increaſing choler. From things naturall, that he is a cholerick young man. From things beſide nature, and firſt from the action hurt, the patient hath great thirſt, diſquietneſſe, payne in the right ſide of the forehead, great light doth hurt him, hee hath ſometime hunger with ſwoning, a weake appetite, loathing, pricking like to the poynts of néedles, raging, great byting in the auoyding of excrements and vrine, a ſwift pulſe with hardneſſe and extenſion. Here may conſequently be added touching dreames, ſith it ſeemeth to pertaine to the action hurt, as, that he ſeeth things of a Citron or fierie colour, that he brauleth, and ſometime dreameth that he flyeth. From the qualitie chaunged, as, yellowneſſe of the face and eyes, as it is in the Jaundies, bitterneſſe of his mouth, drineſſe and

roughneſſe of the toong, drie noſtrels. From excrements changed, as, red vrine, Citronlike, fierie, Saffronlike, his ſtooles like Saffron, his ſpittle bitter, his vomit cholerick, greene, bitter, of a Saffron colour, moyſtneſſe of the eyes & noſtrels ſharp, cholerick, little, and from the eares not much. The ſignes of flegme from things not naturall, as fulneſſeSignes of Fleagme. of mea
                           •
                        e, idleneſſe, long ſleepes: from things naturall, that he is of a flegmaticke complexion, a Fiſher, ſalt, &c. From things beſide nature, and firſt from the action hurt, little thirſtineſſe except the flegme be ſalt, weake digeſtion in the time of health, a ſharpe appetite, much ſleepe, ſluggiſhneſſe, idleneſſe, the partes diſſolued, heauineſſe of the eyes, forgetfulneſſe, paine in the hinder part of the head, giddineſſe, blindneſſe, ill appetite, longing after ſharpe and ſoure things, loathing, belching, heauie payne, coldneſſe, whoſe hurt is notably perceiued in the head and ſtomack: for there is much flegme gathered, as ſayth Auicen. 13. 3. and Meſue in Appropriat. a rare, ſlowe, and eaſie pulſe. From the qualitie changed, as, cold ſenſibly perceiued, white colour in the face and bodie, the toong ouerwhite, too ſoft, fulneſſe in the body, the face ſoft and ſwelled: from the excrements changed, as, vrine white, diſcoloured, darke yellow, his ſtooles flegmatick, ſlimie, watriſh, his ſpittle ſlimie, watriſh, much, and rather harſh then bitter, much ſuperfluitie au
                           •
                        ided by the noſe and palate: his dreames of water, ſnowe, rayne, and ſuch like, which are to be referred to the action not hurt. The ſignes of melancholy firſt from things not naturall, as, heSignes of Melancholie. vſed much muſing, care, feare, &c. Alſo melancholick meates, from things naturall, that he is of a melancholick complexion, often incurring melancholick diſeaſes, from things beſide nature, and firſt from the action hurt, he feeleth heauineſſe in his head, and rather on the right ſide, his mouth hoate, his appetite corrupt, and ſometime greedie like to a dogge, much watching, much ſ
                           •
                        litarineſſe, paine in the Splen
                           •
                        , hardneſſe, ſilence, many meditations, weeping, or a deſire to weepe, a ſettled countenance, ſluggiſhneſſe, the ſides ſtretched, little

ſleepe, if there be not ſharpneſſe, with fleagme, or ſowerneſſe in the mouth, an ill pulſe with hardneſſe, the bodie decaying. From the qualitie chaunged, duſkineſſe, or blackneſſe appearing in the bodie, hearineſſe of the bodie, the blacke Morphew in the lower eylid, & that is a moſt ſtrong ſigne, as ſaith Auerrois Coll. 4. the eyes being blacke & cleare. From the excrements changed, brine black, or darke, greene, blew, his ſtooles blacke or duſkie, little ſpettle & ſharpe, ſower belchings, blood black, & congealed when it is let forth: his dreames full of terror. Here alſo may be added from things which helpe or hurt. Here notwithſtanding muſt bee obſerued, that thoſe three kinds of ſignes ſet downe by Galen, to wit, from things ſubſtantially remayning, from accidents and actions may bee referred to theſe three, or theſe three reduced to them: and if it were thus ſet downe as appeareth in the tree, from things naturall, and not naturall, from hurtfull and helping may be alſo here placed. Notwithſtanding, all theſe may be reduced to the three ſet downe by Galen, as appeareth to him that well conſidereth the matter.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  Certaine other approued Remedies, very profitable alſo for the cure of the French diſeaſe: gathered for the benefite of young Students in Chirurgerie.
                  
                  
                     A ſpeciall good Turbith minerale.
                     REcipe Mercurij viui ſaepius aceto & Sale loti, partes
                           
                              •
                           eware none of our blinde or common practizers, that brag of euery new inuented medi
                           
                              •
                           en, which they gleane or ſteale from others, do with vnwaſhed hands preſume to giue or miniſter this worthy remedy without the counſell of the learned. Georg. Melich. vj. eaſque cum auri puriſsimi parte vna optime permiſce, ita vt auro in fictili fuſorio liquato, & iam refrigeſcere incipienti, mercurius in altero calefactus fictili addatur, & rudicula diligenter miſceatur. Addatur deinde tantundem aquae fortis, qua aurum ſoluitur, fiatque praecipitati puluis.
                     
                        This kinde of Turbith is prepared with great paynes, and it ſerueth for the Collicke, Quartaines, and for Morbus Gallicus: but it requireth a time and charges, as is aforeſaid: but being made, it ought to bee put in a glaſſe veſſell, and ſo to bee ſet in the embers, and when it hath continued a time, whereby the ſtrong water may euaporate forth by force of the fire, then it is become Praecipitat, but if you will make Turbith, then you muſt waſh it very well, and doe it according to arte, and ſo to miniſter it with diſcretion, which doth cure the imperfections aforeſayd, without daunger.
                     
                  
                  
                     The order of the taking the foreſayd Turbith minerale.
                     FIrſt let the patient bee purged with ſome good purgation meete to purge that ſickneſſe: but if the blood be very foule, as moſt commonly it is, let blood alſo the next day: if the patient be ſtrong, giue him xiiii. graynes of Turbith-minerale, and roule it well vp in▪ 
                        Butiri recentis q. s. and make one pill and gild it: but remember before you take the pill, that ye

drinke a good draught of Mutton broth, and at euery time they doe vomit, giue preſently ſome Poſſet Ale, mixed well with Sugar. And thus you ſhall take three of theſe pilles together, hauing a day reſpit betwene, according as the ſtrength of the ſick patient will ſerue. And for healing of their mouths, take Poſſet Ale, and mixe with it Honie of Roſes: and if the mouth growe foule and furred, put into the iniection ſo many droppes of oyle of Sulphur as will make it tart: and alſo to heale it vp with ſome other good lotion, if neede ſo require.
                  
                  
                     White Praecipitate.
                     THis is a ſecrete, and is of very excellent force for the taking away of dead, proude, or ſuperfluous fleſh, and for cleanſing of vlcers, but it moueth greater payne than the other, becauſe the other is made with Aqua fortis, and this with oyle of Sulphur: Therefore this ought to bee applyed when the other will not ſerue, and this is the making therof.
                     Rec. Argenti viui, & olei ex Sulphure, ana partes aequales, in cuc
                           •
                        rbita, horas xxiiij. macerentur, deinde igne vrgeantur, donec humiditate omni abſumpta albeſcant.
                  
                  
                     An Electuary to confirme the cure, and to preuent the comming againe of Morbus Gallicus.
                     
                     Rec. rad. torment. & angell. ſemin. fraxini ana. ʒ. ij.Augeri
                              •
                           s Ferrari
                              ••
                           . cort. citri, cinnamoni, ſemin. card. benedict. ana. ʒ. j. ſs. rament. tenuiſs. ligni iudici ℥. ſs. theriacae & mithridati, ana. ʒ. iij. ſyr. de cort. citri q. ſ. miſce: fiat Electuar. liquidum.
                  
                  
                     A water for puſtules and ſpots in the face in Morbo Gallico.
                     
                     Rec. maſtic. olibani, tragagant. ladani, ana. ʒ. j. ſucciAuger. Fe
                              〈…〉
                           . limonum j. ℥. aquae plantag. & roſ. ana. ℥. ij. ſumach, tartari rubri, coralli albi, borac. ana. ʒ. ſs. ſublimati in pulu.

redacti gra. iij. bulliant ſimul in vaſe vitreo lento igne ad quartae partis conſump. poſtea fiat colatura clarificata & aromatizata cum granis aliquot moſci.
                  
                  
                     An Oyntment for the ſame.
                     Rec. albumen vnius oui recēt. agitetur donec ſpumeſcat,
                           
                              •••••
                           . 
                              〈◊〉
                           . deinde adde ſublimati & camphorae ana. gra. iiij. agitentur iterum ſimul, & miſceantur donec vnguenti formam recipiant. Cum quo biduo aut triduo puſtulas omnes & maculas delebis.
                  
                  
                     A water to take away the ſcurfe and ſcales of the skinne and face.
                     Rec. amigdal amararum, farinae fabarū & orobi. ana.
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            F
                              •••
                           . ℥. j. alluminis, boracis, maſtic. olibani, tragagant. ana. ℥. ſs. ſucci limonum. ℥. ij. aquae plantag. roſarum, & liliorum alb. ana. ℥. iij. lact. caprini recent. ℥. iiij. mixta omnia diligenter deſtillentur lento igne, more ſolito.
                  
                  
                     A Powder for the heate of the reynes and bladder, and for vlcers in the vrinary paſſages of Morbus Gallicus.
                     
                     Rec. gra. halicacabi, paria vij. ſem. cucumeris, portulacae▪
                        
                           
                              •
                           ug
                              •
                           r. F
                              ••
                           r. & papaueris alb. ana. ʒ. iij. amyli, rament. 
                           •
                        boris, glicyrrhizae. rad. torment. ana. ʒ. ij. margaritarum orient, coralli albi. & rubri. ana. ℈. j. zacchari ad pondus omnium fiat puluis.
                  
                  
                     A decoction of Guaiacum.
                     Rec. ligni guaiaci. lib. j. ſs. cort. eiuſdem. ℥. iiij. liquirizae.
                           
                              •
                           
                           ▪ 
                           
                              •
                           . ℥. vj. polypodij. ℥. iij. fumariae. m. ij. ſummitatum, lupulorum, m. j. macerentur horas. 24. in lib. 20. aquae

puriſs. deinde in vaſe terreo coquantur ad medietatem prunis luculentis 5. aut 6. horas, & percolentur: poſtea quotidie in aurora illius aquae dabis. ℥. vj. & eſt decoctum forte. Pro decocto tenui, in idem lignum iam coctum infundas aquae. lib. xx. & iterum coquas ad tertias. Sub decoctionis finem addes liquiritiae raſae & contuſae. ℥. ij. paſſull. mund. ℥. iij. Abſoluta decoctione adde cinamomi. ℥. ſs. ad ſaporis iucunditatem, fiatque decoctio.
                  
                  
                     A moſt rare and ſingular drinke for the cure of Morbus Galicus, comming with extreame aches, &c.
                     Rec. 
                           Limaturae guaiaci. ℥. vj.
                           Zarzae parillae. ℥. iiij.
                           ana. ℥. j. ſs.
  
                                 Corticis guaiaci.
                                 Rad. helenij ſicci.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. j.
  
                                 Rad. & ſo. verbaſculi.
                                 Pol. card. bened.
                                 Rad. Iridis viridis.
                                 Sem. aniſi.
                                 Faeniculi.
                                 Petroſelini.
                              
                           
                           Succi verbaſculi. ℥. iiij.
                           Sennae Alex. ℥. iij.
                           Polypodij. q. s.
                           Agarici. Trochiſ. ana. ℥. j. ſs.
                           Hermodact. ℥. ij.
                           ana. ℥. iiij.
  
                                 Colocinth.
                                 Staechados.
                              
                           
                           ana. ʒ. vj.
  
                                 Mechoacan.
                                 Rad. aſari.
                              
                           
                           ana. ℥. ſs.
  
                                 Rad. foen.
                                 Petroſelini.
                                 Glycirrhizae.
                              
                           
                           Vuarum paſſ. rub. ℥. iiij.
                           Ficuum inciſorum num. x.
                        
                     
                     
                        Infundantur omnia in lib. xvj. Ceruiſiae fort▪ lup. per xxiiij. horas coq. ad dimidias ante finem ebull. adde bugloſſ. boraginis, violarum, capill. anthos ana. m. ſs. Et cum ſaccaro albo dulcoretur. Doſ. ℥. viij. vel 6. mane tantum. Rec. Ceruiſiae. fort. lup. lib. xvj. coq. ad lib. viij. cum predict. ingredientibus cui adde bugl. borag. viol. cap. ven. anthos ana. m. ſs. & cum ſaccaro dulcoretur: ſeruetur pro ſecundario potu.
                  
                  
                     A Cerote for Morbo Gallico.
                     
                     Rec. Axungiae porc. non omnino vetuſtae & a membranisBotallus. optimae purgatae lib. j. pingued. gallinae. ℥. iij. ol. de terebint. ℥. ij. ſs. euforbij caſtorei. ana. ʒ. iij. ſtyracis calamitae. ℥. j. ſs. cinabrij. ℥. ij. ſs. cerae. q. s. ad formandum ceratum quod non coinquinet, in fine adde argenti viui optime comminuti. ℥. iij. quae omnia ſimul miſceantur donec frigida ſit tota maſſa, ne quod grauius eſt, in fundum deſcendat.
                  
                  
                     A purging potion for Lucs Venerea.
                     Rec. rad. enulae campanae & hederae. ana. ℥. iiij. anthos, capilli veneris, calaminthae, pulegij, gallitricum, arthemiſiae. ana. m. j. cort. rad. cichorij. ℥. iii. cort. rad. foenic. & apii. ana. ℥. ii. ſennae ℥. i. polipodii. ʒ. x. croci ℈. i. agarici trochiſcat. ℥. i. ſs. bruſe that which is to be bruſed, and boyle all together in tenne pints of ſaire water, vntill a pinte be waſted, then put thereto mellis deſpumati. lib. i. ſacchari. lib. i. ſs. let it boyle together againe vntill two pintes more be waſted: then when it is cold, let it be filtred thrée or foure times, and ſo euery morning take a pretty draught faſting, and ſweate after it, for it is a moſt ſingular drinke if it be vſed in his due time according to arte.
                     
                  
                  
                     An vnguent for Lues Venerea.
                     Rec. axungiae porc. lib. j. ol. chamomillae, anethi, maſticis & laurini. ana. ℥. i. ſtyracis liquidae. ℥. x. rad. enulae

campanae. ℥. iiii. rad. ebuli. ℥. iiii. ſquinanti, ſtaechados, euphorbii. ana. ℈. iiii. vini maluat. lib. i. powder that which is to be powdered, and boyle all together to the conſumption of the wine, ſtrayne it, and adde thereto lithargirij auri. ℥. vii. thuris, maſticis. ana. ʒ. vi. reſinae pini puriſs. ℥. ſs. terebint. venet. ℥. i. argenti viui extinct. cum ſaliua hominis. ℥. iiii. fiat vnguentum.
                  
                  
                     A moſt excellent Cerote for payne in the ioynts, proceeding of Morbus Gallicus, & for vlcers after they be well cleanſed.
                     Rec. Olei Chamomillae, ſpicae & liliorum. ana. ℥. ii. axungiae porci. lib. i. ſeui vitulini. lib. i. euphorbii. 
                           ʒ. v. thuris maſculi. ʒ. x. ol. laurini. ℥. xviii. pingued. viperi. ℥. ii. ſs. rad. enulae campanae, & ebuli ana. ℥. ii. ſquinati, ſtaechados & arthemiſiae. ana. m. i. vini maluat. lib. ii. powder that which is to be powdered, and boyle all together, vnto the conſumption of the Wine, ſtrayne it, and adde therevnto Litargi auri. lib. i. terebint. venet. ℥. ii. cerae albae. ℥. viii. ſtyracis liquidae. ℥. i. ſs. extract. croci. ℥. ſs. boyle theſe together to the forme of a Cerote, and being taken from the fire, and cooling, adde thereto argent. viui extinct. cum ſucco limonum. ℥. iiii. labour all well together, vntill the Mercury be incorporate, then vſe it as arte doth require.
                     
                  
                  
                     An Vnguent for Morbus Gallicus.
                     
                     Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib. j. Butyri recentis ℥. vj. OleiAndreas Matthiol. Note this vnguent for a ſecret of mi
                              •
                           e owne experience. Laurini ℥. iiij. Olei Vulpini, Hypericonis, Terebint. ana. ℥. v Styracis liquidae lotae in aqua Chamomillae, & vino Cretico ℥. ij. Olei Sulphuris Chynic. ℥. ſs. Cynabrij ℥. j. ſs. Argenti viui extincti ℥. vj. Mercurij ſublimati ʒ. j. Cerae albae q. s. Fiat vnguentum.
                  
                  
                     
                     A fume for the drying of Vlcers, and expelling the venimous infection proceeding of Morbus Gallicus.
                     
                     Rec. Cynabrij ℥. iij. Myrrhae, Thuris, ana ℥. j. Aloes hepat.Andr. Matth. Sandarachae, Styracis calamitae, & Beniamin. ana. ʒ. iij. &c. Puluerizentur Craſso modo.
                  
                  
                     A purging Electuary for Morbus Gallicus.
                     
                     Rec. Turpet. albi & Gummoſi, Hermodactilorum, RutaeAndr. Matth. agreſtis ana. ʒ. iij. Diagredij. ℥. ſs. Gariophilorum, Zinziberis, Cinamomi, ana. ʒ. ſs. Piperis gra. ij. Squinanti, Spicae, Epithimi, Salis gemmae, ana ʒ ſs. Santalorum Citrinorum alb. & rubr. Croci, ana ℈. j. Mannae Calabriae ℥. ſs. Rhabarbari ʒ. ij. Zedoariae ℈. ij. Sacchari lib. ſs. Cum aqua Bugloſſae Fiat Electuatium, vel tabulae.
                  
                  
                     An Vnguent to open a Bubo, when it is come to ſuppuration.
                     Rec. Mercurij ſublimati, ʒ. ij. ſs. Vng. Populionis ʒ. iij. OpijNicholaus Maſſa. gra. v. Lapid. haematitis ℈. j. Fiat vnguentum. And ſo applie it to the ſafeſt part when you will: open it long wiſe, but not round, and it will open without any great payne.
                     
                  
                  
                     A fomentation to be vſed in the ripening of a Bubo, proceeding of Morbus Gallicus.
                     
                     Rec. Rad. altheae, & Liliorum, ana ℥. ij. Rad. acori, Helenij,I. P. Sem. lini, Foenugrae. Aniſi, Foeniculi, ana ℥. ſs. Maluae, Violar. Parietarioe, Chamomilloe, Meliloti, Anethi, Origani, Artemiſiae, ana. m. j. Let all theſe be prepared and boyled in water and wine equall portions, ſo much as will ſuffice, and ſo according to arte foment the place greeued both in the morning and before ſupper.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     A Cataplaſme that doth ceaſe paine, and bring a Bubo to ſuppuration.
                     Rec. medullae pomorum coctorum. ℥. iii. foliorum acetoſae coct. ſub cineribus cum butiro recenti ſalis experte. ℥. ii. rad. cynogloſ. crud. ℥. iiii. farinae triticeae in vitellis quatuor ouorum ſolutae. ℥. i. axungiae ſuillae veteris. q. s. Mixe them well together, and make a Cataplaſme accordingly, and apply it to the greeued place.
                     
                  
                  
                     A Cataplaſme for a ſchirrous tumor proceeding of Morbus Gallicus, and is to be vſed after the vnction.
                     Rec. rad. brioniae crudae. ℥. ii. ſigillae mariae crud. ℥. iiii. axungiae porci veteris. ℥. vi. croci ʒ. ſs. fiat Cataplaſma.
                  
                  
                     Pilles to purge in Morbus Gallicus.
                     
                     Maceratur precipitatus in aquis cichoriae, bugloſſae, ſcabioſae poſt 24. horas poſito ſuper prunas vaſe, in vaporem reſoluantur aquae, & ſiccus relinquitur puluis, miſcetur hic cum ſpec. aromat. roſat. & diamarg. frigid. & cum theriaca vel mithridato formentur pillulae magnitudine cicerum.
                  
                  
                     A Gargariſme for vlcers in the mouth and iawes proceeding of Morbus Gallicus.
                     
                     Rec. plantag. & caudae aequi. ana. m. i. roſarum, balauſt. ſummitatū abſinthii, & ſalic. ana. p. i. hordei integri ℥. i. nucum cupreſsi, lenticulorum, ſumach. ana. ʒ. iii. decoquantur ſufficienter in aquae partibus x. & vna aceti, & in colatura diſſolue mel. roſ. vini granat. & diamori. ana. ℥. i. fiat gargariſmus.
                  
                  
                     A Cliſter drawing back the matter, that cauſeth paine in the head, in Morbus Gallicus.
                     
                     Rec. betae, altheae, mercurial. rutae, fol. lauri, cataputiae, vrticae ana. m. i. rad. polipodii. ℥. i. cort. geniſtae & ſem. cartami contuſi. ana. ℥. ſs. ſ
                           •
                        orum ſtaechados & chamomillae. ana. p. i. fiat decoctio & in colatura diſſolue ſucc.

rad. yreos per reſidentiā depurati. ℥. i. dia catholici, hierae pi
                           •
                        rae, diaphenic. ana. ℥. ſs. ol. rutac. de caſtor. & anethi ana. ℥. j. mellis anthoſati. ʒ. x. ſalis com. ʒ. ij. fiat cliſter.
                  
                  
                     Pilles for Alopecia ex Morbo Gallico.
                     
                     Rec. rhabarbari, agarici. ana. ʒ. ij. aloes. ℥. j. argent. viuiRondolet. extincti in ſucco roſar. ʒ. iij. cinamomi, ambrae, ana. ℈. j. myrrhae, maſticis. ana. ʒ. j. cum terebint. excipiantur & formentur pill. 8. pro ʒ. j. capiat pro prima vice. ℈. j. deinde. ʒ. ſs. poſtremo. ℈. i. pro diuitibus adde limaturae auri aut pannorum auri. ℈. iiij.
                  
                  
                     A ſweete water to cicatrize vlcers, and to heale the itch.
                     Rec. aquae roſar. lib. ij. vini albi. lib. ij. vrinae pueri. lib. j.I. B. malecorij. ℥. iij. balauſtij. ℥. ij. aluminis vſti. ℥. iiij. vitri combuſti. ℥. ij. mercurij ſublimati. ʒ. iiij. maſtic. ℥. vj. ligni aloes. ʒ. iiij. cort. guaiaci. ℥. iiij. caſsiae ligneae ℥. ij. mellis. lib. ſs. ſanguinis draconis. ℥. ſs. miſce, & ad artem diſtillentur, dein iterum dicta aqua diſtilletur, addendo moſci. ℥. ſs.
                  
                  
                     A moſt excellent oyntment for the itch and ſcabbes.
                     Rec. olibani. ʒ. iii. ol. laurini. ℥. i. falis groſsi. ʒ. vij. axungiaeI. B. porcinae, ℥. j. ſs. argent. viui extincti. ʒ. iij. cerae albae. ʒ. ii. ſs. miſce, fiat vnguent. quo vngantur manus & pedes veſperi contra ignem luculentum donec cutem intrauit totum.
                  
                  
                     A Collirium for vlcers of the yard of Morbus Gallicus.
                     
                     Rec. vini albi. lib. i. aquae roſarum, & plantag. ana. lib. ii.Ambroſius P
                              •••
                           us. 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         auripigmēti. ʒ. ii. virid. aeris. ʒ. i. aloes, myrrhae. ana. ℈. ii. terantur ſubtiliſsime, & fiat collirium.
                  
                  
                     An Iniection drying vlcers, and cicatrizing without payne.
                     Rec. aquae fabrorum lib. ſs. nuc. cupreſsi, gallarum, cort.Ambroſ. P
                              •••
                           us. 558 granat. ana. ʒ. i. ſs. alluminis rochae, ʒ. ſs. bulliant omnia ſimul, ſecundum artem, fiat iniectio.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  
                     
                        GOod Reader, in viewing certaine olde Bookes of Chirurgerie, I happened to light vpon this written coppie, and peruſing it thoroughly, I thought it a worke verie profitable and neceſſarie for all godly profeſſors of our Arte: for heere they ſhall finde in breefe, certayne iudgements and aphoriſmes, of moſt imperfections, which dayly aſſaulteth mans bodie, not onely in the exterior, but alſo in the interior partes: which diſeaſes, or griefes, are eaſie to be found, becauſe it goeth alphabetically, firſt in latin, and then in engliſh. It is a worke, (as I iudge) gathered out of diuers Authors, as well of Phyſick, as of Chirurgerie, by ſome that was willing to profit his countrey and common wealth. A collection in mine opinion woorthy the publiſhing and ſetting foorth, although I knowe it will not pleaſe the humors of ſome captious heads, that will neyther do good themſelues, nor ſuffer others: as I my ſelfe, and other good men, haue tasted of their ſclanderous toongs, and vnmannerly backbiting taunts. But thou (good Reader) whatſoeuer thou art, if thou loueſt thy
                     
                     countrey and common wealth, or doſt take pleaſure in our ſo worthy an Arte, hauing a care to diſcharge thy calling with a good conſcience, then (I ſay) thou wilt not onely finde great profit and pleaſure thy ſelfe, by carying theſe ſmall ſentences in memorie, but alſo thou wilt be thankefull to any that ſhall take paynes in ſo woorthye a thing.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  De Apoſtematibus.
                  
                     Apoſtematis tempora quatuor. The foure times of Apoſtemes.
                     
                        1. Beginnning. 2. Augmentation. 3. State. 4. Declination.
                     
                     
                        INitium cognoſcitur ex humorumInitium Apoſtematis. in aliqua parte corporis coaceruatione.
                     
                        The beginning is knowne by the gathering of humors in any part of the bodie.
                     
                     Augmentum ex doloris & tumoris incremento.
                     
                        The augmentation is knowne by the encreaſe of payne andAugmentum. ſwelling.
                     
                     Status, quoniam dolor neque accidentia, creſcunt, aut diminuunt,Status. ſed quaſi in centro ſiſtunt.
                     
                        The ſtate is knowne, when as neither the paine nor accidents do encreaſe or diminiſh, but do ſtand as it were in a ſtay.
                     
                     Declinatio fit per accidentium & doloris decrementum.Declinatio.
                     
                     
                        The declination is knowne by the diminiſhing of the payne and accidents.
                     
                     Apoſtemata quatuor intentionibus curantur, ſcilicet, reſolutione,Intentiones 4. in apoſtematibus curandis. ſuppuratione, putrefactione & induratione.
                     
                        
                        Impoſtumes are cured by foure intentions, viz. by reſolution▪ ſuppuration, putrifying and hardning.
                     
                     Apoſtemata quae non cito ad ſuppurationem vel declinationemAd ſuppurationem vel declinationem 
                              ••
                           rde prou
                              •
                           
                           
                           
                              •
                           entia. Rubri coloris. perueniunt, curatu ſunt difficilia.
                     
                        Impoſtumes that come not ſpeedily either to ſuppuration or declination, are hard to be cured.
                     
                     Rubro colore Apoſtemata cum prominentioris partis mollitie citiſsimè curantur.
                     
                        Impoſtumes that are red in colour, with ſoftneſſe in the vpper parts, are eaſie to be cured.
                     
                     Apoſtemata ad ſuppurationem iam peruenta celeri graduAd ſuppurationem iam peruenta. curanda ſunt.
                     
                        Impoſtumes that are come to ſuppuration, muſt ſpeedily bee cured.
                     
                     Apoſtema ſi ſuppurationem recuſat, neque declinare omninoSuppurationem recuſan
                           
                              ••
                           . concedet, malum.
                     
                        Impoſtumes that come not ſpeedily to ſuppuration or declination, are euill.
                     
                     Apoſtematis augmento▪ vtere mollificantibus.In augment
                              •
                            vtenda.
                     
                     
                        In the augmentation of Impoſtumes, vſe mollificatiues.
                     
                     Apoſtemata pulſationem habet dum humores vertunturPulſationem habentia. in putrefactionem, & ſic fit in arterijs.
                     
                        Impoſtumes doe beate whileſt the humors doe turne to putrifaction, and ſo it chaunceth in the arteries.
                     
                     Apoſtematis corruptio ex abundantia materiae vel eiuſdemApoſtematis corruptio. materiae malignitate, aut prauitate prouenit.
                     
                        The corruption of Impoſtumes commeth by aboundance of matter, or by the malignitie, or vileneſſe thereof.
                     
                     Apoſtematum quaedam terminantur per inſenſibilem reſolutionem,Apoſtematum Terminatio. & hoc eſt valde bonum, & quaedam per virulentiam, & hoc eſt peſsimum, & ſi fuerint in locis ex directo cordis, aut prope, mortale eſt.
                     
                        Some Impoſtumes ende by inſenſible reſolution, which is very good, and ſome turne to a poyſoned qualitie, which is
                        
                        very euill, and if thoſe bee in places agaynſt the heart, or neere vnto it, it is deadly.
                     
                     Apoſtematum quaedam ſunt de materia calida, & terminanturApoſtematum materia in die 20. & quaedam de materia frigida, & terminantur in 40. die.
                     
                        There be ſome Impoſtumes which come of hote matter, and they are ended in xx. daies, and ſome there bee which proceede of colde, and are ended in xl. daies.
                     
                     Apoſtematum quaedam ſunt cum faebribus continuis,Apoſtematum febre. & ſi expuant ſaniem ante 7. diem, impoſsibile eſt quod euadant: quoniam quum tam cito natura generat ſaniem, natura nó inuenit omnino viam, vnde eam expellat: & ſi virtus eſt debilis cito morietur: ſi multa bona ſigna apparent (dicit Hyppocr.) vita pollicetur.
                     
                        Some Impoſtumes haue continuall feuers, and if they ſpit matter before the 7. day, it is vnpoſſible for them to eſcape, becauſe when nature ſo ſpeedily engendreth matter, ſhe findeth not ſufficient way to expell it: And if the partie bee weake, he dyeth ſpeedily: but if many good ſignes appeare (ſaith Hyppocrates) he may liue.
                     
                     Omne apoſtema de materia aduſta, ſicut Anthrax, CarbunculusDe materia aduſta. & formica, peſsimum eſt & mortale, praeſertim cum febre.
                     
                        Euery Impoſtume comming of burnt matter, as Anthrax, Carbuncle & Formica, is euill and deadly, eſpecially if it come with a Feuer.
                     
                     In omni Apoſtemate eſt triplex morbus, viz. MorbusApoſtematum morbi. conſimilis, ratione malae complexionis; Morbus officialis, ratione tumoris; & morbus communis, ratione ſolutionis continuitatis.
                     
                        In euery Apoſtume is a threefold diſeaſe, viz. Morbus conſimilis; by reaſon of his euill complexion, Morbus officialis; by reaſon of the ſwelling and Morbus communis, by reaſon of the ſolution of Continuitie.
                     
                     
                        Tribus modis accidit membrorum corruptio, primo,Me
                              •
                           brorum 
                              〈…〉
                           . ex vene
                           •
                        o calido vel frigido vnde complexio partis naturalis corrumpitur, ſecundo, quando ſpiritus naturales in membro reſidere prohibentur: Poſtremò, per venenoſorum medicamentorum adminiſtrationem, vt Realgar, Arſenicum, &c:
                     
                        Corruption of the members chaunceth three maner of waies, firſt of venime either hote or colde, wherevpon the naturall complexion of the part is corrupted: ſecondly, when the naturall ſpirites cannot bee ſuffered to ſettle in the member: thirdly, by the adminiſtration of venimous medicines, as Realgar, Arſenick, &c.
                     In declinatione ac fine Apoſthematum, deſiccantia frigida,In declinatione
                              ••
                            
                           
                              •
                           ine quae fug
                              •
                           enda. & repercutientia materiam in membro claudunt, vt inde malam qualitatem indueret & omnem putrefactionem contraheret.
                     
                        In the declination and ende of Impoſtumes, colde deſiccatiues and repercuſſiues doe ſhut the matter in the member, whereby it obtayneth an euill qualitie, and draweth to all kinde of corruption.
                     
                     Materiam repercutientia indurabunt qua longiori tractatuRepercutiētia. morabit.
                     
                        Repercuſſiues doe harden the matter, and make it continue longer in cure.
                     
                     Mollificantia & reſoluentia tam augmentatione quàmIn augmento & ſtatu res vtendae. ſtatu conueniunt.
                     
                        Mallificatiues and reſolutiues are conuenient, aſwell in the augmentation, as the ſtate.
                     
                     Materia fluctuante pernitiociſsima ſunt repercutientia.Materi
                              •
                            fluctuante.
                     
                     
                        If the matter bee flowing, then repercuſſiues are moſt pernitious.
                     
                     Cerebri Apoſtema, Lethargum, Apoplexiam, & mortemCerebri Apo
                           
                              •
                           tema. aſciſcit.
                     
                        Impoſtume in the brayne, brings Lethargie, Apoplexy, and death.
                     
                     
                        Pulmonum apoſtema Vlcera, Fiſtulas, inortemqne excitat.
                           
                              〈…〉
                            Apoſtema.
                     
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the Lungs, bring Ulcers, Fiſtulaes and death.
                     
                     In corde congeſtum ſyncopem, mortém
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         adfert.Cordis Apoſt.
                     
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the heart bring ſowning and death.
                     
                     In hepate, putrefactionem humorum, digeſtionis debilitatem,
                           
                              •••••
                            Apoſt. & mali moris vlcera.
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the liuer bringeth corruption of the humors, weakneſſe of digeſtion, and vlcers of hard curation.
                     
                     Fluxus ventris in Apoſtemate hepatis, malum.Fluxus 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              ••
                           ium.
                     
                     
                        In Apoſtumes of the liuer, fluxe of the bellie is euill.
                     
                     Omne apoſtema hepatis generat opilationem, & opilatioApoſtema liepatis 
                              〈…〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           . indigeſtionem, indigeſtio aquoſitatem, & aquoſitas Hydrop
                           •
                        ſim, quare omne apoſtema hepatis eſt cauſa hydropis.
                     
                        Euery Apoſtume in the Liuer cauſeth ſtoppings, and ſtoppings cauſeth want of digeſtion: want of digeſtion, watriſhnes: and watriſhnes the dropſie. Therfore euery Impoſtume in the Liuer, cauſeth the dropfie.
                     
                     In Renibus elongatum morbum mortemque.Renum Apoſtem.
                     
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the Kidneis, brings a long diſeaſe, & death.
                     
                     Inteſtinis gracilibus mortem.Inteſtinis gracilibus.
                     
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the ſmall guttes bring death.
                     
                     Graues affectus mortémque in veſica.Veſicae Apoſt.
                     
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the Bladder, bring greeuous accidents and death.
                     
                     Quae in collo incidunt Cancros, Fiſtulas, vlceráque aegraeColli Apoſt. ſanationis pariunt.
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the necke, bring Cankers, Fiſtulaes, and vlcers of hard curation.
                     
                     In oculis, viſus defectus, & niſi curata citiſsime ſint, obcaecationem.In oculis Apoſt.
                     
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the eyes, bring decay of fight and blindneſſe,
                        
                        if they be not ſpeedily cured.
                     
                     In ano apoſtema Terminat in fiſtulam, vel vlcus difficilisIn Ano. curationis.
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the fundament bringeth Fiſtulaes, or vlcers of hard curation.
                     
                     Apoſtemata virgae ex continua calidorum humorum influxioneVirgae Apoſt. proueniunt, quae ſi cum vlceratione contingant rariſsimè membrum ad integram ſanitatem reducitur.
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the yard doe come by the continuall flowing of hote humors: which if they chaunce with vlceration, the member is hardly or neuer brought to his naturall ſoundneſſe.
                     
                     Apoſtemata in pectore ſenum difficillime ſanantur.In pectore ſenum.
                     
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the breaſts of olde perſons are hard to be cured.
                     
                     Circa iuncturam apoſtema, circumiacentium partiumCirca iuacturam. actiones mancas quodammodo reddit.
                     
                        Impoſtumes about any ioynt do in a ſort maime the actions of the parts lying round about.
                     
                     In ſpina, totius corporis debilitatem, propter neruorumIn ſpina. inde emanantium, copiam.
                     
                        Apoſtumes in the backe bone, bring debilitie to the whole bodie, by reaſon of the plentie of nerues thence ariſing.
                     
                     Circa linguae radices mortem, vel peſsima accidentia.Circa linguae radices.
                     
                     
                        Impoſtumes about the rootes of the tongue bring death, or very euill accidents.
                     
                     Facilis ſunt curationis in carnoſa parte concitata.Pa
                              •
                           tibus carnoſis.
                     
                     
                        Impoſtumes in any fleſhie part are eaſie to be cured.
                     
                     Emunctorijs quae incidunt, citiſsime curanda veniunt.Emunctorijs.
                     
                     
                        Impoſtumes in the emunctorie places, muſt bee ſpeedily cured.
                     
                     Promotum apoſtema ex venenoſa materia, omni cura ſtatimA venenoſi 
                              〈…〉
                           . foris eſt extrahendum.
                     
                        
                        Impoſtumes that come of venimous matter, muſt be ſpeedily drawne to the outward parts.
                     
                     Durae matris apoſtemata ex vini potione, aeris mutatione,I
                              〈…〉
                           . vel alicuius oſsis punctione proueniunt.
                     
                        Impoſtumes in dura mater do chaunce by drinking of wine, chaunging of ayre, or the pricking of ſome bone.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Septem attendenda in apertione iam ſuppurati abſceſſus. Seauen things to be noted in the opening of ripe Impoſtumes.
                     1 PRimo, vt ſectio fiat eo loco quo materia continetur. Firſt, that inciſion bee made in that place wherein the matter is conteyned.
                     
                     2 Secundo, vt fiat in loco inferiori, quo melius purulenta illa colluuies euacuari poſsit.
                     
                        Secondly, that inciſion bee made in the lower part, whereby that venimous matter may the better be euacuated.
                     
                     3 Tertio vt fiat ſecundum rugas & proceſſum muſculorum.
                     
                        Thirdly, that it bee made long wiſe after the lying of the fibres and muſcles.
                     
                     4 Quarto, vt vitentur nerui, venae & arteriae quoad fieri poteſt.
                     
                        Fourthly, that in the making of inciſion, the ſinewes, veynes and arteries be eſchued as much as may be.
                     
                     5 Quinto, vt non tota materia ſemel atque affatim educatur, praeſertim in magnis abſceſsibus, ne ſcilicet ex nimia ſubitá
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         inanitione, & ſpirituum reſolutione virtutis ſequatur proſtratio.
                     
                        Fiftly, that the matter be not all at once or wholly taken out, eſpecially in great Impoſtumes, leaſt by ouermuch and ſodaine emptying and reſoluing of the ſpirites, there followe
                        
                        vtter weakneſſe and throwing downe of the faculties.
                     
                     6 Sextò, vt blandius & minimo quam fieri poteſt dolore locus tractetur.
                     
                        Sixt
                              •
                           y, that the place bee handled gently, and with as little payne as may be.
                     
                     7 Septimò, vt facta apertione locus detergatur, carne impleatur, & ad cicatricem, more aliorum vlcerum perducatur.
                     
                        Seauenthly, that after inciſion is made, the place bee mundified, filled with fleſh, and ſkinned after the maner of other vicers.
                     
                     Apoſtema in via maturationis eſſe, poteſtis iudicare, cumApoſtematis in via matu
                              •
                           a 
                              〈…〉
                           . e
                              •••
                            cog
                           
                              〈…〉
                           . quaedam eſt leuitas circa partem moleſtam cum doloris mitigatione.
                     
                        You may iudge an Impoſtume to be in the way of ripening, when there is felt a certaine lightneſſe about the affected part, with aſſwaging of the payne.
                     
                     Reſolutiuorum applicatio calidis apoſtematibus, & inApoſtematibus cal
                              ••
                           is, reſolu
                              ••
                           tia tug
                              •
                           enda ſunt. augmentatione facit incrementum corruptionis: talia namque partes ſubtiles reſoluunt, ſed quae greſſa eſt ſinunt in membro putreſcere.
                     
                        Reſolutiues applied to hote Impoſtumes, and in the augmentation, doe encreaſe the corruption: for they reſolue the ſubrill parts, but ſuffer the 
                              •
                           woſſe matter to pu
                              •
                           rifie in the member.
                     
                     Repercutientia in locis emunctorijs ſunt valde periculoſa,Repercutientia locis emü c
                              •••
                           is nō 
                           
                              •
                           unt adiubenda. vel ſi aliqua venenoſitas in loco ineſt.
                     
                        Repercuſſiues in the emunctorie places are dangerous, eſpecially if there be any venome in the place.
                     
                     Immatura repercutientium applicatione putredo ſapeImma
                              •
                           ura rep
                              ••••
                           t 
                              〈…〉
                           . gen▪ ratur.
                     
                        By the mordinate application of repercuſſiues, corruption is oftentimes engendred.
                     
                     Frigida & humida maturantia calidis apoſtematibus & a

chole
                           •
                        a cum ſanguine pronenientibus debent applicari.Apoſtematibus calidis qu
                              •
                            vtenda ſunt.
                     
                     
                        Colde and moyſt maturatiues ought to be applyed to hote impoſtumes, thoſe that come of choller and bloud.
                     
                     Sed calida & humida calidis adhibita humores in congeriem
                           
                              •
                           ugienda. coaceru
                           •
                        t, vnde dolor confeſtim multiplicatur.
                     
                        But hate and moyſt maturatiues to hote impoſtumes, gathereth together the humors vpon heapes, wherevppon fo
                              ••
                           h with the payne is increaſed.
                     
                     Alopecia eſt mutatio crinium in candorem quum crinesAlopecia. veretes radicitus excidunt.
                     Alopecia is a changing of the heare into whiteneſſe, when the old heares do fall off by the rootes.
                     
                     Alopecia quae a lepra prouenit raro aut nunquam curationemAlopecia a lepra. admittit.
                     Alopecia comming of a Leproſie, is hard, or neuer cured.
                     
                     Atra bilis veluti niger ſanguis ſi exierit in debilitatis hominibus, mortale.
                     
                        Melancholy, or like vnto black bloud, if it auoide from weake perſons, is deadly.
                     
                     Angina ad pulmonem ſ
                           •
                        pe tranſit, tum intra ſeptem dies mors ſequitur.
                     
                        The ſqumancy goeth often to the lungs, and death enſueth within ſeauen dayes.
                     
                     Aetas, tempus, locus, victus, conſuetudo mutat morbos.
                     
                        Age, tune, place, diet and 
                              •
                           uſtome, alter diſeaſes.
                     
                     Atra bile orti tumores ſemper doloroſi.
                     
                        Tumors comming of melancholy, are alwayes paynefull.
                     
                     Aegritudinum prauarum nolite onus ſuſcipere ne mali medici nomen ſubeatis.
                     
                        Take no deſperate cure in hand, leaſt thou beare the name of an euill Phyſition.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     B.
                     BRonchocele eſt tumor iuxta fauces, differens ab eoBronchocele. quod in ſcroto naſcitur.
                     Bronchocele is a ſwelling beſide the iawes, differing from that which ſpringeth in the codde.
                     
                     Bronchocele ſi ineſt a natura non curatur.
                     
                        If this ſwelling come by nature, it is vncurable.
                     
                     Si non ineſt a natura curatur difficillime.
                     
                        If it come not by nature, it is hardly cured.
                     
                     
                        De brachiorum vulneribus.
                        AN fieri poſit indicat pars affecta potiſsimum, ſic vulnerata.
                        
                           The affected parte doth chiefly ſhewe whether▪ it can be healed.
                        
                        Plicaturae cubiti ſunt periculoſa propter venas magnas.
                        
                           Woundes in the bought of the arme are dangerous, becauſe of the great veynes.
                        
                        Cubiti ſuſpecti propter ſpaſmum & inflamationes.
                        
                           Woundes are to be ſuſpected in the Cubite, becauſe of the Crampe and inflamation.
                        
                        Ex bile flaua & ſanguine nati tumores, nunquam dolore deſtituuntur.
                        
                           Tumors of yellow choller and bloud, are euer full of paine.
                        
                        Cancer in pectore vel collo aegrè ve
                              •
                            nunquam curatur.Cancer in pectore vel collo.
                        
                        
                           A Canker in the breaſt or necke is hardly or neuer cured.
                        
                        Cancro vel veteribus vlceribus immundo corpore incidentibusAcuta medicamina. acuta medicamina adhibita ſemper nociua.
                        
                           Sharpe medecines applyed to Canckers or old vlcers in an vncleane bodie, do alwayes hurt.
                        
                        Cancer qui in propatulo graſſatur non facile ſaluti conſentit.Cancer qui in propatulo graſſatur.
                        
                        
                           A Canker that eateth outwardly, is hardly cured.
                        
                        
                           Cancer non vlceratus atque iam confirmatus curationemCancer non vlceratus. non admittit, niſi radicitus extirpetur, aut per ſectionem, aut per vſtionem.
                        
                           A Cancer not vlcerated, and thorougly confirmed, can not be cured, except it be wholy remoued either by inciſion, or cauterization.
                        
                        Cancer vlceratus qui eſt in venis, neruis & oſsibus difficulterCancer vlceratus. curatur.
                        
                           An vlcerated Canker in the veynes, ſinewes and bones, is hardly cured.
                        
                        Cancer antiquatus incurabilis exiſtit.Cancer anti quatus.
                        
                        
                           An old Canker is vncurable.
                        
                        In canis rabioſi morſu peſsimum eſt ſignum & mortaleCanis rabidi morſus. permixtio rationis & abhominatio aquae mundae.
                        
                           In the biting of a madde dogge, it is an euill and deadly ſigne to raue and abhorre fayre water.
                        
                        Canis rabidi morſus quadraginta dierum ſpatio recluſus foret.
                        
                           The biting of a madde dogge ſhould be kept open the ſpace of fortie dayes.
                        
                        Carbunculus minus lethalis eſt primùm ruber, deindeCarbunc
                                 •
                              l
                                 •
                              s. citrinus apparēs, qui vero liueſcit aut nigricatiugular.
                        
                           That Carbuncle is leſſe deadly, which is firſt redde, and after yellow, but that which w
                                 •
                              xeth ſwarty or blacke, is paſt all helpe.
                        
                        Calida ſuppurationem faciunt, cutem emolliunt, extenuant,Calid
                                 •
                              . dolorem leniunt in ſpaſmo, diſtentione & oſſibus fractis.
                        
                           Hote things do ripen, mollifie the ſkinne, extenuate, and aſſwage payne in crampes, crickes, and broken bones.
                        
                        Calor gignit carnis effaeminationem, neruorum incontinētiam,Calor. mentis ſtuporem, h
                              •
                           morragiam, lipothimiam.
                        
                           Heate cauſeth neſhneſſe of the fleſh, ſhaking and trembling of
                           
                           the ſinewes, dumpiſhnes of the minde, iſſue of bloud, and ſounding.
                        
                        Carnis ſupercreſcentis cauſa eſt humiditas, & mala abſtertio.
                        
                           The cauſe of ſuperfluous or prowde fleſh, is too much moyſture, and want of mundification.
                        
                        Corpora exercitata, morbis minus obnoxia eſſe ſolent.
                        
                           Thoſe bodies yt are exerciſed, are leaſt annoyes with diſeaſes.
                        
                        Ex intemperie calida citius quam ex frigida aegri intereunt, ob ignis in agendo celerem efficaciam.
                        
                           Men dye of a hoate diſtemperature ſooner then of a colde, becauſe of the ſwift force of fire in working.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     D.
                     DIſlocatio groſsis, pinguibus, & teneris, contingen
                           •
                        
                        Diſlocatio in groſsis, pinguibus & teneris corporibus. corporibus aegrè ſanatur.
                     
                        Diſlocations in groſſe, fat, and tender bodies, are hard to be cured.
                     
                     Iuncta cum apoſtemate diſlocatio difficulter curatur.Diſlocatio cum apoſtemate▪ Diſlocatio cum fractura.
                     
                     
                        A diſlocation with an impoſtume is hard to be cured.
                     
                     Diſlocatio cum adherente fractura difficulter curatur.
                     
                        A Diſlocation with a fracture is hardly cured.
                     
                     Si coxa excidit, mucores ibi naſcuntur, crus contabeſcitCoxae diſlocatio. & claudicat.
                     
                        If the hippe be diſlocated, there gathereth in the place watr
                              •
                           ſh matter, and the thigh withereth away, and halteth.
                     
                     Quaedam iuncturae ſunt facilis diſlocationis vt genu.Iuncturarum diſlocatio. quaedam difficilis vt digitorum & cubiti: quaedam medio modo, vt coxae & ſcapulae.
                     
                        Some ioynts are eaſy to be diſlocated, as the knée: ſome hard, as the fingers and cubite, and ſome indifferent, as the hippe, and ſhoulderblades.
                     
                     Quae facilis ſunt diſlocationis faciliter reſtaurantur: quae difficilis difficulter: quae medio modo, mediocriter.
                     
                        
                        Thoſe ioynts which are eaſie to be diſlocated, are eaſie to b
                              •
                           e reſtored▪ thoſe which are hard, hardly: and thoſe which are indifferent, indifferently.
                     
                     Diſlocatio illa eſt deterior quae eſt cum ligamenti fractura,D
                              •••
                           ocatio cum ligam
                              ••
                           
                           ti 
                              〈…〉
                           . qua os cum oſse coniungitur & alligatur, & vt plurimum fit in capite anchae & ſpatulae.
                     
                        That diſlocation is the worſt which commeth with the fracture of a ligament, whereby one bone ioyneth with another, and for the moſt part it chaunceth in the head of the ſhoulder blade and hippe.
                     
                     Quando iunctura ad omnes partes poſitionis ſine difficultateIunctura non diſlocata neque ſeparata eſſe cognoſcitur. mouetur, non eſt diſlocata, neque ſeparata.
                     
                        When the ioynt without difficultie may be mo
                              •
                           ed euery way, it is neither diſlocated nor halfe put forth.
                     
                     Mandibula quando ad interiora diſlocatur, os remanetMandibulae diſlocatio ad interiora. apertum: & dentes inferioris mandibulae poſteriores ſunt dentibus mandibulae ſuperioris.
                     
                        When the iawe is diſlocated inwardly, the mouth remaineth open, and the teeth of the nether iawe ſtand more backward than they of the vpper.
                     
                     Quando autem ad exteriora diſlocatur, clauditur os, & a
                        
                           •••
                        iriAd exteriora. no
                           •
                         poteſt: apparet imminentia mandibulae ad extra, & priuatur loquela.
                     
                        But when it is diſlocated outwardly, the mouth is ſhut and cannot bee opened, and there appeareth a part of the 
                              •
                           awe ſticking out, and ſpeach is taken away.
                     
                     Diſlocatio humeri quandoque fit ad inferiora, & 
                           •
                        entiturDiſlocatio 
                              •
                           
                           ▪ me
                              •
                           i. ſub axillo in tactu capitis▪ vert
                           •
                        b
                           •
                        i, ac ſi eſſet ouum, & in parte ſuperiori concauitas que tactu facile comprehenditur.
                     
                        The ſhoulder ſometime is diſlocated towards the inferiour part thereof, which may be 
                              〈◊〉
                            vnder the ar
                              •
                           ehole, as if it were an Egge, and in the vpper part is a cauitie, which by touching is eaſely perceiued.
                     
                     
                        Ancha, ſi diſlocatur ad anteriora, tunc pes eſt longior, &Anchae diſlocatio ad ante
                           
                              •
                           iora. & non eſt poſsibile plicare pedem, niſi cum dolore, & non poteſt ambulare niſi ſuper calcaneum, & multoties apoſtematur inguen, & retinetur vrina.
                     
                        If the hippe be diſlocated towards the forepart, then the foote is longer, and it is not poſſible to bowe the foote without paine, and the partie cannot goe about vpon the heele, and oftimes the flancke doth impoſtumate, and the vrine ſtoppeth.
                     
                     Quando fit diſlocatio ad interiora tunc pes diſlocatusAd interiora. redditur longior, quoad viſum, altero, & genu eminentius, & non poteſt duplicare pedem ſuum apud inguen inflatum & apoſtematum, quoniam caput coxae iam introiuit in ipſum.
                     
                        When the hippe is diſlocated inwardly, then the legge on that ſide ſeemeth longer than the other, and the knee more eminent, and he cannot double his legge to his flancke being puffed vp and impoſtumated, becauſe the head of the hippe hath entred into it.
                     
                     Si diſlocatur ad exteriora, abbreuiatur pes, apparet in inguineAd exteriora. profunditas & in eius oppoſito eminentia, inflatio in poſterioribus, & gen
                           •
                         ad interiora ſubuerſum.
                     
                        If the hippe bee diſlocated onewardly, the foote is ſhortned, there appeareth in the flancke a hollowneſſe, and ouer againſt it a part ſtanding out, a ſwelling in the hinder parts, and the knēe bowing inwards.
                     
                     Cubitus diſlocatus retrorſum diſtendi minime poteſt, intror
                           •
                        umCubi
                              •
                           i diſlocatio introrſ
                              ••
                           . pl
                           •
                        cari nequit.
                     
                        If the cubite be diſlocated backwards, it cannot bee ſtretched out: if inward, it cannot be bowed.
                     
                     Dextrorſum vero aut ſiniſtrorſum diſlocatum, forma iuncturaeDextrorſum a
                              ••
                            ſiniſtrorſum. & modus poſsibilitatis motionis oſtendit.
                     
                        But if the cubite bee diſlocated either to the right or left ſide, that is eaſely knowne by the forme of the ioynt, and the poſſibilitie of the motion.
                     
                     
                        Si pulſus brachij in cubito diſlocati tangatur, tangenti venaPulſus b
                              •
                           achij. diuiſa ſentitur.
                     
                        If you touch the pulſe of the arme that is diſlocated in the cubite, it ſeemeth as though it were a veyne diuided.
                     
                     Manus diſlocatus introrſum, digitos flectere nequit, cumManus di
                              ••
                           oc
                              •
                           tu
                              •
                            int
                              •
                           orſum & e
                              •
                           t
                              •
                           o
                              •
                           
                           ſ
                              •
                           m. extrorſum diſlocatur, digitos non poteſt extendere.
                     
                        When the hande is diſlocated inwardly, the fingers cannot bowe, when it is diſlocated outwardly the fingers cannot extend.
                     
                     Mandibuloe diſlocatio ſi celeriter ſuppeditetur & ſymptomatibusMandibuloe diſlocatio. deſtituatur, in duodecim diebus curatur, ſed ſi ſymptomatibus coniuncta ſit, periculoſa fit.
                     
                        A diſlocation in the iawe is fully cured in twelue daies, if it be taken ſpeedily in hand and voyde of accidents: but if any accidents doe happen, it is daungerous.
                     
                     Vertebrae ſi diſlocantur, ſemper periculoſum, ſaepe lethaleVertebr
                              •
                           r
                              •
                           m diſlocatio. eſt.
                     
                        A diſlocation in any of the vertebres, is alwaies and for the moſt part deadly.
                     
                     Humeri diſlocatio in xx. diebus reſtauratur.Humeri diſlocatio.
                     
                     
                        A diſlocation in the ſhoulder bones is reſtored in xx. daies.
                     
                     Digiti diſlocati in xij. diebus curantur.Digiti diſlocatio.
                     
                     
                        A diſlocation in the fingers is reſtored in xii. daies.
                     
                     Coxa diſlocata in xxx. diebus reſtituitur.Coxa diſlocata.
                     
                     
                        Diſlocations in the hippe are reſtored in xxx. daies.
                     
                     In calce, tarſo, & pedum digitis, diſlocatio non penitusIn calce tarſo & pedum digitis diſlocatio. donec xl. dies praetereant, firmatur.
                     
                        A diſlocation in the heele, inſteppe and toes, is not reſtored in ſuch ſorte as the patient may goe vpon it, vntill xl. daies be ended.
                     
                     Dolor à quatuor cauſis mouetur, viz. ab inciſione, eroſioneDolor. membri, alicuius fractura, & diſtentione; vt in apoſtemate.
                     
                        The cauſes of paine are foure, as inciſion, corroſion, breaking
                        
                        of ſome member, and diſtention as by impoſtumation.
                     
                  
                  
                     E
                     AB eryſipelate putredo & ſuppuratio malum.Putredo aut ſuppuratio ab eryſipelate.
                     
                     
                        Putrefaction and ſuppuration comming of Eryſipelas, is euill.
                     
                     Ab exterioribus ſi vertitur ad interiora malum, ab interioribus autem ad exteriora, bonum.
                     
                        If Eryſipelas doe goe from the outer to the inner parts, it is euill, but contrariwiſe it is good.
                     
                     Eryſipelas exquiſitum raro terminatur ſuppuratione, ſedEryſipelas exquiſitum. magna ex parte inſenſibili tranſpiratione, ſeu reſolutione.
                     
                        A perfect Eryſipilas is ſeldome cured by ſuppuration, but for the moſt parts by inſenſible tranſpiration, and reſolution.
                     
                     Eryſipelata circa caput, curatu ſunt difficillima, ad
                           •
                        oqueEryſipelas circa caput. periculoſa eſſe ſolent; vt niſi efficax conſequatur auxilium, interdum affectos ſtrangulent.
                     Eryſipelas about the head is hard to be cured, and it is ſo daū
                           gerous, that if it bee not ſpeedily helped with moſt excellent medicines, it ſometime ch
                              •
                           keth the patient.
                     
                     Symptoma pra
                           ••
                        m eſt, ſi oſſe nudato ca
                           •
                        o circu
                           •
                        ſtans ab Eryſipelate occupari videatur.
                     
                        The bone being bare, if Eryſipilas be in the fleſh round about, it is a very euill accident.
                     
                     In curatione eryſepelatis quatuor ſcopis eſt vtendum.Eryſipelatis curatione ſcopi quatuor.
                     
                     
                        In the curing of eryſipelas, there are foure rules to be obſerued▪
                        
                     
                     Primus ſcopus conſiſtit in vitae recta inſtitutione, atque  victus rationis obſeruatione.
                     
                        The firſt rule conſiſteth in the right ordering of life, and obſeruing of diet.
                     
                     Secundus, humoris ad partem affectam cōfluentis (quem  antecedentem materiam appellant) auerſionem conſiderat.
                     
                        
                        The ſecond conſiſteth in the turning away of the humor flowing to the affected part (which they call the antecedent matter.)
                     
                     Tertius in humoris, qui iam in partem aegram influxit, (quem materiam coniunctam dicunt) vacuatione conſiſtit:
                     
                        The third conſiſteth in the euacuation of the humor, which hath alreadie flowed 
                              〈◊〉
                            the affected part (called the matter conioyned.)
                     
                     Quartus circam ſymptomatum correctionem, ac propu
                           •
                        
                        ſionem  verſatur.
                     
                        The fourth conſiſteth in the correction and expulſion of accidents.
                     
                  
                  
                     F.
                     FIſtula eſt vlcus concauum, ſordidum, latum inferi
                           ••
                        s,Fiſtula▪
                         & ſtrictum exterius, quod modò clauditur & modò aperitur.
                     
                        A fiſtula is a hollow and filthy vlcer, broade within, and narrow without, which ſometime ſhutteth, and ſometime openeth.
                     
                     In pulmonibus fiſtulae aegrè vel nunquam curantur.In pulmonibus.
                     
                     
                        Fiſtulaes in the lungs, are hard or neuer cured.
                     
                     In ſtomacho, inteſtinis, & veſica aegrè vel nunquam curanturIn ſtomacho inteſtinis & veſica. fiſtulae.
                     
                        Fiſtulaes in the ſtomacke, ſmall guttes and bladder, are hardly or neuer cured.
                     
                     In oculis, faucibus, ventre, ſede, & iuncturis aegrè ſananturIn oculis, faucibus, ventre, ſede & inncturis. fiſtulae.
                     
                        Fiſtulaes in the eyes, iawes, belly, fundament, and ioynts, are hard to be cured.
                     
                     Fiſtulae in partibus carnoſis procul dubio curantur, tametſiPartibus carnoſ
                              ••
                           
                         foramina multa appareant.
                     
                        Fiſtulaes in fleſhy partes are vndoubtedly to be cured, although many holes do appeare.
                     
                     
                        Fiſtula lachrymalis eſt difficilis curationis propter oculiFiſtula lachrymalis. propinquitatem & ſenſibilitatem, & inueterata, vix curatur, ob magnam carnis duritiem.
                     
                        The lachrimall fiſtulae is hard to be cured, by reaſon of the vicinitie and ſenſibility of the eye, and being old, it is ſcarſely euer cured, by reaſon of the great hardneſſe of the fleſh.
                     
                     Si fiſtula fuerit in carne, ſanies eſt alba, ſi in oſſe, eſt ſicutIn carne, oſſe, & neruo. lotura carnis, ſi in neruo, eſt nigri coloris.
                     
                        If the fiſtulae be in the fleſh, the matter is white, if it be in the bone, it is like waſhing of▪fleſh, if in the ſinew, it is black in colour.
                     
                     Si ad os, vel cartilaginem, vel neruum, vel muſculos, velIn oſſe, cartilagine, neruo, muſculis, thorace, vulua grandibus ve
                           
                              •
                           is & arterijs. thoracem, vel vuluam, vel ad grandes venas, arteriaſque penetrauerit: ſemper periculoſum, ſaepè peſti
                           •
                        erum eſt.
                     
                        If a fiſtulae pearce either to the bone, cartilage, ſinewe, muſcles, matrice, or ſmall 
                              •
                           eyues and arteries, it is alwayes dangerous, oftentimes peſtiferous.
                     
                     Si fiſtula fuerit in aliquo loco cuius ſinus penetrat ad oculos, vt iuxta naſum, incurabilis eſt, quia nec inciſionem, nec aliquam medicinam ibi adminiſtra
                           •
                        e poſſumus, propter teneram ſubſtantiam oculorum.
                     
                        A fiſtulae in any place that hath his paſſage to the eyes, as beſide the noſe, is vncurable, becauſe we can neither make inciſion, nor miniſter thereto any medicine, by reaſon of the tender ſubſtance of the eyes.
                     
                     
                        
                           De fracturis oſſium. F.
                        FRactura cranij magna, aegrè perſanatur.Cranij fractura.
                        
                        
                           A great fracture in the ſkull is hard to be cured.
                        
                        In fractura cranij febris acuta, ſpaſmus, tremor, alienatioSigna mortalia in fractura cranij. mentis, ſyncope, vocis abſciſio, rubedo, & tenebroſitas oculorum, timoroſa & mortalia ſigna, praecipue ſi

maneant & non remittantur.
                        
                           A ſharpe feuer, crampe, trembling, alienation of the minde, ſounding, loſſe of ſpeach, redneſſe and darkeneſſe of the eyes, are fearefull and deadly ſignes in a fracture of the ſkull, eſpecially if they remayne ſtill, and vaniſh not.
                        
                        Denigratio durae matris quae non mundificatur cumDurae matris deuigratio. melle, ſignificat mortem.
                        
                           If the blacknes of Dura mater cannot be mundified with hony, it is death.
                        
                        Tumor magnus in fractura cranij, praecipue ſi citò euanueritTumor magnus in fractura cranij. ſine cauſa rationabili, malum.
                        
                           A great tumor in the fracture of the ſkull is euill, eſpecially if it vaniſh ſoone away without a reaſonable cauſe.
                        
                        Tumor paruus & ſaniei bona digeſtio, bonum.Tumor paruus.
                        
                        
                           A ſmall tumor with a good digeſtion of the matter is good.
                        
                        Caro rubra in conſolidatione cranij, bonum.Caro rubra.
                        
                        
                           Red fleſh in the conſolidation of the ſkull is good.
                        
                        Signa cranij fracti ſunt, contuſio magna, ſeparatio cutisSigna cranij fracta. ab oſsibus, apoplexia, vertigo, vocis deſtructio, ſonus rancus percuſſo capite cum virga, ſtridor dentium filum retinentium dum perc
                              •
                           titur filum, humiditas per fiſ
                              •
                           uram pullulans retento anhelitus.
                        
                           The ſignes of the ſkull being broken, are theſe, a great contuſion, a ſeparating of the ſkinne from the bone, apoplery; giddineſſe, deſtruction of the voyce, a hoarſe ſound being ſtricken with a rodde vpon the head, g
                                 ••
                              ſhing of the teeth▪ holding a thred betwixt them when the threed is ſtricken, moyſture comming out by the ri
                                 •
                              t when the breath is holden.
                        
                        Craneo fracto patiens ſe multas candelas videre putat, ſaepe niſi ſuſtineatur cadit, non v
                              ••
                           ro intuetur lucem, neque pannum diſ
                              ••
                           r
                              ••
                            fu
                              •••
                           rt.
                        
                           The ſkull being broken, the patient thinketh that he ſeeth many candles, he falleth often if 
                                 〈◊〉
                               not holden, he cannot
                           
                           endure to behold the light, neyther can he ſuffer a cloth to be torne.
                        
                        Sanguis ſi inter cranium & meningem inciderit ad putredinemSanguis inter cranium & meningem. vertit, nec non ſymptomata nociua adfert.
                        
                           If bloud fall betweene the ſkull and hard membrane, it will turne to putrefaction, and bring euill accidents.
                        
                        Sanguis ſi fluxerit per nares, aures vel os, poſt caſum, velSigna partium inteſtinorum laeſionis. ictum, laeſam eſſe aliquam partem internam neceſſe eſt, quanquam fractura vel oſsis depreſsio extra non appareat.
                        
                           If bloud iſſue foorthby the noſtrilles, cares, or mouth, after a fall or ſtroake, it muſt needes be that ſome inward part be hurt, although the fracture or depreſſion of the bone appeare not outwardly.
                        
                        Fractura cranij in plenilunio eſt verenda.
                        
                           A fracture of the ſkull in the full of the moone is to be feared.
                        
                        In fractura cranij, terminus ad centum dies, vel ſecundum alios, ad 46.
                        
                           A fracture in the ſkull is cured in a hundred dayes, or as ſome ſay in 46.
                        
                        Cubitus firmatur plurimum diebus. 30.Cubid fractura.
                        
                        
                           A fracture in the cubit is for the moſt part cured in thirtie dayes.
                        
                        Brachium & tibia ſi ritè curentur diebus circiter 40. occaleſcunt.Brachium & Tibia.
                        
                        
                           Fractures in the arme or legge, if they be rightly cured, are confirmed in 40. dayes.
                        
                        Coſta poſt vnum & vigeſimum diem ferrumen implet.Coſta.
                        
                        
                           A fracture in a ribbe, is in 21. dayes ſouldred.
                        
                        Corporibus macilentis fracturae perbellè ſanantur.Corporibus macilentis fracturae. Floreſcente inuentute fracturae.
                        
                        
                           Fractures in leane bodies are eaſy to be cured.
                        
                        Floreſcente iuuentute fracturae modico negotio curātur.
                        
                           Fractures in flouriſhing youth are eaſy to be cured.
                        
                        
                           Quaecunque fracturae ijs inſunt corporibus quibus requiesCorporibus requiem habentibus. benigna conceditur facilè admittunt curationem.
                        
                           Fractures in thoſe bodies that may reſt, are eaſie to be cured.
                        
                        Fracturaeomnes iuncturis vicinae aegrè ſolidantur.Circa iuncturas.
                        
                        
                           A fracture neere the ioynt is hart to be cured.
                        
                        Os fruſtatim comminutum difficilè coaleſcit.Os fruſtatim cōminutum.
                        
                        
                           A bone broken all to ſhiuers is hardly cured.
                        
                        Os in naribus perfractum decem dierum ſpatio conſolideſcit.Narium fractura.
                        
                        
                           A fracture in the noſtrilles doth conſolidate within the ſpace of tenne daies.
                        
                        Fractura quae cum dolore, vel inflammatione, aut carnisCum dolore inflāmatione, aut carnis contuſione. contuſione incidit mala eſt.
                        
                           A fracture with payne, inflāmation or confuſion of the fleſh, is euill.
                        
                        Fractura in decrepitis & cholericis, ac ijs viciſsim qui ſeròIn decrepitis & cholericis. aegrotabunt, cura longa commoratur.
                        
                           Fractures in olde and cholericke perſons, and thoſe eſpecially which are ſicke towards night, are hard to be cured.
                        
                        Fractura per longum interuallum non reſtituta aegrè curatur.Fractura inueterata.
                        
                        
                           A fracture long vnreſtored, is hardly after cured.
                        
                        Fractura tranſuerſim os ſecans, perfacilis curationis.Tranſuerſim os ſecans.
                        
                        
                           A fracture ouerthwart the bone is eaſie of curation.
                        
                        Fractura ſymptomatis priuata facilè curatur.Symptomatis priuaca.
                        
                        
                           A fracture without accidents, is eaſie to be cured.
                        
                        Fere intra 14. & 21. diem ſaneſcunt, maxilla, iugulum, ſcapula,Maxilla, iugulum, ſcapula, os tali, calx, manus, & planta. os tali, calx, manus, planta.
                        
                           A fracture in the iawe, cannell bone, ſhoulder-blade, hecle, hande, and middle of the foote, is commonly cured within 14. or 21. daies.
                        
                        Inter 27. & 40. diem humeri & foemora ſaneſcunt.Humeri & foemora.
                        
                        
                           
                           Fractures in the arme and thigh, are cured betweene 27. and 40. daies.
                        
                        Coxa diebus quinquaginta coaleſcit.Coxa.
                        
                        
                           The Hippe is reſtored in fiftie daies.
                        
                        Pes ſexaginta dierum ſpatio, ſi quieſcat, conſaneſcat.Pes.
                        
                        
                           A fracture in the foote, if it may haue reſt, is cured in 60. daies.
                        
                        Fractura vlnae vel radij, ſi per ſe contingat, amborumVlnae vel radij. comminutione pericu loſior eſt.
                        
                           If one of the bones of the arme bee broken onely, it is more daungerous than the breaking of them both together.
                        
                        Fracto membro applicanda ſunt doloris ſedatiua & apoſtemationisMedicamina fracto membro applicata. remouentia.
                        
                           The medicines which are applyed to fractures ought to aſſwage payne, and remoue impoſtumation.
                        
                        Frigus, conuulſiones, tetanos, denigrationes, rigores febrilesFrigus. efficit.
                        
                           Cold cauſeth Cramps, ſtifneſſe of the ſinewes, blackneſſe and feuerous ſhiuerings.
                        
                        Frigus inimicum eſt oſsibus, neruis, cerebro & dorſali medullae.
                        
                           Cold hurteth the bones, the ſinewes, the brayne, and the marrowe of the backe.
                        
                        Frigida ſiſtunt ſanguinem poſita iuxta partes ſanguinolentas.
                        
                           Cold things do ſtay bloud, being layd nigh the bloudie parts.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     G
                     GAngraena difficulter curatur, & ſi tranſit in ſphacelum, non niſi per ſectionem ſanatur.
                     Gangraena is hard to bee cured, and if it turne to Sphacelus, it cannot be cured but by inciſion.
                     
                     Si carnem & neruum vſque ad os laedat, non curatur.
                     
                        
                        If Gangraena hurt the ſinewes and fleſh euen to the bone, it is vncurable.
                     
                  
                  
                     H
                     HAemorrhagia prouenit aut per abundantiam, aut eroſionemVnde prouenit. vaſorum.
                     
                        Fluxe of bloud commeth either by abundance, or by corroding of the veſſels.
                     
                     Haemorrhagia quae prouenit propter debilitatem cerebriPropter debilitatem cerebri. vix aut nunquam curatur.
                     
                        Fluxe of bloud which commeth by weakneſſe of the brayne, is hard or neuer cured.
                     
                     Haemorrhagia è naribus quae extendit ſe vltra libras quatuorHaemorrhagioe è naribus quantitas. eſt mala, & ſi vltra octo, eſt peſsima, & ſi extendit ſe vſque ad xx. vel xxiiij. vltra viuere non poteſt.
                     
                        Bleeding at the noſe, if it exceede foure pound is euill, and if it come to eight it is moſt bad, and if it extend to twentìe or foure and twentie pound, he cannot liue any longer.
                     
                     Haemorrhagia quae ducit ad colorem pallidum aut viridem,Ducens ad colorem pallidū aut viridem aut liuidum aut fuſcum. aut liuidum, aut fuſcum, peſsima eſt & mortalis.
                     
                        Bleeding which chaungeth the colour to bee pale, greene, ſwartiſh, or ſallowe, is very euill and deadly.
                     
                     Haemorrhagia ducens ad ſyncopem, & ſi ſit cum frigiditateDucens ad ſyncopem. extremitatum eſt mortalis.
                     
                        Fluxe of bloud which cauſeth ſownding, is deadly: or if it bee with coldneſſe of the outward parts, it is alſo deadly.
                     
                     Haemorrhagia quae venit ſubitò & cum impetu, eſt mala,Haemorrhagia ſubito accidens. ſi verò contingit cum alleuatione patientis, eſt bona.
                     
                        Bleeding at noſe that commeth ſodeinly and vyolently, is euill: but if the patient be lightned by it, it is good.
                     
                     Haemorrhagia narium menſtruis deficientibus, bonum.Menſtruis deficientibus prodeſt.
                     
                     
                        Bleeding at the noſe is profitable to them which want menſtrua.
                     
                     
                        Sanguis è naribus profluens, & aluus turbida, tollit ſurditatem.Tollit ſurditatem.
                     
                     
                        Bleeding at the noſe and looſenes of the bellie, taketh away deaffnes.
                     
                     Haemorrhagia in Haemorrhoidibus bonum.Haemor
                              •
                           hoydibus valet.
                     
                     
                        Bleeding at the noſe to them that haue the Hemorhoydes, is very good.
                     
                     Conuulſio ab hemorrhagia lethale.Conuulſio ab haemorrhagia.
                     
                     
                        The Crampe comming after fluxe of bloud is deadly.
                     
                     Fluxus haemorrhoidalis ſi ſit temperatus, facit multa iuuamenta, & praeſeruat à multis a gritudinibus melancholicisAegritudines à quibus 
                              •
                           lu
                              •
                           us haemorrhoidalis praeſeruat, temperatus tamen. aduſtis, & corruptis, ſicut eſt mania, melancholia, pleureſis, lepra, morphea, hydropiſis, ptiſis, malum mortuum, quartana, paſsio ſplenis, &c.
                     
                        If the fluxe of the Hemorhoydes be temperat, it bringeth many commodities, and preſerueth the bodie from aduſtion of humors: and many melancholike and corrupt diſeaſes, as Madneſſe, Melancholte, Pluriſie, Leproſie, Morphewe, Dropſie, 
                              •
                           tiſicke, Malum morbum, a quartaine Agewe, diſeaſes of the Spleene, and ſuch like.
                     
                     Si 
                           •
                        luant vltra temperamentum, omnes praedictas aegritudinesFluxus haemor
                              •
                           hoydalis intemperatus. generant.
                     
                        If the Hemrhoydes doe ſlowe beyond the meaſure of the conſtitution, it bringeth all the aforeſayd diſeaſes.
                     
                     Fluxus Hemorrhoidum temperatus cognoſcitur cumFluxus haemorrhoydum temperati cognitio. ſentiunt ſe alleuatos & melius comedentes.
                     
                        The temperate fluxe of the Hemrhoydes is knowne when the patient feeleth him ſomewhat light and eaſed withall, and hath a good appetite to his meate.
                     
                     Cum autem ſentiunt ſe grauiores, cum malitia appetitus,Fluxus haemorrhoydum ſuperflu
                              •
                            cognitio. & cum foedo colore, tunc iam ſuperfluit fluxus, quare ſtatim conſtringendus eſt.
                     
                        But when the patient feeleth himſelfe ſad and heauie, with naughtie appetite, and filthie colour, it is a ſigne that the
                        
                        fluxe hath paſſed the iuſt temperature: and therfore it ought to be ſtayed preſently.
                     
                     Hemorrhoides curant melancholiam & nephrtiicamMelancholiam & neph
                              •
                           eticam paſsionem curant. Fluxus antiquus. paſsionem.
                     
                        The Hemorrhoydes do cure melancholie & payne of the back.
                     
                     Si fluxus haemorroidum ſit antiquus non omnes ſubitò reſtringantur, ſed vna remaneat aperta.
                     
                        If fluxe of the Hemorrhoyd veynes hath continued long, they ought not all to be ſuddainely ſtayed, but one muſt be left open.
                     
                     Curati citius pereunt, non curati, i. paliati longo temporeCura. viuunt.
                     
                        They that be cured of the Hemorrhoydes of long cōtinuance do dye ſoone, but if they be not cured but kept open, they liue long.
                     
                     Hernia carnoſa raro aut nunquam ſine inciſione curatur.
                     Hernia carnoſa is hard or neuer cured without inciſion.
                     
                     Hernia ventoſa cruciatus ingentes febrimque excitat, & niſi accuratè reſpicitur periculoſa valde eſt.
                     Hernia ventoſa bringeth great torments, and a Feuer, and except the carefully looked vnto, it is very dangerous.
                     
                     Hernia aquoſa ſi ſemel teſtem humore ſuo vileſcit, difficilè aut nunquam abſque inciſione medetur.
                     Hernia aquoſa, if once the humor hath defiled the teſticle, it is hardly or neuer cured without inciſion.
                     
                     Hernia varicoſa propter varices inflatas & circa teſticulam incraſſatas difficillimè abſque inciſione ſanatur.
                     Hernia varicoſa by reaſon of the ſwelled veynes that are puffed vp, and thickned about the teſticle, is hard to be cured without inciſion.
                     
                     Hernia zirbialis inueterata rarò aut nunquam ſine inciſione curatur.
                     Hernia zirbialis of long continuance, is hardly or neuer cured
                        
                        without inciſion.
                     
                     Hernia inteſtinalis in ſenibus difficilè curatur.
                     Hernia inteſtinalis in old perſons is hard to be cured.
                     
                     Hernia humoralis inueterata teſtem putreſcit, ideoque non niſi per inciſionem curatur.
                     Hernia humoralis of continuance doth putrifie the teſticle, therefore it can not be cured without inciſion.
                     
                     Hernia inguinalis ſaepenumero in apoſtemationem degenerat, in fine quoque ſi non celeriter ſuccuratur, in fiſtulam vel vlcus cancroſum vadit.
                     Hernia inguinalis turneth oftentimes into impoſtumation, and in the end, if it be not ſpeedely cured, it either becommeth to be a fiſtula, or a canckrous vlcer.
                     
                     Hernia ſanioſa difficillimè niſi in principio auxiliatur, quoniam materia eius venenoſa, non ſolum vnum teſticulum in quo oritur, verum etiam alterū corrumpit.
                     Hernia ſanioſa is hardly cured, except it be taken in time, for the poyſoned matter therein conteined, doth not onely corrupt the teſticle which it began in, but alſo put
                              ••
                           fieth the other.
                     
                     Hernia zirbialis, inteſtinalis & ventoſa, ſemper ſi tempeſtiuè accipiantur, victus ratione & ligatura conuenienti aut leuantur aut penitus ſanantur.
                     Hernia zirbialis, inteſtinalis & ventoſa, are alwayes eaſed or cured by truſſes, in time, and by good dyet.
                     
                     Hernia ventoſa medicamentis calefacientibus & ſlatum diſcutientibus curatur.
                     Hernia ventoſa is cured by medicines warming and diſſoluing winde.
                     
                     Hernia aquoſa per actuale cauterium inter burſam & teſticulum optimè curatur.
                     Hernia aquoſa is beſt cured by an actuall cautery betwéene the codde and the teſticle.
                     
                     
                        Omnis hernia initio, praeſertim in pueris facillime curatur.
                     
                        Euery rupture in the beginning, eſpecially in children, is eaſie to be cured.
                     
                     Omnis hernia cum dolore ac inguinum tumore difficilè curatur.
                     
                        Euery rupture with payne and ſwelling of the flancks, is hard to be cured.
                     
                     Hernia cum Hydrope let hale eſt.
                     
                        A rupture with a dropſey is deadly.
                     
                     Hernia nulla per inciſionem, ſine vnius teſticuli amiſsione curatur.
                     
                        There is no rupture cured by inciſion, but that one of the teſticles is taken away.
                     
                     Hernia vltra ſeptem dies, antiquata appellatur, quoniam tunc labia vulneris interius indurata ſunt.
                     
                        A rupture after ſeauen dayes is called old, becauſe then the lips of the breach in wardly are hardned.
                     
                     Relaxatio ſine inciſione in principio facilè curatur.
                     
                        A relaxation is eaſily cured in the beginning without inciſion.
                     
                     Relaxatio facilius quam hernia completa curatur.
                     
                        A relaxation is eaſier cured then a rupture complete.
                     
                     Differentia inter relaxationem & rupturam hoc modo cognoſcitur, ſi aliquis ſtet ſupra pedes ſuos & impellat anhelitum verſus inferiora, ſi de facili tunc deſcendant inteſtina inferius, ruptus eſt, ſi non, relaxatus eſt.
                     
                        The difference betweene a relaxation and a rupture, is thus knowne, let him that doubteth, by reaſon of ſome ſtrayne, whether he be broken or no, ſtand vpon his feete, and force his breath towards the inferior parts, if then the entrailes do eaſily deſcend downewards, he is broken, if not, he is but relaxed.
                     
                     Lues venerea ſe omnibus coniungit aegritudinibus, aegritudineſqueLues venerea. omnes in genere ſecum aſſociat.
                     
                        Lucs vencrea ioyneth with all diſeaſes, and all diſeaſes do ioyne with it.
                     
                     Lucs venerea con
                           •
                        agioſa eſt, ſi cum mulieribus immundis coitu accidit.
                     
                        This diſeaſe is contagious, if it chanceth through carnall copulation with vncleane women.
                     
                     Cauſa antecedens eſt quando humores per malignitatem,Cauſa anteccdens. & morbi contagioſi venenoſam qualitatem corripiuntur.
                     
                        The antecedent cauſe is, when the humors are defiled by the malignitie and venemous qualitie of the diſeaſe being contagious.
                     
                     Cauſa primitiua eſt coitus cum mulieribus immundis atqueCauſa primitiua. foedis, puſtulas venenoſas in vtero habentibus.
                     
                        The primitiue cauſe of this diſeaſe, is carnall company with vncleane and filthy women, hauing venemous puſtles in their ſecret partes.
                     
                     Poſtquam lues venerea in ſecretis partibus oritur, adeò venenoſa eſt, vt per totum corpus tranſit, a capite ad pedes.
                     
                        After lues venerea hath begun in the ſecret parts, it is ſo venemous, that it ſpreadeth through the whole body, from the head to the foote.
                     
                     Sanguis in lue venerea vniuerſaliter corrumpitur, ideo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                        Producit, puſtulas, ſcabies venenoſas ſquamaſque c
                              •
                           uſtoſas. puſtulas, ſcabies venenoſas, ſquamaſque cruſtoſas producit.
                     
                        In lues venerea the bloud is corrupted through the whole body, and ſo produceth puſtles, venemous ſcabbes, and cruſty ſcales.
                     
                     In luis venereae curatione, neque anodina, neque paliatiuaQuae medicine fugienda ſunt in luis vene
                              •
                           cae curatione. Lentigines. medicamenta adhibeantur.
                     
                        In the cure of lues venerea, neyther aſſwaging, nor palliatiue medicines are to be vſed.
                     
                     Lentigines ſunt infectiones cutis faciei, vt plurimum, &

aliquando cutis totius corporis.
                     
                        Freckles are infections (for the moſt part) of the ſkinne of the face, and ſometimes of the ſkinne of the whole bodie.
                     
                     In lentiginibus ſi corpus fuerit vniuerſaliter multum repletumI en
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           i
                              •••
                            in co
                              •
                           po
                              •
                           en 
                              ••
                           
                           tum rep
                              •••
                           o. ſiat phlebotomia de baſilica.
                     
                        In a ſreckled bodie, if the bodie be much replete vniuerſally, it is good to open the baſilica veyne.
                     
                     Si autem non fuerit tanta repletio, & infectio fuerit in totoSi ſue
                              •
                           t in to to corpore, ſi in facie. corpore fiat de Mediana, & ſi in facie fiat de Cephalica.
                     
                        But if there be no ſuch repletion, and the infection be through the whole bodie, then open Mediana: but if it be only in the face open Cephalica.
                     Scarificationes in tibijs, aut inter ſpatulas, aut ſub mentoBona vtenda in lentige
                              ••
                           
                           bus. multum valent in lentiginibus.
                     
                        For freckles, ſcarifications of the legs, or betwixt the ſhoulderblades, or vnder the chinne, doe greatly profite.
                     
                     Lepra eſt morbus conſimilis corrumpens figuram & formam,Lepra. & compoſitionem membrorum & finaliter ſoluens continuum, proueniens de materia melancholica ſparſa per totum corpus.
                     
                        The Leproſie is a diſeaſe of like maners, corrupting the figure, forme and compoſition of the members: and finally making breach of continuitie, it commeth of melancholike matter diſperſed through the whole bodie.
                     
                     Lepra poſtquam venit ad manifeſtam corruptionem formaeLepra ad manifeſtam corruptionem accedens. & figurae non curabitur, ſed vitam prolongare poſſumus, & impedire cū medicaminibus, ne materia venenoſa & melancholica, ad cor & membra principalia vadat.
                     
                        After that the Lepro
                              •
                           e commeth to manifeſt corruption of the forme and figure, it is vncurable: but we may prolong life, and hinder by medicines that the venimous and melancholike matter come not to the heart and principall members.
                     
                     
                        Lepra incipit primò ab interioribus, & poſtea manifeſtabiturLeprae initiū. in facie & extremitatibus, & iterata reuertitur ad interiora; & tunc eſt mors, quia membra nobilia ruinam ſuſtinere non poſſunt.
                     
                        The Leproſie beginneth firſt from the inward parts, and after is diſcerned in the face and outwarde parts, and being renewed turneth to the inward parts againe; and then commeth death, becauſe the principall members cannot ſuſteyne ruine.
                     
                     Lippitudo obeſis corporibus & aetate confectis ſine aliquoLippitudo. incomodo nunquam curatur.
                     
                        Blear
                              •
                           dnes in fat and olde perſons is neuer cured without a diſcommoditie.
                     
                  
                  
                     M
                     De Medicamentis.
                     MEdicamina calida corporibus ſiccis macilentiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         applicataMedicamina 
                              〈…〉
                           . calorem humiditatémque naturalem extingunnt.
                     
                        Hote medicines applyed to drie and leane bodies, doe extiuguiſh naturall heate and moyſture.
                     
                     Deſiccantibus non indigent quatuor haec, viz. vlcus contuſum,Deſiccantibus non indigent 4. hac. diſtractum, doloroſum, & apoſtemoſum.
                     
                        Theſe foure noede no deſiccatiues: that is to ſay, an vlcer with contuſion, an vlcer with diſtracted lippes, an vlcer with payne or impoſtumation.
                     
                     Nimis infrigidantia, vlcera nigri coloris, & cerulei reddunt.Infrigidantia nimia.
                     
                     
                        Exceſſiue cooling medicines doe cauſe vleets to be blacke and blew of colour.
                     
                     Incarnatiua abſtergere minimè debent.Incarnantia.
                     
                     
                        Incarnatiues ought not to wipe.
                     
                     Incarnantia antequam mundificandi vim habent, applicata, ſuperſ
                           •
                        uam carnoſitatem generant.
                     
                        
                        Intarnatiues vſed before mundi
                              ••
                           catiues, doe cauſe proude fleſh.
                     
                     Quae ad inijciendum conueniunt neceſſe habent vt cumAd 
                              〈…〉
                            n
                              •
                           unt. melle roſarum, allumine, lixiuioque vel aqua marina, quoniam talia obſcoenitatem abſumunt & humorem defendunt, conficiantur.
                     
                        Medicines conuenient for iniections muſt bee made with Mel roſarum, Alume, Lee, or ſalt-water, becauſe they take away filthie matter, and defend the humour.
                     
                     Medicamina locis neruoſis, venoſis, & arterioſis, vel circaLocis, ne
                              ••
                           oſi
                              •
                            ven
                              •
                           ſis & ar
                           
                              •
                           er
                              •
                           ſis vel circa teſ
                              ••
                           culos medicamina applicata. teſticulos applicanda, ob earum partium ſenſibilitatem facillima ſint oportet, ſed ſuper ligamenta fortiora poſsint applicari.
                     
                        Thoſe medicines which are applyed to ſinewie, veynie, and arterious places, or about the teſticles, ought to bee gentle by reaſon of the ſenſibilitie of thoſe parts: but about the ligaments ſtronger may be vſed.
                     
                     In carne vlcerata ſi peracutus ſit ſenſus, cauendum à cauſticisCarne 
                              •••
                           rat
                              •
                            cum ſenſu per
                              •
                           cu
                              ••
                           . & ab omnibus peracutis medicamentis.
                     
                        In vlcerated fleſh, if there bee moſt ſharpe ſence, take heede of Cauſticke and all ſharpe medicines.
                     
                     Corpora imbecilla atque loca ſenſibilia leues medicinasCorpora imbecilla atque loca ſenſibilia. applicari quaerunt.
                     
                        Weake bodies and tender places doe require ſoft and gentle medicines.
                     
                     Medicamina vnctuoſa minime conueniunt, niſi aliorumMedicamina vn
                              •
                           tno
                              •
                           a. acuitatum auferendi cauſa.
                     
                        Unctuous medicines are not conuenient, except for the taking away of others ſharpnes.
                     
                     Medicamen incarnans deſiccare quoque oportet ac aliquantumMedicam
                              ••
                            incarna
                              •
                           s. excedere naturale membri temperamentum.
                     
                        An incarnatiue medicine ought alſo to drie, and ſomewhat to exceede the naturall temperature of the member.
                     
                     
                        Concaui vlceris cura per exiccationem & mundificationemConcaui vlceris cura. aggreditur.
                     
                        A hollowe vlcer is cured by exiccatiues and mundificatiues.
                     
                     Medicamina exiccantia teneris humidiſque corporibusMedicamina exiccantia. conſentiunt.
                     
                        Exiccatiue medicines are expedient for tender and moyſt bodies.
                     
                     Membra humida magna exiccatione non egent.Membra humida.
                     
                     
                        Moyſt members neede not great drying.
                     
                     Deſiccantia & cicatrizantia, non autem mollificantia, vlceribusMedicinae quoe conueniunt vlceribus mulie
                              •
                           ū in partibus pudibundis. mulierum, in partibus pudibundis, conueniunt.
                     
                        Deſiccatiue and cicatrizing medicines are conuenient for vlcers about the priuities of women: and not mollificatiues.
                     
                     Exiccantia admittit ſanies tenuis & acuta▪ è contra craſſaSanies tenuis & acuta, craſſa & denſa. & denſa abſtergentia.
                     
                        Thinne and ſharpe matter requireth exiccatiues: and contrarily thicke and groſſe, abſterſiues.
                     
                     Vlceribus conferentia tum exiccare tum abſtergere debent.Vlceribus conferentia.
                     
                     
                        Thoſe medicines which doe both drie and wipe are moſt expedient for vlcers.
                     
                     Digerentia vulneribus detritis in primis, poſteaque quaeVulneribus detritis quae vtenda ſunt. mundificandi vim habent adhibeantur.
                     
                        Digeſtiues muſt firſt of all be vſed to bruſed woundes, and afterward mundificatiues.
                     
                     Incarnantia vulneribus concauis ante ea quae conſolidentVulneribus concauis. expediunt.
                     
                        Incarnatiues are expedient to be vſed in hollow woundes before conſolidatiues.
                     
                     Quaecunque per triduum nihil valent, adhibita, poſtquamNota generalis. reijcienda.
                     
                        Thoſe medecines which in thrée dayes compaſſe preuaile nothing, are afterward to be reiected.
                     
                     
                        Melancholia aut ſpargitur ad totum corpus, aut ad partem:Melancholia quomodo corpus excitat. Feb▪ melanchol. Lepra. Morph
                              ••
                           . ſi ad totum, aut putrefit aut non: ſi putrefiat, tum generatur febris melancholica: ſi non putrefiat, tunc aut mittitur ad carnem aut cutem; ſi ad carnem, generat Lepram, ſi ad cutem, morpheam.
                     
                        Melancholy is either diſperſed thorough the whole bodie, or to part thereof: if it be ſent to the whole body, it doth either putrifie, or not: if it putrifie, then it cauſeth a melancholike Feuer: if it do not putrifie, then it is ſent eyther to the fleſh, or to the ſkinne; if it be ſent to the fleſh, it engendreth the Leproſie; if it be ſent to the ſkinne, it cauſeth the morphew.
                     
                     Melancholia eſt mater caecitatis, apoplexiae, ſpaſmi &Caecitatem apoplexiam ſpaſmum & furorem excitat. furoris.
                     
                        Melancholy is the mother of blindneſſe, apoplexie▪ cramps, and madneſſe.
                     
                     Melancholiae ſigna ſunt metus & triſtitia.Melancholiae ſigna.
                     
                     
                        The ſignes of melancholy are feare and ſadneſſe.
                     
                     Membri alicuius amputatione tria praecipue ſunt conſideranda.Membri amputatione conſiderationes.
                     
                     
                        In the cutting off of any member, thrée things are chiefly to be conſidered.
                     
                     Primò, vt fiat ſine dolore inciſio.
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Firſt, that the inciſion be made without payne.
                     
                     Secundò, vt ſanguinis vitetur fluxus.
                           
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Secondly, that fluxe of bloud may be eſchued.
                     
                     Tertio, vt cauterizetur ſiue actualiter, ſiue potentialiter,
                           
                              •
                           
                         tam exiguo cum dolore vt arte inueniri queat.
                     
                        Thirdly, that the cautery eyther actuall or potentiall be done with as little payne as may be deuiſed by arte.
                     
                     Morphea eſt cutis defoedatio maculoſa.Morphea.
                     
                     
                        The Morphewe is a ſpotty filthineſſe of the ſkinne.
                     
                     Si morphea fuerit nouella, curabilis eſt, ſi antiqua, incurabilisVtrum morphea ſit cura
                        
                        
eſt: vel cum magna difficultate.bilis aut incurabilis.
                     
                     
                        If the Morphew be of ſmall continuance, it is curable, but if it be of long continuance, it is hardly or neuer cured.
                     
                     Si morphea occupauerit modicum ſpatium, curabilis eſt, ſi magnum, difficilis.
                     
                        If the Morphew be contained in ſmall ſpace, it is curable, but if it ſpreade very farre, it is hard to be cured.
                     
                     Si locus morpheatus pungatur cum acu in ſuperficie cutis, ita vt non profundetur vltra cutem & ſanguis exierit, curabilis eſt, ſi autem aquoſitas, incurabilis eſt, aut cum magna difficultate.
                     
                        If the place that is affected with the Morphewe be pricked with a néedle in the vpper part of the ſkinne (ſo that it goe not paſt the ſkinne) and that the bloud doth iſſue out, it is curable, but if moiſture come foorth, it is hard or neuer cured.
                     
                     In morphea a principio, ſanguine dominante aut corporePhlebotomia in morphea. plethorico exiſtente, materiaque morpheae in venis adhuc remanente bene poteſt fieri phlebotomia, ſed poſtquam notabiliter apparet extra, & aegritudo ſit confirmata, nullo modo adhibeatur, quia materia traheretur ab externis ad interiora.
                     
                        In the Morphewe, bloudletting may well be vſed, at the beginning when blond doth abound, or in a bodie full of euill humors, and the matter of the Morphewe remayning yet in the veynes, but after it doth manifeſtly appeare outwardly, and that the diſeaſe be confirmed, bloudletting may in no wiſe be vſed, becauſe the matter thereby would be drawne from the outward parts inwardly.
                     
                     Membrorum durities a tribus caſibus euenit, nempe a calore nimio, ab humorum coagulatione & a repletione.
                     
                        There be thrée cauſes of hardneſſe in any member, as great heate, the impaction of humors coagulated, and fulneſſe.
                     
                     
                        Cognita, & vſu ac ratione probata, remedia, ignotis ac nunc primum inuentis ſunt praeponenda.
                     
                        Thoſe medecines which are knowne and approued both by reaſon and experience, are to be preferred before thoſe which are vnknowne, and but newly inuented.
                     
                     Non verbis ſed remedijs conuenienter vſurpatis reſtituitur ſanitas.
                     
                        Health is not reſtored by words, but by medecines conue mently vſed.
                     
                     Scientia ſine experientia haud magnam medico apud aegrum fiduciam conciliat.
                     
                        Knowledge without practiſe, winneth to the Phyſition ſmall credit of his Patient.
                     
                     Praxis eſt operatio, theoriae regulis & legibus cōfentiens.
                     
                        Practiſe is an operation agréeable to the rules and lawes of Theoricke.
                     
                     Artifex qui magnum aliquid & laude dignum praeſtare vult, in notitiam proprij ſubiecti diligenter debot incumbere.
                     
                        That workeman which would ſhew ſome great things that is praiſe-worthie, let him diligently apply himſelfe to the knowledge of his proper ſubiect.
                     
                     Boni medici officium eſt morbum ſanare, aut certe in meliorem ſtatum, & eum, quem natura fert, deducere.
                     
                        It is the office of a good artiſt to heale the diſeaſe, or to bring it into a better ſtate, and that which agréeth to nature.
                     
                     Qui artis operibus, doctiſque de arte lectionibus frequens non interfuit: hocque ſolo, quod multa legerit, ſe pro nobili chirurgo venditat, longe fallitur, & impudens eſt.
                     
                        He that hath not béen conuerſant in the works of the Arte, nor at the Lectures of the learned, but eſtéemeth himſelfe for an excellent Surgeon, by this onely, that he hath read many things, is farre deceiued, and very impudent.
                     
                     
                        Nihil vnquam laude dignum praeſtabit qui ſibi auro non vſu chirurgicum magiſterium parauerit.
                     
                        He ſhall neuer perfourme any thing worthy prayſe, which obtaineth the degrée of a Surgeon by money, and not by vſe.
                     
                     Medicos & chirurgos ſubinde mutare, aegris raedium non leuamen eſt.
                     
                        To change often the Phyſitions and Chirurgions, is a burdening, and not a lightning to the Patient.
                     
                     Etſi in longum tempus ſe morbus protrahat, non eſt tamen quod ſe ab aegro medīcus diſtrahat.
                     
                        Although the diſeaſe continue a long time, yet it is not for the Phyſition to withdrawe himſelfe from the Patient.
                     
                     Magna magnorum vaſorum vulnera lethalia cenſentur.
                     
                        Great wounds in the great veſſels, are eſtéemed deadly.
                     
                     Vt morbi ſic remedij ſpecies eſſe debet.
                     
                        As the kinds of the diſeaſe are, ſo ought the kinds of the remedies to be.
                     
                     Oſsise palato abſceſſus putroris inſert periculum.
                     
                        The ſwelling of the bone out of the palate, bringeth danger of putrefaction.
                     
                     Haemorthagiam calor incitat, frigus refraenat.
                     
                        Heate moueth bléeding at the noſe, but cold reſtrayneth the ſame.
                     
                     Quibus vlcera in cruribus ſunt, hos neque ambulare, neque ſtare, neque ſedere, ſed in lecto quieſcere oportet.
                     
                        They that haue vlcers in their legges, muſt neyther walke, ſtand, nor ſit, but lye in their bed.
                     
                     Mordacia & acria omnia medicamina mundis vlceribus ſunt infenſa.
                     
                        All manner ſharpe and biting medecines are hurtfull to cleane vlcers.
                     
                     Auſtro flante vulneratorum membrorum prompta eſt ſyderatio.
                     
                        
                        When the Southerne winde bloweth, the partes are more diſpoſed to putrefaction.
                     
                     Vlcera rotunda niſi in aliam figuram deducta fuerint non facilè coaleſcunt.
                     
                        Round vlcers, except they be reduced into another figure, are hardly cured.
                     
                     Vlcus eryſipelatoſum purgationem per inferiora poſtulat.
                     
                        An vlcer with Eryſipelas requireth purging by the inferiour parts.
                     
                     Nemini niſi abdominoſo triſtitia prodeſt.
                     
                        Sadnes is profitable to none, ſaue only to them that are corpulent and foggie.
                     
                     Ignauia calorem naturalem debilitat & extinguit.
                     
                        Slouthfulneſſe weakneth and extinguiſheth naturall heate.
                     
                     Morbi frigidi ſenibus ſunt infenſi ac ſolutu contumaces: inuenibus vero non ita infeſti & rebelles.
                     
                        Cold diſeaſes are hurtfull to olde men, and very hard to be reſolued: but to young men not ſo troubleſome and rebellious.
                     
                  
                  
                     O
                     OEdema vt plurimum terminatur per reſolutionemEius terminatio. ſeu exhalationem, raro per ſuppurationem, ſaepiſsimè per conuerſionem ſeu permutationem in nodos & alia apoſtemata.
                     Oedema for the moſt part is cured by reſoluing or euaporation, ſeldome by ſuppuration, and very often by turning or chaunging into knots or other impoſtumes.
                     
                     Quandiu lippa eſt aquoſa & ſubtilis, aegritudo eſt in principio,Principium. & cum incipit ingroſſari & dealbari tunc eſt in augmento, & cum lippa eſt multa, claudens palpebras,Augmentum. Status. tunc eſt ſtatus: & cum incipit minui, tunc eſt declinatio: & lippa quae habet fruſta parua eſt mala, ſicut dicit Auicenna.
                     
                        
                        When the blearednes is watriſh and thinne, than the diſe aſe is in the beginning: and when it waxeth thicke and white, than it is in the augmentation: and when the blearednes is great, cloſing the eylids, than it is in the ſtate; and when that beginneth to diminiſh, than it is in the declining: and blearednes which hath little peeces is euill, as Auicen ſayth.
                     
                     Opthalmia quae eſt in hieme cum particularibus concurrentibusOpthalmia in hieme. in frigiditate, tardius venit & tardius recedit, & eſt magis periculoſa propter clauſionem pororum.
                     
                        That Opthalmia which chaunceth in winter with particulars concurring in coldneſſe, hapneth ſlowly and goeth away ſlowly, and is more daungerous by reaſon of the ſhutting of the pores.
                     
                     Illa autem quae eſt in aeſtate, citius venit & citius recedit.Opthalmia in aeſtate.
                     
                     
                        That Opthalima which is in Sommer time, commeth ſooner, and goeth away ſooner.
                     
                     Opthalmia ſi malè curetur malas reliquias dimittit ſicutReliquie opthalmiae. eſt macula, pannus, tela, & ita de alijs.
                     
                        If Opthalmia bee not well cured, it leaueth behinde it euill reliques, ſuch as is the bloudie ſpot, pannicle, webbe, and ſuch like.
                     
                     Opthalmia quae antiquatur, in qua non proficiunt medicamina, eſt peſsima inter omnes, quoniam ſignificatur humor corruptus inuiſcatus, corrumpens nutrimentum.
                     Opthalmia, that is inueterated wherein medicines are not auaileable is the worſt of all, becauſe it ſignifieth a corrupt ſlimie humour corrupting the nouriſhment.
                     
                     Si panaritio non ſubitò ſuccurritur, corrumpit primam iuncturam digiti, quae cum oſſe deperditur & manat ab eo ſanies ſubtilis foetida, quando ad putredinem deuenit.
                     
                        If a felon be not ſpeedily helped, it putrifleth the firſt ioynt of
                        
                        the finger, which together with the bone is vtterly loſt, and when it commeth to putrifaction there floweth from it thin ſtinking matter.
                     
                     Infrigidantia à principio ſunt applicanda ad confirmationemMedican i
                              •
                           a qua panant
                              ••
                            ſunt applicanda à 
                              〈…〉
                           
                         prohibendam, ſed poſt principium eorum vſus inculcat materiam, & auget dolorem.
                     
                        Cold things muſt bee applped in the beginning to hinder the confirming of the griefe, but the vſe of them after the beginning, impacteth the matter and encreaſeth the payne.
                     
                     Si videris hoc apoſtema ad exituram diſponi, applica maturantia, & cura eo modo, quo aliae exiturae curantur.
                     
                        If you perceiue this impoſtume to growe to a tumor, applie maturatiues, and cure it in that order as other tumors require.
                     
                     Verum ſi dolor intenſiſsimus perſeueret, & nullum appareat ſignum exiturae futurae, finde digitum lateraliter ab vngue vſque ad os, & ſtatim ſedabit dolor.
                     
                        But if the intollerable payne doe remayne, and no ſigne of any tumor appeare, then make inciſion all along the firſt ioynt of the finger hard by the ſide of the naile to the very bone, and preſently the payne will ceaſe.
                     
                     Omnes puſtulae ſi negligantur & non mundificentur inIn ſcabiem conuertuntur. ſcabiem conuertuntur.
                     
                        All puſtules if they be neglected, and not mundified, they turne into ſcabbes.
                     
                     Puſtulae ſi fuerint de cauſa calida ad impetiginem & ſerpiginemDecauſa calida ad imperiginem & ſerpiginem vergunt. & alia mala accidentia vergunt.
                     
                        Puſtules that come of a hote cauſe doe turne to Impetigo, and Serpigo, and other euill accidents.
                     
                     Si autem fuerint de phlegmate poſt ſcabiem in fiſtulam conuertuntur.
                     
                        Puſtules that come of flegme after the Scabbe doe turne to aDe phlegmate. Fiſtula.
                     
                     Si fuerint de melancholia difficilè curantur.De melancholia.
                     
                     
                        
                        Puſtules that come of melancholie are hard to be cured.
                     
                     Puſtulae liuidae in vlla parte corporis emergentes, citoquePuſtulae liuidae. euaneſcentes malum portendunt.
                     
                        Puſtules that bee of ſwartiſh colour appearing in any part of the bodie, and ſodainly vaniſhing away, are a ſigne of eutll.
                     
                     Putredo oritur cum vapores humidi in membro includuntur; & ibi adeo impediti ſunt, vt euaporari nequeunt.
                     
                        Putrefaction commeth when moyſt vapors are included within the member, ſo as they cannot cuaporate.
                     
                     In putredinem humiditas & calor cito tranſeunt, ſi non bono regimine gubernentur.
                     
                        Moyſture and heate being not well gouerned, will ſpeedily turne to putrefaction.
                     
                     Putredo à narcoticis nonnunquam accidit.
                     
                        Putrefaction is often cauſed by the application of ſlupefactiue medicines.
                     
                  
                  
                     S
                     
                        De Sanguine.
                        SAnguis tenuis, totum per corpus non diſperſus, externaSanguis tenuis ſola inflammat, eryſipelas nothum generans.
                        
                           Thinne bloud not diſperſed through the whoſe bodie, 
                                 •
                              nſlameth the outward parts, cauſing a baſtard Eryſipelas.
                        Sanguis ſubſtantia groſſus & calidus carbunculos parit.Sanguis groſſus & calidus.
                        
                        
                           Bloud that is groſſe in ſubſtaunce and hate, cauſeth Carbuncles.
                        
                        Sanguinis naturalis copia phlegmonem parit.Sanguis naturalis.
                        
                        
                           Abundance of naturall bloud cauſeth Biles.
                        
                     
                     
                        Iudicium de ſanguine emiſſo, ex ſubſtantia.
                        SErum multum tanquam aqua citrina concreto ſanguiniSerum multum. innatans, vel potum liberaliorem vel iecur infirmum,

vel imbecilles renes vel eoſdem obſtructos oſtendit.
                        
                           Much whey like vnto yellow water, ſwimming aloft of congealed bloud, ſheweth either much drinking, or a weake Lyuer: or weake or ſtopped kidneyes.
                        
                        Spuma innatans niſi fluoris impetu nata eſt, incendium,Spum
                                 •
                              
                            atque feruorem eius humoris monſtrat, cuius colorem prae ſe fert: rubra quidem, ſanguinis; flaua, bilis▪ alba, pituitae; liuida, melancholiae.
                        
                           Froth ſwimming aloft, except it be by the force of the fluxe, ſheweth burning and heate of that humor, whoſe colour it beareth, as if it be red, it cōmeth of bloud, yellow, of choller, white, of flegme, ſwartiſh, of melancholy.
                        
                        Sanguinis dureſcentis color per ſumma rubicundus, boniColor rub
                                 •
                              
                              ▪cundus. vtiliſque ſanguinis eſt index.
                        
                           The colour of congealed bloud being red aboue, is a ſigne of good and profitable bloud.
                        
                        Sanguini innatat nonnunquam pingue quiddam & adipoſumPingued
                                 •
                              . inſtar telae aranei cohaerens: hoc, ſi admodum pingue & obeſum ſit corpus, ex ipſo ſanguine cauſam habet, qui eſt in adipem pronus. Sin corpus ſtrigoſius ſit minuſque obeſum, idipſum colliquari & marceſcere portendit.
                        
                           There ſwimmeth ſometimes in the bloud a certaine fatneſſe, cleauing together like a Spiders webbe: if the body be very fat, it was cauſed of ſuch bloud, which is enclined to fatneſſe: but if the bodie be verie leane, the ſame is a ſigne of the withering and decay thereof.
                        
                        Si diffiſo ſanguine, grana quaedam arenularum aemula offendantur:Gra
                                 ••
                               arenularum. aiunt vel elephantiaſin vel ad hanc propenſionem notari: quanquam obſeruantibus nihil tale deprehenſum eſt.
                        
                           If in the bloud being cut, certayne graynes like ſand be found, ſome ſay it ſignifieth the Leproſy, or an inclination thereunto, although they that haue obſerued, haue not
                           
                           found it any ſuch thing.
                        
                        Si ſanguinem grauè olere (quod rarum eſt) contigerit,Gra
                                 ••
                               
                              
                                 •
                              lens. putredinis corruptioniſque immenſae eſt inditium.
                        
                           If it chance that the bloud ſtincketh, which hapneth ſeldome, it is a ſigne of very great putrefaction and corruption.
                        
                        Scabies in decrepitis eſt difficilis curationis aut impoſſibilis.Scabies in decrepitis.
                        
                        
                           The Scab in old age is very hard or vnpoſſible to be cured.
                        
                        Scabies foeda vlceratione foetida, multas partes corporisScabies foeda cum vlceratione faetida. occupans, & corrumpens, habet malam radicem, & approximatur ad malas aegritudines, & difficilis curationis valde.
                        
                           A filthy Scab, with ſtincking vlceration, in many parts of the bodie corrupting, hath an euill roote, and draweth néere the nature of euil diſeaſes, being alſo very hard of curation.
                        
                        Scabies ſi fuerit parua, modicam partem corporis occupans,Scabies parua. ſine magna anguſtia, & non ſomnum auferens, facilè curabitur, & e contrario contrariè.
                        
                           A ſmall Scab, occupying but a little part of the body, without any great anguiſh, and not diminiſhing ſléepe, is eaſily cured, and contrarywiſe, contraryly.
                        
                     
                     
                        De Strumis.
                        Strumae paruae facilius curantur, magnae difficilius.Strumae paruae & magnae.
                        
                        
                           Small wennes are eaſy to be cured, but great ones are hard.
                        
                        Strumae mites facile curam recipiunt, malignae aegrè.Strumae mites & malignae.
                        
                        
                           Wennes without payne and anguiſh are eaſy to be cured, but thoſe which are froward, will hardly receiue curation.
                        
                        Strumae ſuperficiariae facilè ſanantur profundoe difficulter.Strumae ſuperficiariae & profundae. Stru
                                 •
                              ae recentes & inuete
                                 •
                              a
                                 •
                              ae.
                        
                        
                           Thoſe wennes which ſye néere the ſkinne are eaſy to be cured, but thoſe which lye deepe within the fleſh, are hard to cure.
                        
                        Strumae recentes diſcuti & reſolui poſſunt, inueteratae

diſcuti & reſolui nequeunt.
                        
                           Wennes of ſmall continuance may be reſolued, but thoſe which are inueterated, can not be reſolued.
                        
                        Dolor & calor oſtendunt ſtrumam vel in ſuppurationemDolor aut calor. ire vel in fiſtulam aut cancrum degenerari.
                        
                           Payne and heate in a wenne, declareth the ſame eyther to turne to ſuppuration, or elſe into a Fiſtulae or Cancker.
                        
                        Qui breui atque anguſta ſunt fronte, & compreſſa habentQui ſtru
                                 •••
                               obnoxij ſu
                                 ••
                              . tēpora, ac maxillas amplas, ſtrumis ſunt obnoxij.
                        
                           They that haue a ſhort and narrow forhead, and their temples compaſſed with large iawes, are incident to haue wennes.
                        
                        Strumae non facilè matureſcunt & plerun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            iterum iuxta cicatrices ipſas reſurgunt.
                        
                           Wennes are hardly ripened, and oftentimes they do riſe agayne beſide the cicatrices.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     T.
                     TInea eſt ſcabies capitis cū ſquammis & pilorum euulſione,Tinea quid▪
                         & colore cinericeo, & odore foetido & aſpectu abhominabili.
                     Tinea, or the ſkall, is a ſcabbe of the head, with ſcales, and falling of the heare, in colour like vnto aſhes, ſtincking ſauour, and in ſight abhominable.
                     
                     Tinea ſi ſit recens tamen cum difficultate curatur.Tinea 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪
                        
                     
                     
                        A ſkall if it be new, yet is it hard to be cured.
                     
                     Si ſit antiqua aut nunquam, aut cum labore magno, & inTinea antiqua▪
                         longiſsimo tempore; quoniam mala complexio venit ad tantam adaequationem, quod quaſi non accipit curationem, & ideo ſi curetur raro ibi pili naſcuntur & illa pars ſemper erit debilior.
                     
                        If the ſkall be olde, it is neuer cured, or with great laboure, and in long time, becauſe that euill complexion commeth to ſuch equalitie, that it cannot almoſt receiue curation, and therefore if it be cured, the haire will ſeldome
                        
                        growe in that place agayne, and that part wil be alwayes weaker.
                     
                     
                        De Tumoribus.
                     
                     TVmores ex flegmate nati ſunt vt plurimum indolentes.Tumores a flegmate.
                     
                     
                        Tumors that proceed of flegme, are for the moſt part without griefe.
                     
                     Tumores de atra bile orti ſemper doloroſi.Tumores de 
                              •
                           tra bile.
                     
                     
                        Tumors proceeding of melancholy, are alwayes greeuous.
                     
                     Tumores de flaua bile & ſanguine nati nunquam dolore deſtituuntur.Tumore de flaua bile & ſanguine.
                     
                     
                        Tumors comming of yellow choller and bloud, are neuer without great payne.
                     
                     Tumor durus circa teſtes, cum carnis excretione, difficulterCirca teſtes tumor durus. curatur.
                     
                        A hard tumor about the teſticles, with excretion of the fleſh, is hard to be cured.
                     
                     Tumor ceruicis promittit ſalutem in angina.Tumor ceruicis.
                     
                     
                        A tumor in the throate, betokeneth health in Angina.
                     
                     Tumores concocti ſunt molles, crudi vero duri.Tumore▪ molles & dun.
                     
                     
                        Ripe tumors are ſoft, but vnripe are hard.
                     
                  
                  
                     V.
                     
                        De Venae ſectione.
                        TEmpus in quo venae ſectio vtenda venit a februarioTempus in quo venae ſectio ſit vtenda. incipit, & rurſus a ſeptembri, ad ſeptimum eiuſdem perdurans.
                        
                           The time when letting of bloud muſt be vſed, beginneth at February, and agayne at September, enduring to the ſeauenth day thereof.
                        
                        Venam ſaepius incidere in anno non expedit.Saepe in anno venam incidere. Obſtructiones curat.
                        
                        
                           It is not good to be let bloud oft in one yeare.
                        
                        In obſtructionibus curandis, ante omnia venam ſecare 

oportet, etiamſi plenitudo non adſit.
                        
                           In the curing of obſtructions, letting of bloud before all other is to be vſed, although there be no fulnes.
                        
                        Quouis tempore & hora mittere ſanguinem neceſsitasQuouis tempore & hora mittere ſanguinem. concedit & iubet.
                        
                           If neceſſitie doe require, Phlebotomie may bee vſed at any time.
                        
                        Non dierum numerus ſed vnicum virium robur conſiderandumFit febribus continui
                                 •
                              . in ſectione venae febrium continuarum.
                        
                           For Phlebotomie in continuall Feuers, not the number of daies, but onely the ſtrength of the partie is to bee conſidered.
                        
                        A ſanguinis miſsione abſtinendum eſt vbi ſanguis bonusA ſanguinis miſsione vbi abſtinendum. exiguus eſt.
                        
                           Abſtayne from Phlebotomie where there is but a little good bloud.
                        
                        Venae ſectio quaecunque & quouis modo facta aequabiliterTotum corpu
                                 •
                               euacuat. totum corpus euacuat.
                        
                           Euery manner of letting of bloud doth equally euatuate the whole bodie.
                        
                        Nullus paene morbus, in quo non mittatur ſanguis.In omni ſerè morbo valet.
                        
                        
                           There is almoſt no diſeaſe wherein Phlebotomie may not be vſed.
                        
                        Vehemens febris, vbi rubet corpus venaeque tument, ſanguinisFebris vehemens. detractionem requirit.
                        
                           A vehement Feuer where the bodie is red and the veynes doe ſwell, requireth letting of bloud.
                        
                        Si timidè ſcalpellus dimittatur ſummam cutem lacerat nec venam incidit.
                        
                           If Phlebotomy be done fearfully, it doth but teare the ſkinne and miſſe the veyne.
                        
                        Poſt longam aegritudinem, cauendum à phlebotomia.A phlebotomia cauendū.
                        
                        
                           After long ſickneſſe beware of bloud-letting.
                        
                        Tempore calidiſsimo, & frigidiſsimo, nullo modo fiatTempore calidiſſimo & frigidiſſimo. phlebotomia.
                        
                           
                           In extremitie of wether, hote or colde, Phlebotomie ought in no wiſe to be vſed.
                        
                        Ver & autumnus ſunt tempora aptiſsima phlebotomiae.Tempus in quo m
                                 •
                              ttatur.
                        
                        
                           The Spring and Autumne are moſt conuenient times for bloud-letting.
                        
                        Aere exiſtente peſtilentiali, nubiloſo vel turbido aut ſlanteNon ſecetur vena. vento auſtrali non ſecetur vena.
                        
                           When the ayre is peſtilent, clowdie or troubled, or when the South winde bloweth, do not let bloud.
                        
                        In aeſtate octaua hora et hieme meridies eligātur in phlebotomia.Hora phlebotomie 
                                 •
                              ligenda.
                        
                        
                           In Sommer take eight of the Clocke, and in Winter, noone, for the houre of Phlebotomie.
                        
                        Si luna ſit in ſigno habente aſpectum malum ad aliquodCautela. membrum non fiat phlebotomia de illo membro.
                        
                           If the Moone bee in any ſigne, hauing an euill aſpect to any member, do not let bloud on that member.
                        
                        Ante Phlebotomiam bonum eſt exercitari, moueri, e
                              •
                           igilariAnte phlebotomiam. vt ſanguis ſit mobilior.
                        
                           Before bloudletting, it is good to be exerciſed, to moue, and to watch, whereby the bloud may be more moueable.
                        
                        Membrum phlebotomandum eſt frigandum & calefaciendum,Membrum. cum aqua calida lauandum, vt vena ſit apertior & ſanguis fluxibilior.
                        
                           The member that you will let bloud muſt be chaffed and heated with hote water, that the veyne may bee more apparant and the bloud more fluent.
                        
                        Si phlebotomandus eſt valde debilis comedat prius panem
                              
                                 ••
                               ſit debilis. & bibat vinum ſtipticum.
                        
                           If a weake bodie muſt bee let bloud, let him eate bread and drinke ſtiptick wine before.
                        
                        In aeſtate & vere fiat phlebotomia in parte dextra, autumnoP
                                 •••
                               qua ſanguis emi
                                 •
                              itur. & hieme, ſiniſtra.
                        
                           In the Sommer and Spring let bloud on the right ſide, and
                           
                           in Autumne and Winter on the left.
                        
                        In materia venenoſa debet fieri phlebotomia ex eademMateria venoſa. parte.
                        
                           In venimous matter let bloud on the ſame ſide.
                        
                        Qui annos 60 habent, cephalicam non aperiant.Qui annos 60 habent.
                        
                        
                           At threeſcore yéeres let not bloud in cephalica.
                        Qui ſenes ſunt & aegroti edant iuſcula & bibant vinumSenes & aegroti. bonum vna vel altera hora ante ſectionem.
                        
                           Olde men and ſicke perſons may eate broth and drinke Wine one houre or two before they be let bloud.
                        
                        Qui facile ac ſaepe ſudant, indigent venae ſectione.Qui phlebotomia indigent. Sectio conin
                                 •
                              ta.
                        
                        
                           They that ſweate eaſely and often neede bloudletting.
                        
                        Sectio conſueta non ſine periculo praetermittitur.
                        
                           Accuſtomed bloudletting may not bee let paſſe without daunger.
                        
                        A ſectione cibo vtere bono, ac tenui, vino ſubtili, vitansPoſt ſectionem. aquam mulſam, ceruiſiam, piſces & quae generant malum ſanguinem.
                        
                           After bloudletting vſe good meate, thinne diet, thinne wine, eſchew Honiedwater, Ale, Fiſh, and thoſe things which engender euill bloud.
                        
                        Sectio venarum nō vrgente neceſsitate obeſt potius quam prodeſt.
                        
                           Bloud letten without neede vrging thereunto, doth more hurt then good.
                        
                     
                     
                        De Ʋariolis.
                        SI variolae fuerint paucae & cito apparentes & quod citoVariolae paucae. maturentur ſigna ſunt bonae criſis.
                        
                           If the meaſels be fewe in quantitie, ſoone appearing, and that they be ſoone ripened, are ſignes of a good criſis.
                        
                        Si vergant ad colorem violaceum, aut liuidum, aut viridemAd colorem violaccum, liuidum, viridem, aut nigrū vergentes. aut nigrum, omnes peſsimae & mortales.
                        
                           If they turne to bee blew, or ſwartiſh, or greene, or blacke colour,
                           
                           they are very euill and deadly.
                        
                        Si autem appareat ſanies foetida mortale.Sanies foetida.
                        
                        
                           But if ſtinking matter do appeare, it is deadly.
                        
                     
                     
                        De vulneribus generalis clocutio.
                        OMnis ſolutio facta in membro bonae complexionis, deMembri complexio. facili curatur, ſed cum eſt in corpore male complexionato de difficili curatur.
                        
                           Euery wound that is made in a member of good complexion is eaſely cured, but when it is in an euill complexioned bodie, it is hardly cured.
                        
                        Vulnera membrorum radicalium cum deperditione ſubſtantiaeVulnera mē
                              brorum radicalium. nunquam perfectè reſtaurantur, ſed ſine deperditione ſubſtantiae bene poſſunt vniri in pueritia, in alijs aetatibus verò non, ſed fit porus in circuitu.
                        
                           Wounds in the radicall members with loſſe of ſubſtance, are neuer perfectly reſtored: but if they be without loſſe of ſubſtance, they may well bee vnited in youth, and not in other ages: but that there remaineth a certaine concrete ſubſtance in the place.
                        
                        Omne vulnus tranſiens à ſuperficie in ſuperficiem eſt malum,Vulnus tranſiens à ſuperficie ad ſuperficiem. quia natura non inuenit radicem vnde ſumat principium.
                        
                           Euery wound going from one ſuperficially part to another is euill, becauſe nature hath not found out a roote from whēce ſhe might take her beginning, of healing.
                           
                        
                        Si in vulneribus propter nimium fluxum venerit alienatio,A
                                 ••
                              enatio. Spaſmus. Syncope. eſt malum, & ſi ſpaſmus vt plurimum moriuntur; & ſi ſyncope cum ſingultu mors eſt in ianuis.
                        
                           If in wounds, by reaſon of ouermuch fluxe of bloud, there chaunce alienation of the minde, it is euill; and if a cramp happen, for the moſt part they dye; but if there come ſownding, with yeſking, death is at the doore.
                        
                        Vulnera periculo non vacant dum poſt ſeptimum diem.
                              
                                 ••
                              ando periculo vacant.
                        
                        
                           
                           Wounds are not paſt danger vntill after the ſeauenth day.
                        
                        Vulnera a dolore & ſymptomate non aſſerta ſunt, donecQuando a dolore & ſymptomate aſſerta ſunt. pus concoquitur.
                        
                           Woundes are not voyde of greefe and accidents, vntill the matter be digeſted.
                        
                        Vulneribus magnis tumor non apparens malum.Tumoria vulneribus magnis. Vulnera maligna.
                        
                        
                           No ſwelling appearing in great woundes, is very euill.
                        
                        Vulnera ſunt maligna ſi ſunt vndiquaque glabra.
                        
                           Thoſe wounds are maligne where the heare falleth off round about.
                        
                        Vulneribus accidit febris die tertio, vel ſeptimo, aut non.Febris quand
                                 •
                               accidit.
                        
                        
                           To woundes chanceth a Feuer in the third or ſeauenth day, or not at all.
                        
                        Sanguis in vulneribus congelatus celerimè rèmoueri ooportet,Sanguis congelata. ne dolor aut putrefactio inſequatur.
                        
                           Bloud that is congealed in woundes muſt be remoued with ſpeede, for feare of paine and putrefaction.
                        
                        Vulnera in partibus ijs quae aſsiduo motu aguntur, raròIn partibus ijs quae aſsiduo motu aguntur. aut nunquam curantur.
                        
                           Woundes in thoſe parts which are without reſt, will hardly or neuer receiue curation.
                        
                        Vulneribus quae incidunt in finibus muſculorum maiusIn finibus muſculorum. imminet periculum quam quibus in medio.
                        
                           Woundes in the endes of the muſcles, are more dangerous, then in the middeſt.
                        
                        Quae in medio muſculorum contingunt optimè curātur.In medio muſculorum.
                        
                        
                           Wounds in the middeſt of the muſcles are eaſy to be cured.
                        
                        Vulnera ſymptomatum expertia paruo nixu curantur.Abſque ſymptomatibus.
                        
                        
                           Woundes voyde of accidents, are eaſy to be cured.
                        
                        Vulnus ad os vſque penetrans, oſsis ſanationem primumOſsis vulnus▪
                            petit, ante carnem regenerare cupias.
                        
                           A wounde in the bone requireth the healing thereof before incarnation of the fleſhe.
                        
                        
                           Vulnera oſsium, neruorum, cartilaginum, tendinum,Oſsium, neruorum, cartilaginum, tendinum, panniculorum, venarum, atque arteriarum vi laus. Carnis vulnera. panniculorum, venarum atque arteriarum ſecundum primam intentionem reſtitui ne expectes quidem.
                        
                           Woundes in the bones, ſinewes, griſtles, tendons, pannicles, veynes, and arteries, may not be looked for to be reſtored according to the firſt intention.
                        
                        Vulnera carnis prima intentione reſtitui poſſunt.
                        
                           Woundes in the fleſh may be reſtored by the way of the firſt intention.
                        
                        Vulnus cum carnis diuiſione citius curatur quam cum ſubſtantiae deperditione.
                        
                           A wounde with diuiſion of fleſh onely is ſooner cured, then with loſſe of ſubſtance.
                        
                        Vulneris principio patiens, tenui ordiendus eſt dieta,Vulneris principio. vſque ad diem ſeptimum, praeſertim ſi fuerit calidus plethoricus.
                        
                           In the beginning of a wounde, the Patient muſt be ordered with a thinne dyet, vntill the ſeauenth day, eſpecially if he haue a hote and full bodie.
                        
                        Vulnera profunda & magna, neſuito, nam intro materiamProfunda & magna vulnera. corruptam & fortaſſe venenoſam includere periculum eſt.
                        
                           Stitch not great and déepe wounds, for that it is in danger to ſhut in the corrupt and peraduenture venemous matter.
                        
                        Vulnus contuſum, concauum vel diſcratum, in oſſe apoſtema,Conſolidantia 
                                 〈◊〉
                               non ſunt adhibenda. punctura in neruo, minime conſolidari debent.
                        
                           A contuſed hollow wound of diſtempered, an impoſtume in the bone, and a prick in the ſinewe, muſt be kept open.
                        
                        Vulnus lethale eſt, acceptum in cerebro, corde, pulmone,Vulnera lethalia. diaphragmate, ventriculo, iecore, veſica & tenuibus inteſtinis.
                        
                           A wounde is deadly in the brayne, hart, lungs, midriffe, ſtomacke, liuer, bladder, and ſmall guttes.
                        
                        Vulnera capitis, & ſtomachi & hepatis, aut ſplenis autVulnera quae ſi parua ſint curari poſſunt.
                           
renum, aut veſicae, aut matricis, aut inteſtinorum, ſiſi magna nunquam aut raro. ſint parua poſſunt curari, ſin magna, nunquā aut raro.
                        
                           Wounds in the head, ſtomack, liuer, ſplene, kidneies, bladder, matrice, or intrels, if they be ſmall may be cured, if they be great, they will hardly or neuer be cured.
                        
                        Cerebri vulnera, ſcotoniam, lethargiam, apoplexiam &Cerebri vulnera. tales affectus proferunt.
                        
                           Woundes in the brayne bring giddineſſe, lethargies, apoplexies, and ſuch like diſeaſes.
                        
                        Si cerebrum vulneretur, ſanies eſt craſſa, globoſa, & medullaris:Signa cerebri vulnera
                                 ••
                              . ſpumaque ex ore, vertigo, ſpaſmus, febris, vomitus bilis, ſtupor & deſipientia ſequuntur.
                        
                           If the brayne be wounded, the matter is thicke, round, and mareylike: and foming at the mouth, giddineſſe, cramps, feuers, vomiting of choller, aſtoniſhment, and dotage do follow.
                        
                        Cum cerebrum vehementer concutitur, vox amittitur.
                        
                           When the braine is ſore ſhaken, ſpeach is taken away.
                        
                        Cerebro corrupto mors poſt triduum ſequitur.
                        
                           The braine being corrupted, death followeth within thrée dayes.
                        
                        Vulnera capitis, cranio valente vel haud multum diminuto,Capitis vulnera cranio valente. curatu ſunt facilia.
                        
                           Woundes in the head where cranium is ſound or not much diminiſhed, are eaſy to be cured.
                        
                        Nigrities in partibus vulneri adiacentibus, conuulſioSigna mala. paraliſis, ciborum abſtinentia corporiſque frigiditas, praeſagiunt malum & paene inſanabile.
                        
                           Blacknes in the parts neare vnto the wound, the crampe, palſey, eſchewing of meate, and vniuerſall coldneſſe of the whole body, are euill ſignes, and almoſt vncurable.
                        
                        Concoctio bona, vulneris rubedo, oſsis albedo, cumSigna bona. humiditatis repletione in partibus adiacentibus & ciborum appetitus, bonum ac ſanabile prognoſticant.
                        
                           
                           Good dgeſtion, redneſſe of the wound, whiteneſſe of the bone, with fulneſſe of moyſture about the partes adiacent, and appetite to meate, doth prognoſticate good, and healthfulneſſe to the wound.
                        
                        Cum magnis capitis vulneribus non bonum eſt verſari in plenilunio.
                        
                           It is not good to be ouerbuſy with great woundes in the head in the full of the moone.
                        
                        Amigdalae propter vaporoſum quendam effectum ijs inſitum,Amigdalae. vulneribus capitis ſunt nociuae.
                        
                           Almonds are hurtfull for woundes in the head, by reaſon of a certayne fu
                                 ••
                              oſity in them naturally contayned.
                        
                        Vinum vulneribus capitis vel neruoſis niſi imminet magnaVinum. debilitas, malum.
                        
                           Wine is naught for wounds in the head and ſinewes, except there be great weakeneſſe.
                        
                        In carnoſis faciei partibus vulnera facilimè curantur.Faciei vulnera.
                        
                        
                           Woundes in the fleſhy parts of the face are eaſy to be cured.
                        
                        Oculorum vulnera ſunt periculoſa tum propter ipſumOculorum vulnera. viſum tum propter cerebri vicinitatem; caeterum ſi effundantur humores, ſequitur deſtructio oculi.
                        
                           Woundes in the eyes are dangerous both in reſpect of the ſight, and alſo of the vicinitie of the brayne, but if the humors do runne out, then followeth deſtruction of the eye.
                        
                        Oculi rubei, etiam inflati, internam capitis laeſionemSigna partium internarum laeſionis. ſignificant: quod ſi bilis, primo, vel ſecundo, vel tertio die, vel deinceps vomitio appareat, laeſionem internarum partium ſignificat, non cerebri, ſed meningum.
                        
                           If the eyes be red and ſwollen, it ſignifieth the inward parts of the head to be hurt: not the brayne, but dura mater is hurt, if choller in the firſt, ſecond, or third day, or afterward be vomited.
                        
                        Vulnera oculorum febres, apoſtemata, & lippitudinesOculorum vulnera. adferunt.
                        
                           
                           Woundes in the eyes bring Feuers, Impoſtumes, and blearedues.
                        
                        Aurium vulnera lethargiam & fiſtulas perducunt.Auriū vulnera.
                        
                        
                           Woundes in the eares bring forgetfulnes and fiſtulaes.
                        
                        Colli vulnera periculo non vacant: is enim locus eſt maiorum neruorum.
                        
                           Wounds in the necke are not free from daunger, becauſe it is the place of great ſinewes.
                        
                        Colli vulnera magis ambigui ſunt quàm faciei.Colli vulnera.
                        
                        
                           Wounds of the necke are more doubtfull than thoſe of the face.
                        
                        Si neruus in collo incidatur motus perit.
                        
                           If a ſinewe in the necke be cut, ſome motion periſheth.
                        
                        Vulnera in ſcapulis periculoſa ſunt reſpectu neruorum abIn ſcapulis vulnera. nucha, & brachij iuncturarum, muſculorúm
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           .
                        
                           Wounds in the ſhoulderblades are daungerous, by reaſon of the ſinewes comming from the backe, and by reaſon of the ioynts and muſcles of the arme.
                        
                        Vulnera magna in ſcapulis adferunt febres, ſpaſmum, paraliſim, apoſtemata cum immenſo humorum influxu.
                        
                           Great woundes vppon the ſhoulderblades bring Feuers, Crampes, Palſies, Impoſtumes, with great inflowing of humors.
                        
                        Dorſi vulnera ſpaſmos, febres, & mentis perturbationesDorſi vulnera. gignunt.
                        
                           Wounds in the backe bone bringeth Cramps, Feuers, and perturbation of the minde.
                        
                        Vulnus ad ſpinalem medullam pertingens mortale & incurabile;Ad ſpinalem medullam pertingens vulnus. ſi verò non perueniat ad medullam, licet ſit curabile, timendum tamen eſt proper laeſionem neruorum orientium ab illa parte nuchae; & propter nocumentum ſenſus, & motus eorum membrorum, ad quae iſti nerui delegantur.
                        
                           A wound in the ſpinall marrowe is deadly and vncurable; but
                           
                           if it come not to the marrowe, although it be curable, yet it is to bee feared, for hurting of the ſinewes, ſpringing from that part of the backe: and ſo for hurting the ſence and motion of the members whereinto theſe ſinewes are ſent.
                        
                        Vulnera pulmonum, pthiſim, peripneumoniam & fiſtulasPulmonum. procreant.
                        
                           Woundes in the Lungs bring conſumption and inflammation of the Lungs, and fiſtulaes.
                        
                        Pulmones eſſe vulneratas indicia haec ſunt: ſanguis rubicundusSigna pulmones vulneratas eſſe. eſt ſpumoſus, ſputum cruentum ſpumoſum, tuſsis, rumor in gutture, breuis anhelitus, praeſertim ſi vox pereat, aut cum ſono ſpiritus reddatur, & ſi inclinans in vulnus aeger loquatur, & in aliam partem obmuteſcat.
                        
                           The ſignes that the Lungs be wounded are theſe, viz. red and frothie bloud, bloudie and frothie ſpittle, a cough, noyſe in the throte, ſhort breath; eſpecially if the voyce doe fayle, or the breath be deliuered with ratling, alſo if bending toward the wound the patient ſpeake, but bending himſelfe otherwiſe cannot ſpeake.
                        
                        Diaphragmatis vulnera ſpaſmos, anhelitus difficultatem,Diaphragmatis vulnera. & acutas febres perducunt.
                        
                           Wounds in the midriffe bring Cramps, ſtraightnes of breath and ſharpe Feuers.
                        
                        Signa diaphragmatis vulnerati, ſunt, ſpiratio magna &Signa diaphragmatis vulnerati. frequens, tuſsis cum ſternutatione, alienatio, ſputum liuidum, ſitis, cibi faſtidium, rigor, & vulnus circa nothas coſtas.
                        
                           The ſignes that Diaphragma is wounded are theſe, great and thicke breathing, a cough with ſnorting, alienation of the minde, ſwartiſh ſpittle, thirſt, loathing of meate, ſtifnes, and the wound being about the falſe ribbes.
                        
                        Hepatis vulnera inflammationes, apoſtemata, & ſanguineosHepatis vulnera. eoſque continuos fluxus perducunt.
                        
                           Woundes in the Liuer bring inflammations, Impoſtumes
                           
                           and continuall fluxes of bloud.
                        
                        Si in parte dextra & prope nothas coſtas vulnus ſit & multusSigna hae
                                 ••
                              
                              tis laeſ
                                 •
                              . ſanguis perfluit craſſus, iecur laeſum eſſe conijcimus.
                        
                           If the wound be in the right ſide and nere vnto the falſe ribbes and that great quantitie of thick bloud iſſue out, we coniecture the Liuer to be hurt.
                        
                        Pectoris vulnera non intus penetrantia facilè curantur; &Pectoris vulnera. è contrario contrariè.
                        
                           Wounds of the breaſt not pearcing into the bulke, are caſie of curation: and contrariwiſe contrarily.
                        
                        Cordis vulnera lethalia ſunt, quia eſt effector vitalis ſpiritusCordis vulnera. & fons arteriarum.
                        
                           Woundes in the heart are deadly, becauſe it is the maker of vitall ſpirites, and originall of arteries.
                        
                        Corvulneratum eſſe indicia haec ſunto; ſanguis niger effluens,Signa cordis vulnerati. extremorum frigiditas, ſudores frigidi, ſyncope, color pallidus ac totae vires debilitatae.
                        
                           The ſignes that the heart is wounded are theſe, blacke bloud flowing out of the wound, coldneſſe of the outward parts, colde ſweats, ſownding, pale colour, and the whole ſtrength decayed.
                        
                        In inteſtinis magnis ob externas eorum carnoſitates vulneraInteſtinorum vulnera. ſanabilia videntur: exiguis autem longe periculoſiora ac dolorum pleniora, propter ſubſtantiam eorum neruoſam.
                        
                           Wounds in ye great guttes by reaſon of their outward fleſhines are eaſie to bee cured: but farre more daungerous are woundes in the ſmall guttes, and more paynfull; becauſe they are of ſinewie ſubſtance.
                        
                        Vulnera renum, ſpaſmum, alienationem animi, & mortemRenum vulnera. inferunt.
                        
                           Woundes in the Kidneis bring the Crampe, perturbation of the minde and death.
                        
                        
                           Veſicae vulnus adfert ſpaſmum, vrinae fluxum continuumVulnera veſicae mortemque.
                        
                           Wounds in the bladder bring the Crampe, continuall fluxe of vrine and deat
                                 •
                              .
                        
                        Omne vulnus prope circiterue iuncturam vllam, muſculiIuncturarum vulnus actionem membri depriuat. alicuius originem aut inſertionem ſeparet neceſſe eſt. Muſculus eſt inſtrumentum motus voluntarij, ergo omne vulnus inſtrumenta motus voluntarij ſupprimens, actionem membri ſequentis depriuare oportet.
                        
                           Euery wound that is made neere or about any ioynt doth of neceſſitie ſeparate either the riſing or inſertion of ſome muſcle. A muſcle is the inſtrument of voluntarie mouing: Therefore euery wound that ſuppreſſeth the inſtruments of voluntarie mouing muſt needes depriue the action of the member following.
                        
                        Iuncturarum vulnera periculoſa, quoniam neruis, tendonibus,Iuncturarum vulnera quare periculoſa ſunt. & ligamentis vinciuntur, membraniſque veſtiuntur.
                        
                           Woundes in the ioynts bee daungerous, becauſe they bee enwrapped with Sinewes, Tendons, Ligaments and Pannicles.
                        
                        Iuncturarum vulnera ſequuntur febres, ſpaſmi, & membri deprauatio.
                        
                           Upon woundes in the ioynts followe Feuers, Cramps and deprauation of the member.
                        
                        Vulnera iuncturarum cum neruorum ac tendinum diſſectioneVtrum neruus vel tendo diſſectus ſit cognolcere. eſſe ſolent, quare ſi ſtatim aeger totum manum aut maiotem partem manus, ſtupidam, grauem, frigidam ſenſerit, neruum laeſum eſſe veriſimile eſt; quod ſi ſine magna inflatione ſit, & neque flectere neque extendere poſsit, tendo illius partis diſſectus eſt.
                        
                           Wounds in the ioynts doe chaunce with the cutting of the ſinewes and tendons: wherefore if the partie feele his whole hand or a great part thereof to be without ſence, heauie and colde, it is a true ſigne that the ſinewe is hurt: but if the
                           
                           hand be without any great ſwelling, and yet can neyther be bowed, nor extended, then is the tendon of that part cut.
                        
                        Fibrarum tranſuerſa diuiſio muſculi officium impedit.Fibrarum vulnus.
                        
                        
                           Ouerthwart cutting of the fibres impaireth the office of the muſcle.
                        
                        Solutio continuitatis in neruo ſi eſt inciſio aut punctura,Neruorum vulnera. ſpaſmum & alienationem, & mortem inducit, niſi diligenti
                              •
                           simè ſuccurratur, & ſi omnino incidatur, nō eſt periculum, niſi quia membrum ſuppoſitum caret motu aut ſenſu, aut vtroque, ſecundum diuerſitatem neruorum.
                        
                           A wound in the ſinew eyther by inciſion or pricking, bringeth a crampe, alienation of the minde and death, if it be not diligently helped; but if it be cleane cut aſunder, it is no danger at all, ſaue onely that the member is depriued of mouing or feeling, or both, according to the diuerſities of ſinewes.
                        
                        Vulnus ad neruos recurrentes pertingens, rancedinemAd neruos recurrdntes vulnus pertingens. inducit.
                        
                           A wounde in the recurrent nerues bringeth hoarſeneſſe.
                        
                        Vulnera ſecundum longitudinem neruorum, non tamVulnus neruorum ſecundum longitudinem. periculoſa ſunt, quàm ſi tranſuerſim diuidantur.
                        
                           Woundes that are made after the length of the ſinewes, are not ſo dangerous, as when they are cut ouerthwart.
                        
                        Laeſio neruorum per contuſionem, magis periculoſa, quā
                           Neruorum contuſio. per inciſionem, quia non tam facile digeſtio inducitur.
                        
                           Hurt of ſinewes that commeth by contuſion, is more dangerous then by meiſion, by reaſon that digeſtion can not be ſo ſoone brought to paſſe.
                        
                        Vulnera neruorum per deſiccantia curantur.Curatio.
                        
                        
                           Woundes in the ſinewes are cured by deſiccatiue medicines.
                        
                        Vulnera neruorum per contuſionem digerentibus curantur.Curatio.
                        
                        
                           Woundes in the ſinewes made by contuſion, are to be helped
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈1 page duplicate〉
                           
                           
                           by diſperſing medicines.
                        
                        Punctio neruorum, inciſione periculoſior.Punctio neruorum.
                        
                        
                           Woundes in the ſinewes made by pricking weapons, are more dangerous than by inciſion.
                        
                        Vulnera neruorum ſi humores collectos expirare non valent, in periculo apoſtematum ſpaſmique ſunt.
                        
                           Woundes in the ſinewes that cannot breathe out the humors collected, are in danger of impoſtumes and Cramps.
                        
                        Neruorum vulnus ſi in ſuperiori parte corporis inciderit,Neruorum in ſuperiori parte vulnus. iuncturas colli, pectuſque cum iuncturis adiacentibus vnge.
                        
                           If the ſinewes in the vpper parts be wounded, it is good to anoynt the vertebres of the necke, and the breſt, with the ioynts about the wounded part.
                        
                        Si autem in inferiori parte euenit, lumborum vertebrae,In inferiori parte neruorum vulnus. os ſacrum, inguen, iuncturae, parteſque adiacentes inungantur.
                        
                           But if the wounde of the ſinewes chance in the nether parts, anoynt the vertebres of the loyues, os ſacrum, flancks, ioynts, and other parts adiacent.
                        
                        Euaporantia vulneribus neruorum magis conueniuntMedicamenta vulneribus neruorum conuenientiſſima. quam repercutientia.
                        
                           Euaporatiue medicines are more conuenient for wounds in the ſinewes, then repercuſſiues.
                        
                        Principio vulnerum neruorum nec conglutinantia, nec incarnantia expediunt, donec omni periculo vacant.
                        
                           Woundes in the ſinewes at the beginning require neyther conglutinatiues, nor incarnatiues, vntill they be paſt all danger.
                        
                        Si in punctione neruorum venerit apoſtematio nocent deſiccantia, reſoluentia tamen, & mollificantia, cum attractione familiari maximè conueniunt.
                        
                           If in pricking of ſinewes there happen impoſtumation, deſiccative medicines are hurtfull, but reſolutiues, and mollificatiues,
                           
                           with familiar attraction, are moſt conuenient.
                        
                        Mollificantia & maturantia in omni punctione neruorum periculoſa ſunt.
                        
                           Mollificatiue and maturatiue medicines are dangerous in all pricks of the ſinewes.
                        
                        Medicamina neruis vulneratis adhibita ſubtilia & liquida cum attractione familiari eſſe debent, non ſolum vt virtus eorum celeriter ad partem affectam adueniat, verum etiā vt materiam cōtentam ſine dolore trahat.
                        
                           Medicines applyed to wounded ſinewes, muſt be ſubtill and liquid with familiar attraction, not onely that their vertue may more ſpéedely come to the affected part, but alſo, that they may drawe without payne the matter fixed in the greeued part.
                        
                        Medicamina neruis vulneratis actu calide applicentur.
                        
                           Medicines applied to wounded ſinewes, ought to be actually hote.
                        
                        Nerui tendineſque per vulnera nudati, celerrime carni amiciri debent, cum medicamentis temperaturae bonae potius calidis quam frigidis.
                        
                           Sinewes and tendons lying bare by woundes, ought ſpeedily to be couered with fleſh, by medicines of good temperature, and rather hote then cold.
                        
                        Nerui iuuenibus ſunt ſine periculo ſuendi, adultis nonNerui iuuenum ſuendi ſunt. item.
                        
                           Young mens ſinewes may be ſtitched without danger, but in old perſons not ſo.
                        
                        Si in oſſe ſit vulnus tendineſque digitorum exteriores ſecantur,In oſſe vulnus. digiti tamen poſtquam extendi poſſunt.
                        
                           If there be a wound in the bone, and the exterior tendons of the fingers be cut, yet the fingers may after wards be extended.
                        
                        Si os ſit vulneratum interiori parte digitorum vbi tendines diuidantur, nunquam digiti poſtquam extendi queant.
                        
                           
                           If the bone be wounded in the inſide of the fingers where the tendons are diuided, the fingers neuer after can be ſtretched foorth.
                        
                        Partes omnes ex ſanguine generatae reſtaurationem citò admittunt.
                        
                           Thoſe parts that are engendred of bloud, are ſoone reſtored.
                        
                        Flegmatici & melancholici carnes comedant & vinumFlegmatici & melancholici vulnerati. bibant initio vulneris.
                        
                           Flegmatike and melancholick perſons may eate fleſh, and drinke wine in the beginning of a wound.
                        
                        Ruſticis quàm delicatis vulnera citius curantur.
                        
                           Woundes in ſtrong and ruſticall bodies, are ſooner cured, than in tender bodies.
                        
                        Sagitta vel globulus venenatus per ingentem dolorem,Sagitta vel globulo venenato. tumorem & nigredinem cognoſcuntur.
                        
                           Arrowes & bullets that are venemous are knowne by great payne, ſwelling, & blackneſſe that follow in their wounds.
                        
                     
                     
                        De Vlceribus.
                        ANi vlcera concaua, aetate confecta, aegrè vel nunquamAni vlcera. curantur.
                        
                           Hollow vlcers in the fundament in an aged partie, are hardly or neuer cuted.
                        
                        Vlcera in corpore hydropico, leproſo & rheumatico peraegrèIn corpore hydropico vlcera. vel nunquam curantur.
                        
                           Ulcers in a dropſey, leprous, and rheumatike body, are hardly or neuer cured.
                        
                        Cruribus antiquata vlcera cum ſimul contracta duritieIn carnibus vlcera. difficilis ſunt curationis.
                        
                           Ulcers in the legs of continuance, with hardneſſe about the affected part, are hard of curation.
                        
                        Capitis vlcera nunc di
                              •
                            nata aegrè curantur.Capitis vlcera.
                        
                        
                           Ulcers in the head, of continuance, are hard to be cured.
                        
                        
                           Capitis vlcera ſerpentia difficilè emendantur.
                        
                           Créeping vlcers in the head are hard to be cured.
                        
                        Vlcera in corpore humorum corruptela referto aegrè curantur.In corpore conupta vlcera.
                        
                        
                           Ulcers in a body full of corrupt humors are hard of curation.
                        
                        Vlcera in corporibus teneris facile curantur.In corporibus teneris vlcera.
                        
                        
                           Ulcers in young bodies are eaſy to be cured.
                        
                        Corporibus macilentis quàm in obeſis vlcera facilius curantur.In corperibus macilentis vlcera.
                        
                        
                           Ulcers in leane bodies be eaſier to be cured then in thoſe that be fat.
                        
                        Materia caerulei vel liuidi coloris difficultatem curationisMateria caerulei vel liuidi coloris. planè comminatur.
                        
                           Matter that is blew or ſwartiſh in colour, doth playnely declare difficultie of curation.
                        
                        Materia citrina lixiuio abſimilis, parit in vicinis partibusMateria citrina. eroſiones, & curationis difficultatem.
                        
                           Yellow matter like vnto lée, bringeth eroſions to the partes round about, and hardneſſe of curation.
                        
                        Pus groſſum & in fundo hoerens prius abſtergendum antèPus groſſum. aggrediatur cura.
                        
                           Groſſe matter cleauing to the bottome, ought firſt to be clenſed, before healing be gone in hand withall.
                        
                        Pus ſi ſit album & craſſum, bonum, ſi ſubcruentum & foetidum,Pus album & craſſum ſubcruentum & foetidum. malum.
                        
                           If the matter be white, it is good, but if it be bloudy and ſtiucking, it is euill.
                        
                        Oſsis ſcalprata caries, vlcus tunc, & non ante ſanabitur.Oſsis caries.
                        
                        
                           The putrefaction of the bone being taken away, the vlcer will then be cured, but not before.
                        
                        Caro nigra in oſſe aegrotante, malum.Caro nigra.
                        
                        
                           Blacke fleſh when the bone is craſy, is euill.
                        
                        Corpore phlegmatico vlcera albeſcunt, ſic ſanies groſſa,In corpore phlegmatico vlcera.
                           
viſcoſa & ſubalbida.
                        
                           Ulcers in a phlegmatike body are white, and the Matter is groſſe, flymy and whitiſh.
                        
                        Corpus calidum & ſiccum, erit vlcus rubrum in circuituCorporibus calidis & ſic
                              
                                 ••
                              s 
                                 •
                              l
                                 •
                              era. non abſque dolore & inflamatione, preterquam quod color materiae ad citrinitatem, rubedinem, flauitatem vel viriditatem tender.
                        
                           Ulcers in a hote and dry body, wil be red in the Circuite, not without payne and inflamation; and beſides that, the colour of the Matter will be citrine, red, yellow, or gréene.
                        
                        Melancholici habent vlcera fuſci coloris, corpus macerumMelancholicis vlcera. & exiccatum, tum ſanies nigreſcens, denſa, inſtar cineris & coeni miſtionis.
                        
                           Melancholick perſons haue vlcers black in colour, a leane and dry body, and the Matter is thick waxing black, like vnto the mixing of aſhes and dirt.
                        
                        Membro in affecto ſanguis non debitam habens proportionem,Sanguis debitam non habens proportionem. curationem impedit, ſi maximè redundat, naturalem prorſus ſuffocabit calorem, & ad membrum ſolitos acceſſus nutrimenti prohibebit.
                        
                           In the affected member, if the bloud haue not his due proportion, it doth hinder the cure; if it do greatly abounde, it will altogether ſuffocate naturall heate, and prohibite the wonted comming thereto of nouriſhment.
                        
                        Cauernoſa inguinis vlcera aegrèvel nunquam curantur.Inguinis vlcera. Iuncturarum vlcera.
                        
                        
                           Hallow vlcers in the flancke are hardly or neuer cured.
                        
                        Vlcera in iuncturis perdurantia, nunquam ſine oſsis vel iuncturae iactura curantur.
                        
                           Ulcers in the ioynts of continuance are neuer cured without the ieopardie of ſome bone or ioynt.
                        
                        Omnis humorum acuitas vlcera pruritu affligit.Humorum acuitas.
                        
                        
                           All ſharpneſſe of humors afflicteth vlcers with 
                                 •
                              ching.
                        
                        Vlcera in collo veſicae ſi diutius permanſerint aegerrimèIn collo veſicae vlcus. aut nunquam curantur.
                        
                           
                           Ulcers in the neck of the bladder of long continuance, are hardly or neuer cured.
                        
                        Vlcera ad medullam vſque putreſcentia difficulter autAd medullam vlcera putreſcentia. nunquam curantur.
                        
                           Ulcers that putrefie to the marrow of the bone, are hardly or neuer cured.
                        
                        Vlcera in extrema parte manuum ac pedum inueterata,Manuum aut pedum vl. era. difficilis ſunt curationis.
                        
                           Ulcers that be of any continuance eyther in the back of the hand, or top of the foote, are hard of curation.
                        
                        In naſo vlcera rarò abſque incommodo curantur.In 
                                 •
                              aſo 
                                 〈…〉
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           Ulcers in the noſe are ſeldome cured without a diſcōmoditie.
                        
                        In naribus vlcera, os vel cartilaginem penetrantia, aegrèIn 
                                 〈…〉
                               vlcera curantur.
                        
                           Ulcers in the noſtrils pearcing either the bone or griſtle, are hard to be cured.
                        
                        Vlcera neruis vicinantia ſaepenumero ſpaſmum inducūt.Neruis vi
                                 ••
                              
                              nantia.
                        
                        
                           Ulcers yt are néere ye ſinewes, do oftentimes bring ye crampe.
                        
                        Sanies foetida mala eſt & ſignum corruptionis quae maturationiSanies 
                                 •
                              oetida contraria eſt, indicatque aegrotum caliditatis naturalis eſſe deſtitutum.
                        
                           Stinking Matter is euill, and a ſigne of putrefaction, which is contrary to ripening, and ſheweth the patient to be deſtitute of naturall heate.
                        
                        Ex humorib, calidis cū aquoſitate & ebullitione fit virus.Virus.
                        
                        Virus is made of hote humors, with watriſhnes and boyling.
                        
                        Sordes vero ex ſuperfluitate humorum frigidorum &Sordes. groſsitie eorum.
                        
                           Filthy matter is engendred by the ſuperflui
                                 •
                              ie and groſſenes of cold humors.
                        
                        Vlcera ſubitò exicantia & citra cauſam manifeſtam, malum,Vlcera ſubitō exiccantia. atque nigreſcentia mortem adferunt.
                        
                           Ulcers drying vp ſodainely without any manifeſt cauſe, ſignify euill, and if they waxe blacke, it is a ſigne of death.
                        
                        
                           Iniectiones fiſtuloſis vlceribus conuenientes mediocriterFiſtuloſis vlceribus iniectiones conuenientes. deſiccare debent.
                        
                           Iniectiōs agréeing to fiſtulated vlcers, ought to dry meanely.
                        
                        Vlceribus ſufficienter mundificatis, erit ſanies pulchra &Vlcera ſufficienter mundificata. alba ſine omni faetore.
                        
                           In vlcers ſufficiently cleanſed, there will be faire and white Matter, without ſtincke.
                        
                        Qui habent vlcera concaua, cibis magni nutrimenti veſcantur,Vlcera concaua. vt bonum ſanguinem generent.
                        
                           Let them that haue hollow vlcers, eate meate of great nourtſhment to engender good bloud.
                        
                        Vertebrae ſi corrumpuntur, fuge curam.Vertebrarum corruptio.
                        
                        
                           If the vertebres growe defiled, ſh
                                 •
                              m medling with the cure.
                        
                        Vlcus varicoſum tam cum vlceratione, quàm ſine vlcerationeVlcus varicoſum. confirmatum, non ſine periculo curatur.
                        
                           A various vlcer, whether with vlceration, or without vlceration, being once confirmed, can not be cured without danger.
                        
                        Cura paliatiua in vlcere varicoſo maxime prodeſt: namCura paliatiua maximè prodeſt. meatus innaturalis, quò diutius aliquid è corpore emanare conſueuit, obturari non poteſt, ſine timore.
                        
                           In a various vlcer, a paliatiue cure is moſt conuenient: for an vnnaturall iſſue, whereby nature is wo
                                 •
                              t long time to emptie from the bodie, can not be ſtopped without danger.
                        
                        Curatio varicum non vlceratorum, per inciſiouem non ſine ingenti periculo efficitur, propter ſluxum ſanguinis inde promanantem.
                        
                           To cure ſwollen veynes not vlcerated, by inciſion, is verie dangerous, by reaſon of the fluxe of bloud which wil enſue.
                        
                        Varices optimè curantur per fontanellam cum rupturioVaricum curatio optima. vel igne ſub genu per quatuor digitos, in parte exteriori, qua materia purgetur.
                        
                           The beſt way to cure ſwollen veynes, is to make an iſſue eyther
                           
                           with an actuall or potentiall camery, foure fingers vnder the outſide of the knée, whereby the matter may be purged out.
                        
                     
                     
                        Vtrum vlcus ſit facilis vel difficilis curationis quatuordecini conditiones.
                        PRima eſt ſigura vlceris, nam vlcus rotundum difficulter1. Figura vlceris. curatur, longum vero faciliter.
                        
                           The firſt is the figure of the vlcer, for a round vlcer is hard to be cured, but a long eaſy.
                        
                        Secunda eſt ſimplicitas vel compoſitio: nam ſimplex vlcus2. Simplicitas vel compoſitio. faciliter curatur, compoſitum difficulter.
                        
                           The ſecond is the ſimplicitie or compoſition: for a ſimple vlcer is eaſy to be cured, but a compound, hard.
                        
                        Tertia eſt cum deperditione partis membri organici vlcus,3. Deperditione partis membri organici. & tale difficulter curatur.
                        
                           The third is an vlcer with the loſſe of the part of the organick member, and ſuch a one is hard to be cured.
                        
                        Quarta eſt vlcus cum duritie, & tale difficulter curatur.4. Vlcus cum du
                                 •
                              itie.
                        
                        
                           The fourth is an vlcer with hardneſſe, and that is hard to be cured.
                        
                        Quinta eſt deperditio ſubſtantiae vel eius non deperditio,5. Deperditio ſubſtantiae. nam vlcus cum deperditione ſubſtantiae cum difficultate curatur.
                        
                           The fift is an vlcer with loſſe of ſubſtance, or which out loſſe of ſubſtance, for an vlcer with loſſe of ſubſtance, is hard to be cured.
                        
                        Sexta quando vlcus eſt in membro exangui, tale enim6. Vlcus in membro exangui. difficulter curatur: contrarium accidit ſi membrum non ſit exangue.
                        
                           The ſixt is when the vlcer is in a member without bloud, and ſuch a one is hard to be cured, but if the member be endued with bloud, it is eaſy.
                        
                        
                           Septima eſt nobilitas membri aut eius ignobilitas: nam7. Membri nobilitas aut ignobilitas. fi vlcus in aliquo membro nobili ſit, eius curatio eſt difficilis aut impoſsibilis, ſecus autem accidit in membro ignobili.
                        
                           The ſeauenth is the nobility or ignobility of the member, for if ye vlcer be in any noble member, it is hard or vnpoſſible to be cured, but if it be in a baſe member it is eaſy to be cured.
                        
                        Octaua eſt ſi vlcus fuerit in mēbro ſubtili vt in panniculis,8. In membro ſubtili vel groſſo. veſica, &c. tale enim difficulter curatur, ſi vero fuerit in mēbro groſſo faciliter, ſi in mediocri, mediocriter.
                        
                           The eight is if the vlcer be in a ſubtile member, as the pannicles, bladder, &c. and ſuch a one is hard to be cured, but if it be in a groſſe member it is eaſy, if in a meane member, meanely.
                        
                        Nona eſt motus membri & ipſius quies, nam motus9. Membri motus & quies. membri vlcerati impoſsibilitatem & difficultatem facit, vt patet in pulmone, arterijs, & diaphragmate, quies vero facilitatem facit curationis.
                        
                           The ninth is the mouing and reſt of the member, for the mouing of the member maketh the cure hard and vnpoſſible, as it hapneth in the lungs, arteries, and midriffe, but reſt maketh the cure eaſy.
                        
                        Decima eſt inceſſus ſuperfluitatum ſuper membrum vlceratum,10. Inceſſus ſuperfluitatum ſuper membrum vlceratum. nam earum inceſſus difficultatem operatur, vt patet in ventrieulo, inteſtinis, veſica, matrice, virga, &c.
                        
                           The tenth is the courſe of ſuperfluities vpon the vlcerated member, which cauſeth hardneſſe of curation, as it chanceth in ye ventricle, entrayles, bladder, matrice, yard, & ſuch like.
                        
                        Vndecima eſt quando corpus eſt repletum multis ſuperfluitatibus,11. Corpus multis ſuperfluitatibus repletum. vt ſunt corpora cachochimica, in talibus enim vlcera ſunt difficilis curationis, contrarium accidit corporibus mundis.
                        
                           The xi. is when the body is repleniſhed with many ſuperfluities, as the bodies full of euill iuyce; for vlcers in ſuch bodies are hard of curation, but in cleane bodies contrary.
                        
                        
                           Duodecima eſt quando non poſſunt debitae vlceribus12. medicinae appropriari.
                        
                           The twelfth is when as due medicines can not be applied to the vlcers.
                        
                        Decimatertia eſt ſitus membri in alta vel infima parte13. Situs membri. corporis, nam vlcera in membris ſuperioribus faciliter curantur, quae vero ſunt in inferioribus difficulter.
                        
                           The xiii. is the ſituation of the member in a high or lowe part of the body, for vlcers in the ſuperior members are eaſy to be cured, but in the inferior hard.
                        
                        Decimaquarta eſt profundita
                              〈…〉
                           ceris, nam vlcus profundum14. Vlceris profunditas. cum difficultate curatur, non profundum verò faciliter.
                        
                           The xiiii. is the deapth of the vlcer, for a déepe vlcer is hard to be cured, but that that is not déepe, is eaſy to be cured.
                        
                        Vlcera virulentia ab humore bi
                              •
                           ioſo 
                              •
                           aſ
                              •
                           untur, & ad acuitatem per pituitam ſalſam perueniunt, quibus inui
                           
                              •
                           em permixtis accidit aduſtio, & tun
                              •
                            virulentia.
                        
                           
                              Ʋiculent vlcers proceede of a cholerick humor, and come to ſharpnes by reaſon of ſalt flegme, which mixing with the choller, cauſeth aduſtion, and then virulencie.
                        
                        Sorditiei duae ſunt cauſae, propria & dependens, cauſa propria eſt quaedam in carne malignitas & vocatur proprietas occulta, cauſa dependens eſt humorum improborum eſſentia, carnem depaſcens & erodens cum ad coniunctam aduenit vt per bilem cum flegmate ſalſo permixtam.
                        
                           There be two cauſes of filthy Matter, as a proper, and a depending, the proper, is a certayne malignitie in the fleſh, which is called a hidden property: the cauſe depending, is euill humors, which eate or corrode the fleſh when they come to the coniunct, as by choller mixt with ſaite flegme.
                        
                        Varicum cauſae ſunt, lienis opilatio, hepatis imbecilitas,

ciborum melancholicorum nimius vſus, longa ſtatio, & onerum aggrauatio.
                        
                           The cauſes of varices are, ſtopping of the ſpléene, weakenes of the liuer, much vſe of melancholy meates, long ſtanding, and bearing of great burthens.
                        
                        Vlcus cacoethes niſi valido remedio non cedit.
                        
                           That kinde of vlcer called cacoethes, yéeldeth not but to a ſtrong and moſt forceable medicine.
                        
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ¶ The Table.
                  
                     A
                     ALopecia ex morbo Gallico. 130
                     Anodinum cataplaſma. 15
                     Aphoriſmes. 133
                     Apozema Arcai. 10
                     Aqua Fallopii. 14
                     Aqua pro oculis. 64
                     Aqua Cicatrizans pro oculis. 81
                     Aqua pro puſtulis faciei 123
                     Aqua ad ſerpiginem & impetiginem faciei. 124
                     Aqua ad vlcera cicatrizanda. 130
                     
                        Apoſtumes and their beginnings. 133
                     Arcaus Balme for wounds. ibid.
                  
                  
                     B
                     Balme for wounds. 46
                     Balme deuiſed by Ambr. Parrey. 50
                     Balme of Andernacus ibid.
                     Balmes diſtilled. 51
                     Balme deuiſed by M. Keble. 52
                     Balme of Arcaus. 79
                     Bloud and the iudgement thereof. 172
                     
                        Bolognini reſtrictiuum. 17
                     
                        Bronchocele. 142
                     Burning with Gunpowder. 2. 59. 62
                  
                  
                     C
                     
                        Cancer in the breaſt and other parts. 142
                     
                        Cataplaſme to ceaſe paine. 6
                     
                        Cataplaſma Anodinum. 15
                     
                        Cataplaſma Fallopii. 22
                     
                        Cataplaſme for inflamations. 55
                     
                        Cataplaſmes for bruſes and ceaſing of paine. 56
                     
                        Cataplaſme for a Gangraena. 59
                     
                        Cataplaſme for windy tumors. 70
                     
                        Cataplaſme to ſuppurate impoſtumes. 82
                     
                        Cataplaſme to ceaſe paine. 129
                     
                        Cataplaſme for a ſchi
                           ••
                        hous tumor. ibid.
                     Cauſes of Morbus Gallicus 100
                     Cautions to bee obſerued to eſcape Morbus Gallicus. 111
                     
                        Cerotum reſolutiuum. 7
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        Cerotum mundificatiuum. 74
                     
                        Cerote for Morbus Gallicus. 126
                     
                        Cerote for paine in the ioynts. 127
                     Cicatrizing water for Vlcers. 81
                     Choller in Morbo Gallico. 119
                     Cliſter to drawe backe paine of the head. 129
                     Corroſiue powder. 8
                     Corroſiue powder ſtrong. 14
                     
                        Collirium for vlcers in the yard. 130
                     Cure of two Gentlemen greeuouſly burnt with Gunpowder. 1
                     Cure of a Merchant of London woū
                        ded with Gunſhot. 5
                     Cure of Andrewe Fones hurt with Gunſhot. 8
                     Cure of a Souldier that was wounded with gunſhot, which turned to a Fiſtula. 12
                     Cure of Henry Rhodes of diuers wounds, made by the breaking of a peece. 17
                     Cure of Henry Battey hurt by the breaking of a Dagge. 20
                     Cure of a Souldier ſhot into the leg

which turned to a Gangrena. 21
                     Cure of one that cut his own throat. 49
                     Cure of Morbus Gallious. 103
                  
                  
                     D
                     Defenſiues. 7. 9. 17. 26. 49. 22
                     
                        Defenſatiuum Empluſtrum. 41
                     Declaration of the tree of ſignes. 117
                     Decoction of Gu
                              •
                           icum. 124
                     Digeſtiu▪ to preſerue a wounded part. 9
                     Digeſtiues. 19. 30
                     Digeſtiue vſed cōtuſed wounds. 35
                     Digeſtiue to remoue eſcares. 78
                     Diſlocations. 144
                     Doubts diſcuſſed concerning Morbus Gallicus. 112
                  
                  
                     E
                     Electuary to confirme the cure, and preuent the comming againe of Morbus Gallicus. 123
                     Electuary purging for Morbus Gallicus. 128
                     
                        Emplaſtrum nigrum. 24
                     
                        Emplaſtrum de Peto. 30
                     
                        Emplaſtrum defenſatiuum. 41
                     
                        Emplaſtrum Paracelſi. 52
                     
                        Emplaſtrum Stipticum. 53
                     
                        Emplaſtrum reſoluendum. 54
                     
                        Emplaſtrum conſoliditiuum. ibid.
                     
                     
                        Emplaſt. to be vſed for a dry ſtitch 55
                     
                        Emplaſt. to keepe open iſſues. ibid.
                     
                     
                        Emplaſt. Epiſpatices. 60
                     
                        Emplaſt. meliloti. 73
                     
                        Emplaſt. Aromatizatum Keb
                              ••
                           . 72
                     
                        Emplaſt. mucilaginum album. ibid.
                     
                     
                        Emplaſt. for inveterate vlcers. 74
                     
                        Emplaſt. to reſolue nodes. 75
                     
                        Emplaſt. for hard ſwellings in Womens breaſts. 76
                     
                        Emplaſt. Arcaei for woundes in the head. 79
                     
                        Emplaſt Betony for the ſame. ibid.
                     
                        Emplaſt. Vigonis ad Idem. 80
                     
                        E
                              •••
                           pelas. 218
                  
                  
                     F
                     Fiſtulaes. 149
                     
                        Flos v
                              •
                           g
                              •
                           entorum. 69
                     Fomentation for the ripening of a Bubo. 128
                     Fractures in generall. 150
                     Fume for drying of Vlcers. 128
                  
                  
                     G
                     Gangraena. 154
                     Gargariſme. 18
                     Gargariſme for vlcers in the mouth. 125
                  
                  
                     H
                     Hemorrhagia. 155
                     Hemrhoydes. 156
                     Hernia. 157
                  
                  
                     I
                     
                        Iniectio mundificatiua. 11
                     Iniection of Tagaltius. 15
                     Iniection for hollow vlcers. 59
                     Iniection to dry vp vlcers. 139
                  
                  
                     L
                     Liniment for windy tumors. 71
                     Liniment to ceaſe paine. 74
                     Linimēt for wounds in the head. 80
                     
                        Lixiuium Ambroſe Parey. 21
                     
                        Lixiuium for a Gangraena. 60
                     
                        Lixiuium to take away warts. 71
                     
                        Londrad
                              •
                           es oyle for gunshot. 35
                     
                        Lues Venerea. 159
                  
                  
                     M
                     Maturatiue plaiſter. 60
                     Meaſels and the iudgementes thereof. 179
                     
                        Medicine for the pinne and webbe in the eyes. 72
                     Medicines, and howe to Miniſter them. 167
                     Mucilage plaiſter white. 73
                     
                        Mundiſicatiues. 7. 55
                     
                        Mundificatiuum optimū Vigonis. 24
                     
                        Mundificatiuum vnguentum. 30
                     
                        Mundificatiuum Franciſci Raſis. 38.
                     
                        Mundificatiue for hollow and plaine vlcers. 66
                     
                        Mundificatiuum lipſium. 70
                  
                  
                     O
                     Obſeruations for wounds in the belly. 39
                     
                        Obſeruations for purging wounded perſons. 85
                     Obſeruations to be notified in the opening of Apoſtumes. 139
                     
                        Oedema and the determination. 169
                     
                        Oleum Catellorum. 36
                     
                        Oleum Londrad
                              •
                           . 35
                     
                        Omentum wounded, and the cure thereof. 42
                     
                        Opthalmia, the times and the preceedings. 170
                     Order of taking of a mortified member. 25
                     Oyle moſt excellent for all inflamations to cauſe ſleepe, and ceaſe paine in the Gout. 75
                     Oyle for conuulſions proceeding of wounds in the nerues. 76
                     Oyle neceſſarie for conuulſions. 77
                     Oyntment for puſtules in the face ex Morbo Gallico. 124
                  
                  
                     P
                     
                        Phlebotomy and the vſe therof. 176
                     Pilles to purge in Morbo Gallico. 129
                     Pouder to take away proud fleſh. 68
                     Potiō purging for Morbo Gallico. 126
                     Pouder to take away wartes about Praeputium. 71
                     
                        Praecipitate white. 123
                     
                        Puluis coroſiuus fortis. 14
                     
                        Puluis reſtrictiue. 27
                     
                        Puluis ſine Pari. 69
                     
                        Pus and the iudgement. 193
                  
                  
                     R
                     
                        Raſuis plaiſter to be keep open iſſues. 55
                     Remedies good for burning with powder. 4
                     
                        Reſolutiue cerote. 73
                     Reſtrictiue powder. 57. 27
                  
                  
                     S
                     Signs of choller in Morbo Galiico. 119
                     Signes of flegme and melancholy in the ſame. 120
                     Sinewes ſtitched. 191
                     
                        Sparadrap plaiſter. 6
                           •
                        
                     
                     
                        Sparadrap mollificatiuum. ibid.
                     Spiced plaiſter: M. Keble. 72
                  
                  
                     T
                     
                        Tinea or skales in the head. 175
                     
                        Turbith Minerale. 122
                     Tumors & the difference according to the humor. 176
                  
                  
                     V
                     Vlcers and their iudgements. 192
                     Vlcers varicous. 196
                     Vlcers filthy. 200
                     
                        Vnguent for burning with pouder. 3. 4. 59 62
                     
                        Vnguent de Peto. 12
                     
                        Vnguentum mundiſicatiuum. ibid. 81
                     
                        Vnguent. de minio. 20
                     
                        Vnguent. Aegyptiacum. 21
                     
                        Vnguent. Tetraphamacon. 23
                     
                        Vnguent. Ceraſeos paruum. 24
                     
                        Vnguent. mundificatiuum. 30
                     
                        Vnguent. Deſiccatiuum. 32
                     
                        Vnguent. to be vſed with tent or flamula. 34
                     
                        Vnguent. conſolidatiuum. 49
                     
                        Vnguent. incarnatiuum. 61
                     
                        Vnguent. for inflamations. 62
                     
                        Vnguent. Neruorum. 63
                     
                        Vnguent Apii. 65
                     
                        Vnguent. Populeon. 66
                     
                        Vng. mundiſicatiuum magiſtrale. 67
                     
                        Vnguent mollificatiuum. ibid.
                     
                     
                        Vnguent. Sanatiuum. 68
                     
                        Vnguent. infrigidans Galeni. 70
                     
                        Vnguent. Reſinae. ibid.
                     
                     
                        Vnguent. for the cramp. 77
                     
                        Vnguent. for the Hemrhoyds. 73
                     
                        Vnguent. Nutritum. 78
                     
                        Vnguent. incarnatiuū regis Angliae. 81
                     
                        Vnguent. Viride. 82
                     
                        Vnguent. pro Morbo Gallico. 125. 127
                     
                        Vnguent. to open a Bubo. 128
                     
                        Vnguent. for Scabbe and itch. 130
                  
                  
                     W
                     Wounds and the iudgements thereof, in particular members. 182
                     Wounds in the ioynts. 188
                     Wounds in the Sinewes. 189
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   