
      
         
            
            
            THE
COVNTESSE
OF LINCOLNES
NVRSERIE.
            
               AT OXFORD,
Printed by IOHN LICHFIELD, and IAMES SHORT
Printers to the famous Vniversitie. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVrable,
and approved vertuous LA:
BRIGET COVNTESSE
OF LINCOLNE.
            FOR the better expressing
& keeping in memorie my
Loue, and your Worthines;
I doe offer vnto your LA:
the first worke of mine that
ever came in Print; because
your rare example, hath given an excellent
approbation to the matter contained in this
Booke; for you haue passed by all excuses, and
haue ventured vpon, & doe goe on with that
loving act of a loving mother; in giving the
sweete milke of your owne breasts, to your
owne childe; wherein you haue gone before
the greatest number of honourable Ladies
of your place, in these latter times. But I
wish many may follow you, in this good
worke, which I desire, to further by my kinde

perswasion. And such women as will vouchsafe
to read this little short treatise; may be
put in minde of a duty, which all mothers are
bound to performe; and I shall be glad if any
will consider, and put in practice, that which
is both naturall and comfortable. I hope they
will at the least commend with me such as do
this good deede, and no more speake scornefully
of that which is worthy of great praise;
and for my part I thinke it an honour vnto
you, to doe that which hath proued you to
be full of care to please God, and of naturall
affection, and to bee well stored with humility,
and patience, all which are highly to be
praised; to giue praise to any person or thing
deseruing praise, I dare doe it, & for this louely
action of yours I can with much thankefulnesse
praise God, for all his gracious guifts
of grace and Nature, wherby he hath inabled
you, to doe the same: desiring also with my
heart, that you may euer, and euery way honour
God, who hath honoured you many
wayes, aboue many women; and I reioyce,
that I can beare witnesse, that God hath adorned
you with fayre tokens of his loue and
mercy to your soule: As the practise of true

Christian religion; dedicating your selfe to
Gods seruice; answerablenesse to all holy commands
of the holy God, which are Testimonies
of Gods loue, and doth challenge a very
great esteeme from me, amongst the rest, that
can truly iudge and rightly discerne what is
best; I am full of thoughts in this kinde, or of
this matter: yet I say no more but this, Goe
on and prosper, Hold fast all that is good,
Trust in God for strength to grow and continue
in faithfull obedience to his glorious Majesty;
And I wil not cease to intreat the Lord of
Heauen, to powre aboundantly all Blessings
of heauen and earth vpon you, and your
Children, as they increase in number.
            
               Your LA: in the best and fastest loue,
               ELIZABETH LINCOLNE.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE COVRTEOVS,
chiefly most Christian, Reader.
            THE Generall Consent of too many
mothers in an vnnaturall practise,
(most Christian Reader) hath caused
one of the Noblest and Fairest
hands in this land to set pen to paper.
As ashamed to see her sex farther
degenerate; desirous for the
glory thereof, to haue all both rightly knowe, and answere
their kind, hath made Honour it selfe stoop to these paines;
which now shee sends thee to pervse. Three things easily
Inuite to Read what to view is offred. Eminency, or Interest
in the Author. Rarity in the handled Matter; Breuity
in the quicke dispatch. These three meet in this won. The
Author so Eminent in Honour; thou canst hardly be anciently
Honourable; and not be interested in her Honours
acquaintance; scarcely not Alliance. Next for the Rarenesse,
a peculiar tract of this subiect, I belieue, is not in
thine hands. Lastly its so briefe, as I am perswaded, it
smoothly gliding thee along in the reading, Thy sorrow
will be, it lands thee so soone. What may giue satisfaction to
a Reader, let me acquaint thee next, is here to be found.
These are two things; Vsefulnesse of the subiect; Fulnes
for the prosecution. If method and soundnesse can make

               Full, this is Full. What, not alone Confirmation vshering
in the Assertion, but Refutation for vshering out Obiections
can doe to making Sound and Through, this is
Such. The Accommodation to these particulars (Gentle
Reader) I leaue to thy selfe, least I become tedious whilst am
honoring Breuity. The pay, assure thy selfe, will bee larger
then the promise. The Wine much better then the Bush.
This one word, and Ile stand out of the gate, thou mayest goe
in. If Noble who readest, (likenesse is Mother & Nurse
of liking) this comes from Nobility; Approue the rather,
and practise. If meaner; blush to deny, what Honour becomes
speaker to perswade to, president to lead the way to.
And so I either humbly take my leaue; or bid farewell.
            
               Blest is the land where Sons of Nobles raigne.
               Blest is the land where Nobles teach their traine.
               To Church for blisse Kings, Queenes, should Nurses be.
               To state its blisse great Dames Babes nurse to see.
               Go then Great booke of Nursing plead the Cause.
               Teach High'st, low'st, all, it's Gods and Natures lawes.
               THOMAS LODGE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE COVNTESSE OF
Lincolnes Nurserie.
            BEcause it hath pleased God
to blesse me with many children,
and so caused me to
obserue many things falling
out to mothers, and to their
children; I thought good to
open my minde concerning a speciall matter
belonging to all childe-bearing women, seriously
to consider of: and to manifest my
minde the better, even to write of this matter,
so farre as God shall please to direct me; in
summe, the matter I meane, Is the duty of nursing
due by mothers to their owne children.
            
            In setting downe whereof, I wil first shew,
that every woman ought to nurse her owne
childe; and secondly, I will endeavour to answere
such obiections, as are vsed to be cast
out against this dutie to disgrace the same.
            
               
The first point is easily performed. For it is
the expresse ordinance of God that mothers
should nurse their owne children, & being his
ordinance they are bound to it in conscience.
This should stop the mouthes of all replyers,
for God is most wise,
               Isa.31.2. and therefore must needs
know what is fittest and best for vs to doe: &
to prevent all foolish feares, or shifts, we are giuen
to vnderstand that he is also All sufficient,
               Gen.17.1.
& therefore infinitely able to blesse his owne
ordinance, and to afford vs meanes in our
selues (as continuall experience confirmeth)
toward the obseruance thereof.
            If this (as it ought) bee granted, then how
venterous are those women that dare venter
to doe otherwise, and so to refuse, and by refusing
to dispise that order, which the most
wise and allmighty God hath appointed, and
in steed thereof to chuse their owne pleasures?
Oh what peace can there be to these womens
consciences, vnlesse through the darknes of
their vnderstanding they judge it no disobedience?
            And then they will driue me to proue that
this nursing, and nourishing of their own children

in their own bosomes is Gods ordinance;
They are very willful, or very ignorant, if they
make a question of it. For it is proued sufficiently
to be their dutie, both by Gods word,
and also by his workes.
            By his word it is proued, first by Examples,
namely the example of Eue. For who suckled
her sonnes Cain, Abel, Seth, &c. but her selfe?
Which shee did not only of meere necessitie,
because yet no other woman was created;
but especially because shee was their mother,
and so sawe it was her duty: and because
shee had a true naturall affection, which
moved her to doe it gladly. Next the example
of Sarah the wife of Abraham; For shee both
gaue her sonne Isaac suck,Gen.21.7. as doing the dutie
commanded of God: And also tooke great
comfort, and delight therein, as in a duty well
pleasing to her selfe; whence shee spake of it,
as of an action worthy to be named in her holy
reioycing. Now if Sarah, so great a Princesse,
did nurse her own childe, why should any of
vs neglect to doe the like, except (which God
forbid) we thinke scorne to follow her, whose
daughters it is our glory to be, and which we

be only vpon this condition, that we imitate
her well-doing.1.Pet.3.6. Let vs looke therefore to our
worthy Pattern, noting withall, that shee put
her selfe to this worke when shee was very
old, and so might the better haue excused her
selfe, then we yonger women can: being also
more able to hire, and keepe a nurse, then any
of vs. But why is shee not followed by most
in the practise of this duty? Euen because they
want her vertue, and piety. This want is the
common hinderance to this point of the womans
obedience; for this want makes them
want loue to Gods precepts, want loue to his
doctrine, and like step-mothers, want due loue
to their own children.
            But now to another worthy example,
namely that excellent woman Hannah,
               1.Sam.1.23. who
hauing after much affliction of minde obtained
a sonne of God, whom shee vowed vnto
God; shee did not put him to another to nurse,
but nursed him her owne selfe vntill shee had
weaned him, & carried him to be consecrate
vnto the Lord: As well knowing that this duty
of giuing her childe sucke, was so acceptable
to God, as for the cause thereof shee did

not sinne in staying with it at home from the
yearely sacrifice: but now women, especially
of any place, and of little grace, doe not hold
this duty acceptable to God, because it is vnacceptable
to themselues: as if they would
haue the Lord to like, and dislike, according
to their vaine lusts.
            To proceed, take notice of one example
more, that is, of the blessed Virgin: as her womb
bare our blessed Sauiour, so her papps gaue him
sucke. Now who shall deny the own mothers
suckling of their owne children: to bee their
duty, since euery godly matrone hath walked
in these steps before them: Eue the mother of
al the liuing; Sarah the mother of al the faithfull;
Hannah so gratiously heard of God; Mary
blessed among women, and called blessed of
all ages. And who can say but that the rest of
holy women mentioned in the holy Scriptures
did the like; since no doubt that speech
of that noble Dame, saying, who would
haue said to Abraham that Sarah should haue
giuen children sucke? was taken from the ordinary
custome of mothers in those lesse corrupted
times.Gen.21.7.
            
            
               
And so much for proofe of this office, and
duty to be Gods ordinance, by his own VVord
according to the argument of Examples: I
hope I shall likewise proue it by the same
word from plaine Precepts.
               1.Tim.5.14. First from that
Precept, which willeth the younger women to
marry, and to Beare children, that is, not only
to Beare them in the wombe, and to bring thē
forth; but also to Beare them on their knee, in
their armes,Ver.10. and at their breasts: for this Bearing
a little before is called nourishing, and
bringing vp: and to inforce it the better vpon
womens consciences, it is numbred as the
first of the good workes, for which godly women
should be well reported of. And well it
may be the first, because if holy Ministers, or
other Christians doe heare of a good woman
to be brought to bed, and her child to bee living;
their first question vsually is, whether
she her selfe giue it sucke, yea, or no? if the answere
be she doth, then they commend her: if
the answer be she doth not, then they are sorry
for her.
            And thus I come to a second Precept. I pray
you, who that iudges aright; doth not hold

the suckling of her owne childe the part of a
true mother, of an honest mother, of a iust
mother, of a syncere mother, of a mother worthy
of loue, of a mother deseruing good report,
of a vertuous mother, of a mother winning
praise for it? All this is assented to by any
of good vnderstanding. Therefore this is
also a Precept, as for other duties, so for This of
mothers to their children; which saith, whatsoeuer
things are true,Philip.4.8. whatsoeuer things are
honest, whatsoeuer things are iust, whatsoeuer
things are pure, whatsoeuer things be worthy
of loue, whatsoeuer things be of good report,
if there be any vertue, if there bee any
praise, thinke on these things, these things
doe and the God of peace shall be with you.
            So farre for my promise, to proue by the
word of God, that it is his ordinance that women
should nurse their owne children: now
I will endeauour to proue it by his workes:
First by his workes of iudgement; if it were not
his ordinance for mothers to giue their children
sucke, it were no iudgement to bereaue thē
of their milke, but it is specified to be a great
iudgement to bereaue them hereof, & to giue

them dry breasts, therefore it is to be gathered,
euen from hence, that it is his ordinance,
since to depriue them of meanes to doe it, is a
punishment of them.
            I adde to this the worke that God worketh in
the very nature of mothers, which proueth also
that he hath ordained that they should nurse
their owne children: for by his secret operation,
the mothers affection it so knit by natures
law to her tender babe, as she findes no power
to deny to suckle it, no not when shee is in
hazard to lose her owne life, by attending on
it; for in such a case it is not said, let the mother
fly, and leaue her infant to the perill, as if
she were dispensed with: but onely it is said
woe to her, as if she were to be pittied, that for
nature to her child, she must be vnnaturall to
her selfe: now if any then being euen at liberty,
and in peace, with all plenty, shall deny to
giue sucke to their owne children, they goe against
nature: and shew that God hath not
done so much for thē as to worke any good,Lam.7.3.
no not in their nature, but left them more sauage
then the Dragons, and as cruell to their
little ones as the Ostriches.
            
               
Now another worke of God, prouing this
point is the worke of his prouision, for euery
kinde to be apt, and able to nourish their own
fruit: there is no beast that feeds their young
with milke, but the Lord, euen from the first
ground of the order of nature; Growe, and multiplie;
hath prouided it of milke to suckle their
owne young, which euery beast takes so naturally
vnto, as if another beast come toward
their young to offer the office of a Damme
vnto it, they shew according to their fashion,
a plaine dislike of it: as if nature did speake in
them, and say it is contrary to Gods order in
nature, commanding each kinde to increase,
and multiplie in their owne bodies, and by
their owne breasts, not to bring forth by one
Damme, and to bring vp by another: but it is
his ordinance that euery kinde should both
bring forth, and also nurse its owne fruit.
            Much more should this work of God prevaile
to perswade women, made as man in
the image of God, and therefore should be ashamed
to bee put to schoole to learne good
nature of the vnreasonable creature. In vs also,
as we knowe by experience, God prouideth

milke in our breasts against the time of our
childrens birth, and this hee hath done euer
since it was said to vs also, Increase, and multiply,
so that this worke of his prouision sheweth
that hee tieth vs likewise to nourish the
children of our owne wombe, with our own
breasts, euen by the order of nature: yea it
sheweth that he so careth for, and regardeth
little children euen from the wombe, that he
would haue them nursed by those that in all
reason will looke to them with the kindest
affection, namely their mothers; & in giuing
them milke for it, hee doth plainely tell them
that herequires it.
            Oh consider, how comes our milke? is it
not by the direct prouidence of God? Why
prouides he it, but for the child? The mothers
then that refuse to nurse their owne children,
doe they not despise Gods prouidence? Doe
they not deny Gods will? Doe they not as it
were say, I see, O God, by the meanes thou hast put into
me, that thou wouldst haue me nurse the child thou
hast giuen me, but I will not doe so much for thee.
Oh impious, and impudent vnthankfulnesse;
yea monstrous vnnaturalnesse, both to their

own natural fruit borne so neare their breasts,
and fed in their owne wombes, and yet may
not be suffered to sucke their owne milke.
            And this vnthankfulnesse, and vnnaturalnesse
is oftner the sinne of the Higher, and the
richer sort, then of the meaner, and poorer, except
some nice and prowd idle dames, who
will imitate their betters, till they make their
poore husbands beggars. And this is one hurt
which the better ranke doe by their ill example;
egge, and imbolden the lower ones to follow
them to their losse: were it not better for
Vs greater persons to keepe Gods ordinance, &
to shew the meaner their dutie in our good
example? I am sure wee haue more helpes to
performe it, and haue fewer probable reasons
to alleage against it, then women that liue by
hard labour, & painfull toile. If such mothers
as refuse this office of loue, & of nature to their
children, should hereafter be refused, despised,
and neglected of those their children, were
they not iustly required according to their
owne vnkind dealing? I might say more in
handling this first point of my promise; but
I leaue the larger, and learneder discourse hereof

vnto men of art, and learning: only I speake
of so much as I reade, and know in my owne
experience, which if any of my sexe, and condition
do receaue good by, I am glad: if they
scorne it, they shall haue the reward of scorners.
I write in modestie, and can reape no disgrace
by their immodest folly.
            And so I come to the last part of my promise;
which is to answer obiections made by
diuers against this duty of mothers to their
children.
            First it is obiected that Rebeckah had a nurse,
and that therefore her mother did not giue
her suck of her owne breasts, and so good women,
in the first ages, did not hold thē to this
office of nursing their owne children. To this
I answer; that if her mother had milk, and
health, and yet did put this duty from her to
another, it was her fault, & so proueth nothing
against me. But it is manifest that she that Rebeckah
calleth her nurse, was called so, either
for that she most tended her while her mother
suckled her: or for that she weaned her: or for
that during her nonage, and childhood, shee
did minister to her continually such good

things as delighted, and nourished her vp. For
to any one of these the name of a nourse is
fitly giuen: whence a good wife is called her
husbands nourse: and that Rebeckahs nourse
was only such a one,Gen.24.61. appeareth, because afterward
she is not named a nourse, but a maide, saying:
Then Rebeckah rose, and her maides; now
maids giue not suck out of their breasts, never
any virgin, or honest maide gaue suck, but
that blessed one from an extraordinary, & blessed
power.
            Secondly it is obiected, that it is troublesome;
that it is noysome to ones clothes; that
it makes one looke old, &c. All such reasons
are vncomely, and vnchristian to be obiected:
and therefore vnworthy to be answered, they
argue vnmotherly affection, idlenesse, desire to haue
liberty to gadd from home, pride, foolish finenesse, lust,
wantonnesse, & the like euills. Aske Sarah, Hannah,
the blessed virgin, and any modest louing
mother, what trouble they accounted it to
giue their little ones sucke: behold most nursing
mothers and they be as cleane and sweet
in their cloathes, and carry their age, and hold
their beautie, as well as those that suckle not:

and most likely are they so to doe; because
keeping Gods Ordinance, they are sure of Gods
Blessing: and it hath beene obserued in some
women that they grew more beautifull, and
better fauoured, by very nursing their owne
children.
            But there are some women that obiect
feare: saying that they are so weake, & so tender,
that they are afraid to venter to giue their
children suck, least they indanger their health
thereby. Of these, I demand, why then they
did venter to marry, and so to beare children;
and if they say they could not chuse, and that
they thought not that marriage would impaire
their health: I answere, that for the same
reasons they should set themselues to nurse
their owne children, because they should not
chuse but doe what God would haue them
to doe: and they should beleeue that this
worke will be for their health also, seeing it is
ordinary with the Lord to giue good stomach,
health, and strength to almost all mothers that
take this paines with their children.
            One answere more to all the obiections
that vse to bee made against giuing children

sucke, is this, that now the hardnes, to
effect this matter, is much remooued by a
late example of a tender young Lady, and you
may all be encouraged to follow after, in that
wherein she hath gone before you, & so made
the way more easie, and more hopefull by
that which shee findeth possible and comfortable
by Gods blessing, and no offence to her
Lord nor her selfe: shee might haue had as many
doubts, and lets, as any of you, but she was
willing to try how God would enable her, &
he hath giuen her good successe, as I hope he
will doe to others that are willing to trust in
God for his helpe.
            Now if any reading these few lines returne
against me, that it may bee I my selfe
haue giuen my own children suck: & therefore
am bolder, and more busie to meddle in
vrging this point, to the end to insult ouer, &
to make them to bee blamed that haue not
done it. I answer, that whether I haue, or haue
not performed this my bounden duty, I will
not deny to tell my own practise. I knowe &
acknowledge that I should haue done it, and
hauing not done it; it was not for want of will

in my selfe, but partly I was ouerruled by anothers
authority, and partly deceiued by somes ill counsell, &
partly I had not so well considered of my duty in this
motherly office, as since I did, whē it was too late
for me to put it in execution. Wherefore being
pricked in hart for my vndutifullnesse, this
way I studie to redeeme my peace, first by repentance
towards God, humbly and often craving
his pardon for this my offence: secondly
by studying how to shew double loue to my children, to
make them amends for neglect of this part of
loue to them, when they should haue hung on
my breasts, & haue beene nourished in mine
owne bosome: thirdly by doing my indeauour to
prevent many christian mothers from sining in the
same kinde, against our most louing, and gratious God.
            And for this cause I add vnto my performed
promise, this short exhortation: namely
I beseech all godly women to remember, how
we elder ones are commaunded to instruct the
yonger, to loue their children, now therefore
loue them so as to do this office to them when
they are borne, more gladly for loue sake, then
a strunger, who bore them not, shall do for lucre
               
sake. Also I pray you to set no more so light
by Gods blessing in your owne breasts, which
the holy Spirit ranketh with other excellent
blessings; if it be vnlawfull to trample vnder
feete a cluster of grapes, in which a little wine
is found; then how vnlawfull is it to destroye
and drie vp those breasts, in which your owne
child (and perhaps one of Gods very elect, to
whom to be a noursing father, is a Kings honour;
and to whom to be a noursing mother,
is a Queens honour) might finde food of syncere
milke, euen from Gods immediate prouidence,
vntill it were fitter for stronger meat?
I doe knowe that the Lord may deny some
women, either to haue any milke in their
breasts at all, or to haue any passage for their
milke, or to haue any health, or to haue a
right minde: and so they may be letted from
this duty, by want, by sicknesse, by lunacy, &c.
But I speake not to these: I speake to you,
Whose consciences witnesse against you, that
you cannot iustly alleage any of those impediments.
            Doe you submit your selues, to the paine
and trouble of this ordinance of God? trust

not other women, whom wages hyres to doe it,
better then your selues, whom God, and nature
ties to doe it. I haue found by grieuous experience,
such dissembling in nurses, pretending
sufficiency of milke, when indeed they
had too much scarcitie; pretending willingnesse,
towardnesse, wakefulnesse, when indeed
they haue beene most wilfull, most froward,
and most slothfull, as I feare the death of one
or two of my little Babes came by the defalt
of their nurses. Of all those which I had for
eighteene children, I had but two which were
throughly willing, and carefull: diuers haue
had their children miscarry in the nurses
hands, and are such mothers (if it were by the
nurses carelesnesse) guiltlesse? I knowe not
how they should, since they will shut them
out of the armes of nature, and leaue them to
the will of a stranger; yea to one that will
seeme to estrange her selfe from her owne child,
to giue sucke to the nurse-child: This she may
faine to doe vpon a couetous composition, but
she frets at it in her minde, if she haue any naturall
affection.
            Therefore be no longer at the trouble, and

at the care to hire others to doe your owne
worke:
bee not so vnnaturall to thrust away
your owne children: be not so hardy as to venter
a tender Babe to a lesse tender heart: bee not
accessary to that disorder of causing a poorer
woman to banish her owne infant, for the entertaining
of a richer womans child, as it were, bidding
her vnloue her owne to loue yours. Wee haue followed
Eue in transgression, let vs follow her
in obedience. VVhen God laid the sorrowes
of conception, of breeding of bringing forth,
and of bringing vp her children vpon her, &
so vpon vs in her loynes, did shee reply any
word against? Not a word; so I pray you all
mine owne Daughters, and others that are still
child-bearing reply not against the duty of
suckling them, when God hath sent you
them.
            Indeed I see some, if the wether be wet, or
cold; if the way be fowle; if the Church be far
off, I see they are so coy, so nice, so lukewarme,
they will not take paines for their own
soules. alas, no maruell if these will not bee at
trouble, and paine to nourish their childrens bodies,
but feare God, bee diligent to serue him;

approue all his ordinances; seeke to please
him; account it no trouble, or paine to doe
any thing that hath the promise of his blessing:
and then you will, no doubt, doe this
good, laudable, naturall, louing duty to your children.
If yet you be not satisfied, inquire not of
such as refuse to doe this: consult not with
your owne conceit aduise not with flatterers:
but aske counsell of syncere, and faithfull
Preachers. If you be satisfied; then take this
with you, to make you doe it cheerefully.
Thinke alwaies, that hauing the child at your
breast, and hauing it in your armes, you haue
Gods blessing there. For children are Gods blessings.
Thinke againe how your Babe crying
for your breast, sucking hartily the milke out
of it, and growing by it, is the Lords owne instruction,
euery houre, and euery day, that you
are suckling it, instructing you to shew that
you are his new borne Babes, by your earnest
desire after his word; & the syncere doctrine
thereof, and by your daily growing in grace
and goodnesse thereby, so shall you reape
pleasure, and profit. Againe, you may consider,
that when your child is at your breast, it

is a fit occasion to moue your heart to pray
for a blessing vpon that worke; and to giue
thanks for your child, and for ability & freedome
vnto that, which many a mother would
haue done and could not; who haue tried &
ventured their health, & taken much paines,
and yet haue not obtained their desire. But
they that are fitted euery way for this commendable
act, haue certainely great cause to be
thankfull: and I much desire that God may
haue glory and praise for euery good worke,
and you much comfort, that doe seeke to honour
God in all things.
            Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   