
      
         
            
            
            An anſwere
to the examination that is
ſayde to haue bene made of one
named Iohn de Poltrot, calling
himſelf the Lord of Merey, vppon
the death of the late
Duke of Guyſe
By the Lord of Chaſtillon admyrall
of Fraunce, and others named
in the ſaide examination.
            At Caen. 1562.
            
               PRINTED AT LONdon
by Rouland Hall, for Edwarde
Sutton, dwellyng in Lumbard
ſtrete at the ſigne of the
Cradell.
1563.
         
         
            
            
            An Epiſtle.
            
               A Fewe dayes after the
late Duke of Guyſe
was hurt ſodainly before
the towne of Orleans,
the .xiiij. daye of
Februarye laſte paſt
there roſe a bruyte and rumour, that
one called Merey had done the deede
at the ſuggeſtion of the Lord Admirall
which was then and is yet at Caen in
Normandy Lieutenant in the kynges
army vnder the charge of the prynce of
Conde. Whereat the ſayd Lord Admirall
was not muche moued, for as
muche as he thought that this ſlaunder
(as many other) woulde vaniſhe away
of it ſelfe. But ſince by the ſolicitation
of a certain man called La Vallette,
maiſter of the campe of the light
horſemen vnder the ſayde Duke of
Guyſe, goyng aboute to diſvnite the
Almaines, and to put the Amirals armie
into an vprore and trouble: a copie

of the confeſſion beynge caſte abrode
in the ſayd army, aſcribed vnto one called
Iohn de Poltrot, naming himſelfe
Senior of Merey, & ſigned by the hand
of one called Maluaut, Scriuener or
Notarie: by the which it appeareth that
the ſaid Poltrot being examined by the
quene mother in perſone, & in the preſence
of certaine lords of the counſell, &
knightes of the order of the kings maieſtie,
dyd greatly charge the ſaid Lorde
admyrall, & certayne other Lords, & alſo
certayne Miniſters of the worde of
God, to haue induced & allured by
wordes & money the ſaide Poltrot to
that which is aboueſayde. The ſayde
Lorde admyrall hauyng reſpect & regard
to the trouth & to his honour, can
not attribute ſuch an inuented accuſation
but to ye ene
                  •
               ies of the reſt & quietnes
of this realme, cōtinuing in their
wicked wil & purpoſe, which is wholly
to ouerthrow & deſtroye the ſaid Lorde
admyrall with all thoſe that profeſſe
the goſpell bringing them into hatred

to all the worlde by ſuch craftes & practiſes:
whervnto he meaneth ſpedely to
ſeeke a remedye. And for this cauſe not
regarding the ſubtelties & deceytes of
the aforeſaid enemies, but truſting in
God & in his own good conſcience hath
not ſtickt to publiſhe the ſayd confeſſion
word for word, adioyning therevnto
his anſweres vppon euery article conteyned
therein. Proteſting before god,
to anſwere it before all Iudges in chriſtendom
that be not ſuſpected, but indifferent,
& offering him ſelf to maintaine
his innocencie in all ſortes & maners
reaſonable & meete in the place &
degree that he hath in this realme: to
thentent that ſuche calumnie & ſlaunder
being diſcouered, & the trouth hauyng
vanquiſhed lyes, the faultye and
culpable maye be puniſhed, as
the déede ſhall require.
(**)
         
      
      
         
            
            The .xxi. daye of
February 1562. in the campe at
ſainct Hyllaries beſyde
S. Meſmyn.
            BEfore the Quéene mother of the
kinge, my lordes the Cardinall of
Bourbon Duke of Etampes,
prince of Mantua, ye Erle of Gruyeres
the lordes of Martigues, of Sanſac, of
Cypierre, of Loſſe, and the byſhoppe of
Lymoge, reſpectiuely lordes of the priuie
counſell of the king, and knightes
of the order being than preſent. Was
brought one Iohn de Poltrot, naming
himſelfe ſeniour of merey borne in the
country of Angoumois in the lordſhip
of Aubeterre of the age of xxvi. yeares
or there about: who being commaunded
by the ſaid Quéene to declare truly
the cauſe of his enpriſonement who
prouoked him to ſhoote ye dagge wherwith
the Duke of Guyſe was hurt on
thurſday laſt: what his entent was, or
theirs which had cauſed him to doe it,

and what money he receyued for it or
truſted for to receyue. Sayd and confeſſed
kneelynge on hys knees before
the Quéene and aſkynge pardon theſe
wordes folowing.
            
               Depoſition or confeſſion.
               That is to ſay, yt about the moneth
of Iune or Iuly laſte. The Prince of
Conde beyng at Orleans, and the lord
of Soubize in his company whoſe ſeruaunt
he is, he went to the ſaid towne
of Orleans.
            
            
               Aunſwere.
               The Lord admirall anſwereth truly
and before God, that he knoweth not
when the ſayd Poltrot arriued at Orleans,
nor when he went from thence,
and remembreth not that euer he ſaw
him nor heard him ſpeake in any maner
or ſort, vntyll Ianuary laſt by occaſion
which afterward ſhalbe declared.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               In the which place the Lord of Feuqueres
the yong gouernour of Roy &

Captaine Brion, came vnto hym, and
ſayde: that heretofore they had knowen
hym to be a man to execute a
matter or enterpriſe, and that yf he
would take in hande to do a good exployte,
which ſhould tourne to the ſeruice
of God, and the honour of the
kyng, and the comfort of his people, he
ſhoulde be greatlye commended and
eſtemed. And then the Deponent requiring
them to declare more, and to
open vnto him what enterpriſe they
woulde ſpeake of aſſuryng them that
for his parte, he woulde be alwayes
ready to do ſeruyce to the kynge: they
than knowynge hys good wyll, they
remitted hym to the Lorde admyrall, &
tolde hym that he ſhoulde gyue him
to vnderſtande more at large the matter
that they had moued vnto hym.
            
            
               Aunſwere.
               As touchyng the Captayne Brion,
the ſayd lorde admyrall declareth that

he neuer heard him ſpeake of the ſayde
Poltrot, and it is not lyke to be true,
that if the ſayde Brion had knowen of
any ſuch practiſe he would haue helde
his peace ſynce that he was in the ſeruice
of the Duke of Guyſe where he is
now dead. And as concernynge Feuqueres,
the ſayde Lorde Admyrall
remembreth well that aboute the latter
ende of Ianuarye laſte, and neuer
before, he tolde hym, ſpeakynge of the
ſayde Poltrot newly comme from Lyons,
that ſometyme he had knowen
hym a man of ſeruyce, in the tyme
of the warre in Pycardye, whych was
the cauſe that the Lorde Admyrall
ſhortlye after the reporte of the ſayde
Feuqueres, employed hym as anone
ſhall be declared. And as for the reſte,
the ſayde Lorde Admyrall doubteth
not but the ſaide Feuqueres can well
anſwere for his owne déedes.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               
               And agayne, two or thre dayes after,
the ſayde men Feuqueres and Brion
preſented him to the ſayd Lord of Chaſtillon
admyrall beyng lodged at Orleans
nigh vnto the houſe of the prince
of Conde. And the ſayde Chaſtillon
was then in a low hall vnder the ſaide
lodging: & after the ſayde Feuqueres &
Brion had preſented him to the ſayde
lord of Chaſtillon, he commaunded all
that were in the hall to depart, whiche
thing thei did. And alſo the ſaid Feuqueres
and Brion departed, and he remained
alone with the ſaide Lord of
Chaſtillon, who aſked him by theſe or
ſuch like words, yf he would take vpon
him to go into the campe of the kyng,
(which the ſayde lord of Chaſtillon called
the Duke of Guyſe campe, beyng
then beſide Bogency) & that if he wold
enterpriſe to go to ye ſayd campe about
the matter that he would declare vnto
him, he ſhoulde doe God, the kyng and
the common wealth great ſeruice: and
the ſayde deponent aſkyng hym what

enterpriſe it was, he ſaid vnto him that
yf he woulde venter to go to the ſayde
campe to kyll the ſayde Duke of Guiſe
(whiche perſecuted the faythfull) he
ſhould do a meritorius worke toward
God and man. The ſayde Deponent
hearing theſe words, which ſemed vnto
him more then he was able to doe or
performe, he ſayd vnto the ſayd lord of
Chaſtillon, that he durſt not take vpon
hym ſo great a matter. The which anſwere
being made, the ſayde Lorde of
Chaſtillon preſſed hym no further: but
prayed him to keepe this talke ſecrete,
and not to vtter it to any man.
            
            
               Aunſwere.
               The contents of this article are vtterly
falſe and imagined: wherevppon
the ſaid Lorde admirall ſheweth firſt
that in all this confeſſiō he is called but
Lord of Chaſtillon, which is a name yt
he telleth not ſcorne of, or diſdeineth it:
but yet that declareth manifeſtly out
of what ſhoppe thys confeſſion comcommeth,

ſeynge he is not ſo called in
no place of all thys Realme nor elles
where, but by theym that pretend by
ſuche crafte to beriue and ſpoyle hym
of the ſtate and degree that appertayneth
vnto hym.
               And ſecondly theſe words. The campe
of the kyng whyche the ſayde Lorde of
Chaſtillon calleth the campe of ye Duk
of Guyſe being then beſyde Bogency,
ſhew ſufficiently that whoſoeuer wrot
or endyted thys depoſition of the poore
Deponent was to muche in a paſſyon
or affection for to do his occupatiō wel,
and went about no other thing but to
ſéeke how he myght not leaue out any
thinge that myght charge the ſaid lord
Admirall, were it to the purpoſe or
not. Finally when it is ſayde that the
Lord Admirall for to induce the ſayde
Poltrot, alledged vnto him yt he ſhould
doe a meritorious worke to god & man
who ſeeth not plainly that al this talke
was forged by ſome one all togyther
ignorant of the true religion, y• whych

ye ſaid lord admiral profeſſeth? He ſhuld
at the leaſt haue conſidered what the
doctryne of the Goſpel is, & how much
it condempneth the wordes to Merito
and meritorious workes, before he toke
in hand to conterfete the talke of a goſpeler.
But behold howe it fareth wyth
falſe witneſſes by the Iuſt iudgement
of God, that by their owne mouthe
they be conuinced.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               And ſynce the ſayde Lord of Soubize
departynge from the ſayde towne
of Orleans for to goe to Lyons, the
ſayde Deponent accompanyed hym
and there contynuallye remayned
wyth hym, vntyll about fiftene dayes
after the battaylle foughte beſyde
Dreux.
            
            
               Aunſwere.
               The ſayde Lord Admyrall knoweth
nothyng of all thys.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               
                  
That the ſayde lorde of Chaſtillon,
wrot to ye ſayd Soubize being at Lions
ye he ſhuld ſend him the ſaid deponent.
            
            
               Aunſwere.
               The ſayd lord Admirall wrote then
many times to lions to the lord of Soubize:
but vppon hys lyfe & his honour it
ſhall not be found that euer he wrote,
that the ſaid Poltrot ſhuld be ſent vnto
him whom he knoweth not whether
euer he ſaw or knew before, & thought
nothyng vpon him.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               And thā in dede the ſaid lord of Soubize
diſpatched him with letters to goe
to the ſaid lord of Chaſtillō, & gaue him
a packet to carye not telling him what
he wrot vnto the ſaid lord of Chaſtillō.
And being arriued nygh vnto ye towne
of Celles in Berry in a place named
Villefranche, he found the lord of Chaſtillon
there to whome he delyuered
the ſayde packet of letters.
            
            
               Aunſwere.
               
                  
The lord Admiral remembreth wel
that it is ſo: but ſo farre of is it yt it was
to employ the ſaid Poltrot about thys
matter now in queſtion, that contrary
wiſe the ſaid lord of Soubize ſent word
that he ſhuld ſend him againe, bycauſe
he was a man of ſeruice, as the letters
ſhall declare and ſpecifye.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               And when he had ſene the letters he
commaunded him to go to tarrye hym
at Orleans and ſo he dyd.
            
            
               Aunſwere.
               The ſayd lord Amirall ſent him not
to Orleans, but he gaue hym leaue to
goe thyther, bycauſe he ſayde he had
buſynes to doe there.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               And ſhortly after the retourne of the
ſaid lord of Chaſtillon vnto Orleans,
this Deponent preſenting himſelf to ye
ſaid lord of Chaſtillon to know & vnderſtand
his pleaſure: he aſked him if he remembred
the talke that he had wt hym

the ſomer before: & this Deponent anſwering
ſaid yt he remembred it verye
wel but it was to venturous a thinge.
The ſaid lord of Chaſtillon ſaide vnto
him, yt if he wold execute the ſaid enterpriſe
he ſhould do the moſt notable and
moſt honorable thing for the ſeruice of
god & the comō welth yt euer was done
& gaue him courage to put the ſame in
execution frō the which ons againe he
wold haue excuſed himſelf. But than
euen at yt inſtant came in Theodore de
Beze, & another miniſter of a ſmal ſtature
ſomwhat bigge, wt a blacke berd, y•
which ſpake vnto him many things demaunding
him if it were not a bleſſed
thing to cary his croſſe in this world as
Chriſt had caried it for vs: & after mani
diſcourſes & words, they ſaid vnto him
yt he ſhuld be the moſt happieſt man in
this world, if he wold execute the enterpriſe
which ye lord Admiral had moued
vnto him bicauſe he ſhould ryd a tirant
out of this world, for the which acte he
ſhuld win heauē & be among ye bleſſed

                     •
                  aits if he died in ſo iuſt & good a quarel.

By the which perſuations the ſaid deponent
graunted vnto them, & ſaide to
the lord of Chaſtillon, yt he was ready
to conſent to al the ſayings of the ſaide
miniſters, and that he woulde than
the wyll of God, and woulde go to the
campe of the ſaid Duke of Guyſe, to endeuour
to put the ſaid enterpriſe in execution.
For the which he was greatly
commended & eſteemed as well of the
ſayd Lord of Chaſtillon, as of the ſayd
Miniſters: & thei told him that he was
not alone that had done ſuch exployts,
becauſe there were many other yt had
taken vpon them the like charge: & namely
ye ſaide lord of Chaſtillō ſaid vnto
him, yt there were more then fifty other
gentilmen of good houſes, that had promiſed
him to put in effect other lyke
matters: and furthwith cauſed his ſteward
to geue him .xx. crowns, for to go
to the campe at Meſſas, where then the
ſaid Duke of Guyſe was, to thende he
might thinke & deuiſe ye meane & way
how he might bring his purpoſe to pas.
            
            
               
               Aunſwere.
               The ſayd lorde admirall anſwereth
truly before god & man, that the foreſaid
words be falſely & wickedly inuented.
And furthermore, to thentent that
all the world may know how he behaued
himſelf towarde the ſayd Duke of
Guyſe, he declareth frankly & frely,
that before theſe laſt tumults, he knew
ſome that were determined to kyll the
ſayd Duke of Guyſe becauſe thei were
diſpleaſed with him. But ſo farre of is
it that he inticed them thervnto or allowed
it, that rather contrariwiſe he did
diſuade and tourne them from their
wicked purpoſes, as madame de
Guyſe her ſelfe knoweth whome he
ſufficiently aduertiſed thereof in tyme
and place where. True it is that after
the murder at Vaſſy, after taking of armur
for to maintain ye authoritie of the
kynges decrees and lawes, and to defend
the poore oppreſſed men agaynſt
the violence of the ſayd Duke of Guyſe

and his adherentes, he hath counted &
purſued them as publyke enemyes of
God, of the kyng, & of the reſt & quietneſſe
of this realme. But vppon hys
lyfe & hys honour, it ſhall neuer be
founde that he allowed that anye man
ſhoulde attempt on this ſort vppon the
perſon of the ſayde Duke, vntyll he
was certainelye aduertiſed that the
ſayde Duke of Guyſe & the Marſhall
Sainct Andre had hired & ſuborned certain
perſons to kil the prince of Conde,
him, & his brother Dandelot: as the
ſayde Lorde Admyrall not longe ago
declared amplye vnto the Queene before
Paris, and ſynce vnto the Conſtable
at Orleans. And ſeyng thys, he
confeſſeth that ſynce y• tyme when he
heard one ſay that yf he could he would
kyll the Duke of Guyſe, yea euen in
his campe, he dyd not diſſuade or withholde
hym from it: But vppon hys
lyfe and honoure, it ſhall neuer be
founde that he ſoughte or induced any
man to do it, neyther by words, money

or promiſes by himſelfe, nor by anye
other directly nor indirectly. And touching
the twentye Crownes whereof
mencion is made in the article before,
he acknowledgeth it to be true, that at
his laſt retourne to Orleans about the
end of Ianuary laſt, after that the ſaide
Feuqueres had tolde him that he had
knowen the ſayde Poltrot for a man of
ſeruice, he determined to employ and
vſe hym for the vnderſtandynge of
newes from the campe of his ſayd enemies:
& for this cauſe he gaue hym .xx.
Crownes, hauing no other words or
talke wt him, nor ons making any mencion
of killing or not killing the ſayde
Duke of Guyſe. For namely if the ſaid
Lorde admyrall had had any ſuche enterpriſe
in hand, he would in no wyſe
haue truſted the ſaid Poltrot: for when
he ſent him to ye camp of ye ſaid duke of
Guyſe about ye matter foreſaid, it was
not wtout miſtruſting him, for aſmuch
as it ſéemed vnto him that he made the
meane & way to eaſie to enter into the

ſayde campe, as the ſaide lord admirall
declared vnto Monſieur de Grammont,
who at that tyme was preſent, &
neuertheleſſe he letted not to ſend him
for to vnderſtande newes of the ſayde
campe, ſaying theſe very wordes that
he ſhould be rather tryed & proued than
nouryſſhed & maineteyned.
               Vpon this ſame article alſo, Thodore
de Beze declareth moſt truly as foloweth
for his dyſcharge be fore all chriſtendome.
To wete that ſeyng manye
ſo animated & moued againſt the ſayde
Duke of Guyſe for the murther committed
at Vaſſy, yet he was neuer of
the mynde or aduiſe at that tyme to procede
againſt the ſayde Duke, but by
way of ordinarye iuſtice: where of he
calleth them to witnes that haue ſéene
& heard him ſpeake at that time, which
alſo was ye cauſe why he was at Monceaux
in the cōpany of other appoynted
by the reformed church of Paris: for to
require iuſtice for ye ſaid murder at the
kings maieſtie, & the quene his mother

& of ye late king of Nauar, beſeching thē
moſt hūbly to prouide wt al diligence againſt
the troubles which alredy thretened
this realme, & are hapned ſince indede.
And herevpō, the anſwer y• it pleaſed
ye quene to make him, was ſuch, that
thei of ye reformed church wer cōtented
& ſatiſfied wt it, for the hope yt was geuē
them y• good & ſpedy iuſtice ſhuld be don
vpō the trāſgreſſers. But ſone after the
ſaid duke of Guiſe & his cōplices hauīg
taken armour, & the matter brought to
ſuch a ſtate, y• right & iuſtice could take
no more place: & which is more ye perſōs
of the king & quene being vſed & handled
as euery man knoweth, he cōfeſſeth
to haue at y• time aſwell publikly in his
ſermōs, as by letters & words warned &
aduertiſed aſwell ye prince of Conde as
thadmirall & al other lords, & men of all
cōditiōs & qualities profeſſing y• goſpel,
of their duty, for to brīg thē to maintein
by al meanes poſſible, ye authoritie of ye
kings lawes & ordinances, & thinnocen
                  
                     •
                  ie
of ye pore oppreſſed. And ſince he hath

alwayes cōtinued, & yet now cōtinueth
in the ſame minde: exhorting not wtſtanding
euery man to vſe his armour and
weapons wt the moſt modeſtie yt is poſſible,
& to ſeke (next to ye honour of god)
peace & concord aboue al things, ſo that
thei ſuffer not thēſelues to be deceiued.
Of the which things he taketh to witnes
all thoſe which haue hard him publikly
or particularly, & ſuch as wyll ſay
the trouth. And furthermore as concerning
ye Duke of Guyſe, becauſe he hath
taken him for the chief authour & main
tainour of theſe troubles, he confeſſeth
to haue manye tymes deſyred & prayed
God, eyther to tourne the heart of the
ſayde Duke of Guyſe (whyche thyng
not withſtanding he coulde neuer hope
for) or elles to deliuer this realme from
him. Whereof he calleth to witneſſe all
thoſe yt haue hard his ſermōs & praiers,
and namely madame de Ferrare knoweth
what he tolde her both wt mouth
and heart, and what he hath often tymes
wrytten to her hereof.
               
                  
But it ſhall not be founde that euer he
named the ſaid Duke of Guiſe publikly,
not yt euer he ſpake to the ſaid Poltrot
in perſon, nor by any other, nor that
euer he knew him, or had to do wt hym
in any thing, & then muche leſſe that
he did counſell him to do it. The ſayde
Theodore de Beze ſayth more, ouer y•
it ſhall neuer be found that euer he hyred
or ſuborned any other man to do
this deede, wherein he acknowledgeth
not withſtanding a iuſt iudgement of
god, threatening the like or greater puniſhment
vnto all the ſworne enemies
of his holy ghoſpell, and thoſe that are
the cauſes of ſo much miſerie & calamitie
in this realme. And for the verifiing
of his anſwere, beſide the forſayde
things, he taketh his aduantage vpon
ye very termes aſcribed vnto y• ſayd Poltrot
deponent. For thāks be to god, he
is not ſo ignorant or euill inſtructed in
his charge & calling, as to apply ye ſcripture
ſo euil in that which is there ſaid,
to cary his croſſe, & muche leſſe to ſaye,

that men winne heauen. And therfore
he ſendeth all this confeſſion into the
forge from whence it came, being readie
alſo to ſubmitte himſelfe generally
and particularly, concerning al that he
hath done & ſayd in this preſent warre,
to the knowledge & vnderſtandynge of
all vnſuſpect Iudges, as well in thys
realme as ells where: vpon paine to be
puniſhed as the moſt wicked offēdour
vpon the earth, yf he be founde a lyer,
or culpable in this aunſwere.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               The which xx. crownes he receiued,
and came to the ſaid campe at Meſſas
where he preſented himſelfe vnto the
ſayd Duke of guiſe, and ſayde that he
repented him ſelfe that he had caryed
armoure agaynſte the Kynge, and
that he would from hence forthe render
hymſelfe vnto hym. The whyche
thynge the ſayde Duke of Guyſe toke
in good parte, and ſayde that he was
wellcome. And when the ſaid Duke

departed from Meſſas to goe to Blois
thys Deponent went thyther and retourned
wyth hym.
            
            
               Aunſwere.
               The ſaid Lord Admirall beleueth it
to be ſo, foraſmuch as the ſaid Poltrot
told him the ſame thinge, not at Orleans
where he neuer ſawe him ſynce he
ſent hym to the ſaide Campe to knowe
& vnderſtand newes: but in a place called
Neufuille, as afterwarde ſhall be
declared. And the ſaide Lord Admyrall
remembreth well that the ſaid Poltrot
bringing report of that he had ſene and
knowen in the ſaid campe, ſaid that he
went to Neung, to one whom he called
ſenior de Lſtang who preſented
him to the ſaid Duke of Guiſe.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               And certaine daies after, he returned
to Orleans to the ſaid lord of Chaſtillon
and there excuſed himſelf vnto him
from taking in hand ſo great a charge
bycauſe that the ſaide Duke of Guyſe

vſed not to goe out of his houſe, but wt
a great companye. But the ſayde Lord
of Chaſtillon encouraged hym more
then he dyd before: & ſaid he knew well
ynough what he had promyſed hym
and that he might not make ani excuſe
in the matter. And furthermore cauſed
the ſayde Theodore de Beze and the
other miniſter whyche before had ſpoken
to hym, to gyue hym dyuers inſtructions,
whyche ſo troubled hys
mynd, that he accorded and conſented
to do what they would. And for to confyrme
him in thys wycked mynde and
purpoſe the ſaide Lorde of Chaſtillon
gaue hym with hys owne handes a C.
crownes of the ſunne in a paper, for to
bie him a horſe, if his were not good ynough
for to ſaue himſelfe after he had
done the deede. The whiche. C. crownes
this Deponent receiued, and came
to the ſayde campe at Meſſas, to fynde
the meanes to put the ſayde enterpryſe
in effecte.
            
            
               Aunſwere.
               
                  
It is true that the ſaid Poltrot comming
againe to Orleans to make hys
report of things, found not the ſaid lord
Admyral there, who was already gone
on hys iourney towarde Normandye
which thing is ſufficient to proue that
the reſt of the former article, is no leſſe
falſe & inuented. True it is that Monſieur
Dandelot hauinge heard hys report
of newes at Orleans ſent hym to
the ſaid lord Admirall his brother then
being ariued at y• village of Neufuille
ſixe or ſeuen leagues from Orleans, in
his ſaid viage to Normandy, accompanied
wt Monſieur de Traues, bi whom
he ſent him word that he was determined
to ſtay the ſaid Poltrot becauſe he
ſemed to make a doubtfull and an vncertaine
reporte of newes. Yet neuertheles
the ſaid Lord Admirall hauyng
heard hym Iudged that would ſerue
their turne for to vnderſtand certayne
newes of the enemyes campe: and for
this cauſe he delyuered him ye hundred
crownes, whereof there is queſtion,

aſwel for to horſe himſelf better, as for
to vſe diligence requiſite in ſuch aduertiſementes,
and commaunded him to
repaire in his abſence to the ſaid Monſieur
Dandelot his brother: More, the
ſaid lord Admirall remembreth well
now, that the ſaid Poltrot went ſo far
in making his report of newes that he
ſaid it was an eaſy thing to kyl the ſaid
Duke of Guyſe. But the ſaid lord Admirall
ſtaid not vppon that talke, becauſe
he thought it a thyng to vain and
folyſhe: and vppon his lyfe and hys honour,
he neuer opened his mouthe to
prouoke hym to take it vpon hym.
Vppon the ſelfe ſame Article Theodore
de Beze aunſwereth that he cannot
remember that he euer ſawe the
ſayde Poltrot and he neuer knew him
nor knoweth hym yet and muche leſſe
that he euer ſpake to hym about ſuche
an enterpriſe.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               And ſynce, the ſayd Duke of Guyſe

being come wt the armie in thys place
of S. Hylary beſyde S. Meſmine, he folowed
him, hauing bought of Mōſieur
de la Mauuoiſiniere a ſpaniſhe Genet
at the ſaide place of Meſſas for y• ſūme
of a C. crownes that he gaue him & the
horſe wherevppon he rode before. And
lodged certaine daies in the Caſtell of
Corneil .ii. or .iii. leagues frō the cāpe
at ſ. Hilaryes, differring to execute the
ſaid enterpriſe vntill he ſaw the towne
of Orleans ſore laide vnto, & that they
went about by al meanes to take it, &
fearing than y• many honeſt men being
in the towne, ſhuld be ſlain & ſpoiled, he
fully determined wt himſelf to kepe his
promiſe. And to do this act, on thurſday
laſt ye xviii. of this preſent moneth, after
he had dined in a ferme halfe a league
frō the houſe where the ſaide Duke of
Guiſe was lodged, it came into hys
mind to execute yt day ye ſaid enterpriſe
& in dede the ſaid Duke paſſing the ryuer
of Leret for to go to Pontereau, he

accompanied him & folowed him to the
ſaid Pontereau: & than returned by the
brydge & village of Olyuet, where the
Suyſſers were lodged, & there taryed
the coming of the ſaid Duke of Guyſe
at the paſſage of the ſayd riuer of Leret
intending whether he were well or euill
accompanied, to execute his enterpryſe,
as he dyd. And hearing a trōpet
blowen at the retourne of the ſayde
Duke of Guyſe, whan he woulde enter
into the boote to paſſe the water,
he approched neere vnto the Ryuer
and after that the ſayde Duke of
Guyſe was landed beynge accompanyed
onelye wyth one gentyllman
that wente before, and another that
ſpake vnto hym rydynge vppon a lyttle
Mulette, he folowed hym behynde,
and whan he approched nigh
vnto hys lodginge, at the corner of a
ſtrete where there were manye wayes
turning this way & yt way, he ſhote hys

dagge at him charged wt thre pellets, about
vi. or vii. paſe of, thinking to ſtrike
him in the ſhulder, bycauſe he thought
he had bene armed on the body: and by
& by ſet ſpurres to his ſpaniſhe genet
whervpon he rode, and ſaued himſelfe
ſwiftly, paſſing ouer muche wood that
was cut down, & rode that night about
x. leagues in the countrey, thinking to
conuey himſelfe far frō Orleans. But
god would that the darkeneſſe of the
night turned hym out of his way, and
came againe to the village of Oliuet
into the myddes of ye gard of Suiſſers
where one of the ſayd Suyſſers ſpake
vnto him theſe wordes, Houardot. Vnderſtandyng
thoſe wordes he knewe it
was the gard of the Suyſſers, & drewe
backe and rode on the ſpurre vntill the
next day nyne of the clocke in the mornyng.
And perceyuynge that his horſe
was wery and ſore trauailed, he lodged
in a ferme where he reſted vntyll
the next morrowe, that he was taken
and brought as priſoner.
            
            
               
               Anſwer.
               This article appertaineth particularly
to the ſaid Poltrot, and therfore
he referreth it vnto hym, praiſing god
in the meane while for all hys iuſte
iudgementes.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               And vpon that, which the ſaid quene
mother examined him whether any other
were conſenting to the ſaid enterpriſe,
beſide ye lord of Chaſtillon & the
ſaid miniſters. He ſaid yt he was neuer
ſpokē to of it, by any other perſōs thē
by the ſaid lord of Chaſtillon, the ſayd
Theodore de Beze and his fellow: but
yet he thinketh that he lord of Roche
foucaul knew ſome thing of the matter,
foraſmuch as when he arryued at
the ſaid Ville 
                        •
                     ranche, beſyde the toun
of Celles: the ſayde Roche foucault
ſhewed him a good countenance, and
ſaid he was welcome.
            
            
               Aunſwer.
               This confeſſion is manifeſtly contrary

to that which before he declared
againſt Feuqueres and Capitain Brion,
and yet wrongfullye and without
cauſe, as the ſaid lord Admyrall thynketh.
And as for that which concerneth
the erle of Rochefoucault he aunſwereth
truely, that if he had knowen any
thing of ſuch an enterpriſe he woulde
not denye it: but he neuer hearde any
talke of any ſuche thing before it was
done, and referreth it alſo to the iudgement
of all vpright men, whether the
contecture of the ſaide Deponent bee
well grounded or not: and whether it
appeareth not that the ſayde Poltrot
hath beene rather procured to accuſe
the ſaid erle of Rochefoucault by ſom
manner of meane than to teſtifye the
truth.
            
            
               Depoſition
               And as touching the Prince of Conde,
beyng therevpon demaunded ſaith
he neuer knewe that he was priuy to
the ſayde enterpriſe neyther that he
knewe any thyng of it, and thynketh
in his conſcience that he neuer knewe
of it. But contrary wyſe the fyrſt time

that the ſayd lord of Chaſtillon ſpake
of this enterpriſe, the ſaid Deponent
aſked hym if the prince of Conde wold
haue him to do it, the ſaid lord Admyrall
aunſwered, and ſaid, that he needed
not aſke any thing as concerning
the prince of Conde.
            
            
               Anſvver.
               The ſayde lorde Admirall perceyneth
by this article the crafte and ſubtiltye
of his enemies, goyng about by
al meanes to ſeparate hym and al this
army from the Prince of Conde lieue
tenaunt generall for the kynge in the
ſaid army. But he is aſſured that ſuch
practiſes by the grace of God, ſhall returne
and fall vppon their owne heades.
Furthermore he douteth him not
but will beare alwayes witnes of the
integritye, honeſtye, and innocencye
of the ſayde prynce, not onely in thys
deede, but alſo in all that is taken in
hande done, ſaide, or written by hym
in this warre, and denieth plainly and
expreſſely the ende of the ſaide article
referring hymſelfe to that he hath anſwered
before.
            
            
               
               Depoſition.
               Likewiſe he declareth that Monſieur
Dandelot neuer ſpake to hym of
it, nor the lord of Soubize, but contrarye
wiſe when the ſaid Deponent declared
vnto him the firſt talk that the
lord of Chaſtillon hadde with hym, of
which he hath before ſpoken, the ſayd
Soubize ſaid vnto him, that it oughte
not to be done by that meanes, for yf
God would puniſh the ſaide Duke of
Guyſe he wold do it another way, not
vſyng ſuch maner of doyngs.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               The ſayd lord Admirall thinketh in
his conſcience, that the ſaide Poltrot
had neuer ſuche talke with the ſayde
Soubize, for he neuer vnderſtode any
thing therof: and alſo douteth nothing
of the innocency of Monſieur Dandelot
his brother nor of ye ſaid Soubize.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               And alſo the ſaid Deponent hath aduertiſed
and warned the quene to beware
and to take hede to her ſelfe, becauſe

yt ſynce the battail beſyde Dre
                     ••
                  
the ſaid lord of Chaſtillon, with the capitains
and ſouldiors being with him
beare her euill wil, ſaying, that ſhe betra
                     •
                  ed them, bicauſe ſhe promiſed thē
before Paris many thinges which ſhe
hath not perfourmed.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               The ſaid lord Admirall ſaieth, that
this aduertiſement and warning can
not procede but out of a wicked mind,
which deſireth nothyng elles but the
continuāce of the preſent miſeries and
calamities of this realme: & for proofe
of his fidelity & faithfulnes he cannot
haue better witnes thā the quene her
ſelf, with ye ſeruices that he hath done
heretofore, proteſting before g
                     •
                  d that
by his grace no euill entreating made
him euer nor ſhal n
                     •
                  uer make him forget
the duty and obedience that he oweth
vnto their maieſties & to his countrey,
& he douteth not but the intent &
mind of the lordes, capitaines, and other
of his army is ſo likewiſe.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               
                  
Sayeng more ouer, that there wer
many perſons, as well in the traine
of the court as folowing this campe,
which were ſent by the ſaide lorde of
Chaſtillon to execute the lyke enterpriſes:
yet he neuer hearde them named,
whom the Lorde of Chaſtillon
would haue to be kylled: but onely
in generall woordes, he hearde hym
ſay, that after the ſaid duke of Guiſe
ſhoulde be kylled, he woulde cauſe
the lyke to be doone to all thoſe that
ſucceſſiuely would rule and leade the
army, and alſo that there muſte bee
ſlayne ſixe or ſeuen knyghtes of the
order, not otherwyſe namyng them,
but that he vnderſtode it commonly
by the capitaynes and ſouldiors beyng
at Orleance, which hated greatly
the lorde Duke of Montpenſier,
and monſieur de Sanſa
                     •
                  : and that
if the ſayd duke of Guyſe were ſlain
together with the ſayde knyghtes of
the order, to whome they bare euyll
wyll, they woulde than come to the
courte to ſubmytte theym ſelues to
the grace and pardon of the kynge,

and would doo what he would commaund
them.
            
            
               Anſvvere.
               The ſayde lorde admyrall anſwereth
to this article, as vnto the next
before it, leauing it to al mē to iudge
that know him whether it ſmell lyke
a trouthe, that in caſe he had taken
in hande ſuche enterpriſes he would
haue diſcouered theym vnto ſuche a
man as the ſayd Poltrot is. And as
touchyng that he ſayth, that he heard
it ſayde of the capitaynes and ſouldiours,
the ſayd lord admirall ought
not to aunſwere to it, and yet beleueth
it not to bee true, ſpecially ſeynge
there is not ſo greate occaſion
nor apparēce of hatred againſt them
which are named in the ſaid Article.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               He ſaith moreouer, that being in y•
town of Bloys with the ſaid duke of
Guyſe, whyle the Campe was at
Meſſas, he found in the gardens of ye
ſaid town nigh vnto ye king, who thā
playd at the mallet & the ball, a mā of
a mean ſtature wt a red berd, red hoſe
and a ierkyn of lether cut, which had

a dagge ready charged and ſpande in
his hande, whome ſometyme he had
ſeene at Orleance, in the ſaide lord of
Chaſtillons hall.
            
            
               Anſvvere.
               The ſayd lorde Admyrall can not
tell what the ſayd Poltrot myght ſee
at Bloys, and therefore ought not to
anſwere to it: but he knoweth verye
well, that he and all hys army beare
accordyng to their duetie, a ſinguler
affection, obedience and reuerence to
his maieſtie, as his true and faithfull
ſubiectes and ſeruants, and that they
haue nothyng in this worlde ſo deare
vnto theym, as the proſperitie and
wealth of their prince and kyng.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               And furthermore, that he ſawe in
this campe fower men well horſed,
whoſe names he knewe not, but he
knoweth them if he ſee them, whych
wer in the hall at Orleance when he
ſpake with the ſaid lord of Chaſtillon
the laſte tyme, and the ſayde lorde of
Chaſtillon aſked him, if he would be
knowen vnto the ſaid men, who alſo

had promiſed him to execute other enterpriſes.
But this deponent fearyng
to be deſcried, prayed the ſayd lord of
Chaſtillon not to diſcouer hym vnto
them: And ſayde, that if they woulde
geue him libertie to walke about the
campe, he truſted to fynde them out,
and to ſhewe them.
            
            
               Anſvvere.
               The ſaid lord Admirall ſaith that calumnie
and falſe report was forged in
the ſame ſhoppe that the other were,
and for to haue certaine & true knowledge
therof, they ſhold haue ſuffred ye
ſaid Poltrot to walk about the campe
with a good & ſure gard about hym.
            
            
               Depoſition
               Being demanded what the ſaid lord
of Chaſtillon departing frō Orleance
to go into Normandie went to doo &
worke: ſaid, that he purpoſed to go to
ioyne with the Engliſhemen, and to
bring them to Orleance: & that at his
departyng he promiſed his brother
monſieur D'andriot, that if the ſaid
duke of Guiſe wold come to beſiege
the ſaid towne of Orleance, he wold

come with ſuccour, and wold ſeke to
gyue hym battaile.
            
            
               Anſvvere.
               The ſayd lord Admirall anſwereth
that his enemies ſekyng ſo curiouſly
all meanes to deſtroy hym, vnder the
colour and pretext of iuſtice, ſhoulde
haue ſought out thynges by ſome other
of his counſell, than by the ſayd
Poltrot, or other ſuche as he is: And
alſo the ſaid Poltrot was not at Orleance
whan the ſayd lorde Admirall
departed from thence at the leſt that
he knewe of, and therfore could not
teſtifie any thynge but by hereſaye,
what he had promyſed vnto the ſayd
monſieur Dandelot his brother. And
furthermore, the ſayd lorde admirall
ſayth, that it ſhall not be founde that
he euer dyd it, and that he had rather
dye, than to thynke ones to doo any
thyng contrary to the dutie of a true
and faithfull ſubiecte and ſeruant of
his maieſtie: as he wil ſhewe it at all
tymes when nede ſhall require.
            
            
               Depoſition.
               Furthermore, beyng demanded of

the maner of the deathe of the late
marſhal ſaint Andre, and after what
ſort he was killed, ſaid that he heard
ſay at Orleance of many gentilmen
that foraſmuch as the ſayd Marſhall
Saint Andre had firſt geuē his faith
to a yonge gentylman of a highe ſtature
with a lyttle abern bearde: and
afterwarde the ſeconde tyme had geuen
his ſaid faith to the prince of Portian,
the ſaid gentylman to whom he
had fyrſt geuen his fayth, killed hym
with his dagge: and more the ſaid deponent
ſayde not. The mynute he
hath ſigned.
               The .xxii. of the ſaid moneths and
yere, this preſent confeſſion or depoſitions
being made yeſterday by the
ſaid Iohn de Poltrot, before ye quene
and the lordes of the counſell, and
knightes of the order were red and
repeted agayne to the ſaide Poltrot,
in the whiche his confeſſion after an
othe by him takē, he perſiſted, ſaying
that it cōteined the truth: and in witneſſe
therof, ſigned euery leafe of the
minute, thus ſigned. P. Maluaut.
               
            
            
               
               Anſvvere.
               If the ſaid Poltrot, either for feare
of deth, or by any other ſubornatiō or
perſuaſion hath perſiſted in his falſe &
inuented confeſſions: The ſaid lorde
admirall, & they that by them be charged
with him, haue more reaſon to
perſiſt in their anſwers which contein
the pure and plaine truth. And for as
much as the verificatiō of all this matter
dependeth vpon the bryngyng of
the ſaid Poltrot face to face before thē
whom he hath charged, the ſaid lorde
admirall with the other aforenamed,
after hauynge refuſed the courtes of
parliament, & all other iudges which
haue manifeſtly declared themſelues
their enemies in theſe preſent tumultes:
moſt humbly beſech the kings maieſtie,
to appoint & cōmaund y• the ſaid
Poltrot may bee wel & ſafly kept, in
place where he may neither be put in
feare nor ſuborned, vntill it ſhal pleſe
god to graūt the long deſired and neceſſary
peace in this realme: and that
by this means the whole matter may
be verified and ended before vpright &

vnſuſpect iudges: and in caſe that any
of the ſaid iudges of the parliament or
any other will forthewith procede in
iudgement and execution of the ſayde
Poltrot, and by that meanes take frō
the ſaid lord admiral & from al thother
the true meane & way to iuſtify themſelues
of the ſaid fals accuſations, they
proteſt of their integritie, innocency,
& honeſt reputation, and ſtand againſt
the ſaid iudges and againſte all other
to whom it ſhal appertayne.
               
                  Geuen at Caen in Normādy the
12. day of Marche. 1562.
                  
Thus ſigned.
Chaſtillon. La Rochefoucault.

                        〈◊〉
                      B
                        •
                     ze.
               
            
         
         
            A copy of the letter ſente to
the quene by the ſaid lord Admiral
with the foreſaid aunſwer.
            MAdame two daies ſince I ſaw
an examination whiche was
made to one Iohn Poltrot catling
himſelf the lord of Merey, the 21.
day of the laſt moneth: who confeſſeth

to haue hurt the duke of Guiſe, by the
which alſo he chargeth yt I ſhould procure
him or rather forced hī to do that
he hath done: & becauſe it is the thing
that I moſte feare in this worlde leaſt
the ſaid Poltrot ſhold be put to execution
before the truth of this matter be
knowen, I moſt humbly beſeche your
maieſtie to commaund that he may be
well kepte. And in the meane tyme I
haue ſet forth certaine articles vpon euery
one of his, which me thinketh deſerue
an aunſwer, the whiche I ſende
vnto your maieſtye by this trompet:
whereby all men of good iudgement
may almoſt be certified of the matter.
And more ouer I ſaye, that it ſhal not
be found that euer I ſought that man
nor any other to do ſuch a deede. But
rather contrarywyſe I haue alwayes
ſtopte and not ſuffered aſmuch as laye
in me, that ſuche enterpriſes ſhoulde
bee 
                  •
               utte in execution. And thereof
haue I often tymes talked wyth the
Cardinall of Lorayne, and Madame
de Guyſe, and namely with your maieſtye:
whome it maye pleaſe to be remembred

howe contrary I haue bene
thereunto, ſauyng within this fyue or
ſyxe monthes, that I haue not muche
ben againſt thoſe which ſhewed them
ſelues to haue ſuch a mynde. And that
hathe bene ſynce there came certayne
perſonnes whiche I wyll name when
tyme ſhall ſerue, which ſayd, that they
were procured to come to kyll me, as
it ſhal pleaſe your maieſty to remember
what I ſayde vnto you at Paris,
going out of the Myll where we commoned
together: whiche thyng alſo I
haue tolde vnto the Conſtable, and
neuertheleſſe I may ſay, and that truly,
that for myne owne part, I neuer
ſoughte procured, nor practiſed wyth
any man aboute ſuche a matter. And
I wyll reporte me vnto all thoſe whiche
haue ſene ſuche enterpriſes putte
in effecte beefore me, howe muche I
mocked ſuche doynges. And beecauſe
I will not trouble your maieſty
wyth any longer letter, I moſt hū
               blye
beeſeeche the ſame ones againe

to commaunde that the ſaide Poltrot
be wel and diligently kepte for to verifye
of this matter the truthe. Alſo
that beeyng broughte to Parys, as
I heare ſaye, I feare leſte they of the
court of parliament wil put him to execution,
and al for to leaue this calumnye
and falſe accuſation in my necke:
or els leſt they ſhould procede againſt
me for this dede, which thing they cannot
do beyng my parties and refuſed
as they be. And in ye meane time think
not that which I ſay, is becauſe I am
ſory for the duke of Guiſe: for I think
it is the greateſt good turne that euer
could happen to this realme, and to ye
church of god, and particularly to me
and to al my houſe, and alſo if it pleaſe
your maieſty it ſhalbe the mean to ſet
this realme at reſt and peace, whiche
thing al we of this army deſyre, according
to y• whiche we haue required of
you, as ſone as we were aduertiſed of
the death of the ſaid duke of Guyſe.
Madame I praye god geue you moſte
parfit helth with happy and long life.
            From Caen the. 12. of March. 1562.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   