
      
         
            
            
            THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Hector. ONE, AND THE FIRST OF the moſt Puiſſant, Ʋaliant, and Renowned Monarches of the world, called the Nyne worthies. Shewing his jnvincible force, together with the marvailous, and moſt famous Acts by him atchieved and done in the great, long, and terrible Siege, which the Princes of Greece held about the towne of Troy, for the ſpace of Tenne yeares. And finally his unfortunate death after hee had fought a Hundred mayne Battailes in open field againſt the Grecians: The which heerein are all at large deſcribed. Wherein there were ſlaine on both ſides Fourteene Hundred, and Sixe Thowſand, Fourſcore, and ſixe men.
            Written by Iohn Lidgate Monke of Berry, and by him dedicated to the high and mighty Prince Henrie the fift, King of England.
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot. Anno. Dom. 1614.
         
         
            
            
            THE EPISTLE, AS IT vvas dedicated vnto the high and mightie Prince HENRY the Fift.
            
            
               
                  MOST puiſſant Prince,
               whoſe fame is knowne ſo well,
               And whoſe renowne
               ſo farre abroad doth ſhine,
               That it is found
               all others to excell,
               And equall with that of the worthies Nine:
               Borne by diſcent of right Paternall line,
               To be the heire, and th
                     •
                  onor to obtaine,
               To weare the Crowne of mighty Kingdomes twaine.
            
            
               Who even as farre as Phoebus in the ſpheare
               Celeſtiall, doth ſpread his beames moſt bright;
               And as Lucina with her face moſt cleare,
               The world doth compaſſe round, & caſt her light:
               Art held to be the moſt renowned knight,
               And worthy for the honor of thy name,
               To ſit on high in throane of Lady Fame.
            
            
               And 
                     •
                  hold the palme of honor in thy hand,
               In triumph for thy noble victory,
               For which thou feared 
                     •••
                  t by ſea and land,
               And ever with perpetuall praiſe and glory,
               Shalt for thy conqueſt freſh in memory,
               Sit oppoſite before her to be ſeene,
               With wreath about thy head of Lawrell greene,
            
            
               
               In former time for Conquerors ordain'd,
               That conſtantly perſever'd to the end,
               And valiantly warre once begun maintain'd,
               For cauſes iuſt, and did their right defend,
               And therevnto their forces did only bend:
               Whoſe fame's ſtill ſpread, & was long time agone,
               Among whom thou by right mayſt ſit for one.
            
            
               For through the world it's known to every one,
               (And flying Fame reports it farre and wide,)
               That thou by naturall condition,
               In things begun wilt conſtantly abide,
               And for the time doſt wholly ſet aſide
               All reſt, and never carſt what thou doſt ſpend,
               Till thou haſt brought thy purpoſe to an end.
            
            
               And that thou art moſt circumſpect and wiſe,
               And doſt effect all things with providence,
               (As Ioſua did) by counſell and adviſe,
               Againſt whoſe ſword ther's none can make defēce,
               And wiſedome haſt by heavenly influence,
               With Salomon, to iudge and to diſcerne
               Mens cauſes, and thy people to governe.
            
            
               For mercy mixt with thy magnificence,
               Doth make thee pitty all that are oppreſt,
               And to withſtand the force and violence
               Of thoſe that right and equity deteſt;
               With Dauid thou to piety art preſt;
               And like to Iulius Caeſar valorous,
               That in his time was moſt victorious.
            
            
               And in one hand (like worthy Prince) doſt hold
               Thy ſword, to ſee that of thy ſubiects none
               Againſt thee ſhould preſume, with courage bold
               And pride of heart to raiſe rebellion,
               Thereby to ſhake off thy ſubiection:
               And in the other Scepter, to maintaine
               True iuſtice, while amōgſt vs thou doſt raigne.
            
            
               
               Then ſith thou art adorn'd with Maieſtie,
               Grace, wiſedome, pitie, and benignitie;
               With humble heart I craue ſubmiſſiuelie
               That thou wilt not diſdaine, but pleaſed be
               T'accept this Booke, though rudely done by me:
               Thereby thy great and Princely mind t'expreſſe,
               By taking pitie of my ſimpleneſſe,
            
            
               
                  And in thy high and magnanimious hart,
               With naturall jngrafted Sapience;
               Remember Chriſt accepted in good part
               The wido wes almes of two poore ſingle pence,
               When ſhe (without expecting recompence)
               Gaue to the poore with willing heart and glad,
               That little gift being all that ere ſhe had.
            
            
               Let this, if that it may thee not offend,
               Example be vnto thy Nobleneſſe,
               
                  And of thy great benignitie, extend
               Thy favor vnto me with gentleneſſe,
               Not to diſdaine me for my barrenneſſe
               Of wit, and though I haue no skill in muſe,
               Let my good will and meaning me excuſe.
            
            
               More then good heart, none can whatſoere he bee
               Preſent, or giue to God, nor vnto man.
               Which for my part I wholy giue to thee,
               
                  And ever ſhall as farre foorth as I can,
               Wherewith I will (as I at firſt began)
               Continually, not ceaſing night and day,
               With ſincere mind for thine eſtate thus pray.
            
            
               Firſt that thou maiſt Gods mercy ſo procure
               Vnto thy ſelfe, that he may ſtill advance
               Thine honor, and that thou maiſt here endure
               Thy raigne ore vs with long continuance,
               
                  And all thy Subiects true obeyſance:
               
                  And that he will vouchſafe to giue to thee
               
                  All vertues whatſoere may reckned bee.
            
            
               
               Lenvoy.
               
                  
                     GO forth my Booke vaild with the Princely Grace
                  Of him, that is extold for excellence
                  Throughout the world, but do not ſhew thy face,
                  Without ſupport of his magnificence:
                  And whoſoere againſt thee takes offence,
                  Be thou not ſtubborne with preſumption;
                  But ſee thou arme thy ſelfe with patience,
                  And gently yeeld to their correction.
               
            
         
         
            The Tranſlator to his Booke.
            
               
                  ANd ſith thou art not limb'd with trees not flowers
               Of Eloquence, but clad in white and blacke;
               Thou muſt prepare thy ſelfe t'abide the ſhowers,
               Of them that of diſlike occaſion take:
               And when thou likelieſt art to go to wracke,
               Seeme not gainſt them thine error to defend;
               But rather yeeld a little and giue backe,
               And pray them, that they will thy faults amend.
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE TO The READER.
            
               
                  MY Muſes ſubiect
               tending to intreate
               Of ancient warres,
               and acts of Chivalrie,
               Whereby renowned Knights
               much honour get:
               And with Eternall pariſes deifie
               (Their names and fames,) is forced to require
               Thee mighty Mars with Art him to inſpire.
            
            
               Whoſe fiery nature bent to wrath and thrall,
               (As being of complexion hot and drie,
               Melancholicke, and furious withall,
               For in thy bowels chollor hid doth lie)
               Doth rightly cauſe all Poets ſound thy fame,
               And thee the God of warres in stories name.
            
            
               Sith then thou art of warlike influence,
               And that my ſtile of battailes must indite:
               Aſſist me with ſome Marſhall Eloquence,
               That I may frame my hand and pen aright,
               With words of Art and arteficiall phraſe,
               Of valiant Knights to ſing th'eternall praiſe.
            
            
               And if at my requeſt thou dainst to list,
               Or graunt the thing which I of thee do craue,
               Yet for her ſake that lovingly thee kist,
               (Blacke Vulcans wife) and further fauour gaue;
               Vouchſafe thy ayd my verſe ſo to infuſe,
               That I therein fit tearmes and phraſe may vſe.
            
            
               Els truth to ſay, ſo barren is my wit,
               And void of Aureat liquord Eloquence,
               That I confeſſe my ſelfe to be vnfit,
               Or able to accompliſh my pretence.
               Helpe then God Mars for faire Bellonaes ſake,
               And of my worke vouchſafe protection take.
            
            
               And thou ſweet Clio with thy ſiſters deare,
               Whoſe chiefe aboad is on Pernaſſus hill
               By Helicon, the fountaine faire and cleare,
               Lend me thine ayd, and giue to me ſome skill,
               That loftie verſe by ſtately tearmes may yeild
               To valiant Knights their honour due in field.
            
            
               Aſſist herein likewiſe, ift be thy will
               
                  Calliope, (to Orpheus mother deare,
               Who inſweet muſicke ſo exceld for skill,
               That with the ſound of harpe as doth appeare,
               He pleaſd the monſter Cerberus ſo well,
               That he had leaue to enter into hell,
            
            
               To fetch his loue out of th'infernall lake,
               Where Pluto held her for his owne ſweet-hart,
               But with the muſicke he to them did make,
               He graunted ſhe with him ſhould thence depart.)
               And with the dew of thy ſweet liquor wet
               My tongue ſo harſh, and in right tune it ſet.
            
            
               For thou art ſayd of Rethoricke to beare
               The onely praiſe, and patroneſſe for skill,
               And eke of muſicke pleaſant to the eare,
               Thou canſt direct each instrument at will:
               Deny not then (ſweet Muſe) thy ayd to mee,
               And I ſhall reſt beholding vnto thee.
            
            
               Els will the clowds of ignorance encloſe
               And round incampe my wits that are ſo bare,
               And cauſe the rude (to Poets vtter foes)
               To laugh at me: But ſuch as learned are
               I will intreat what faults ſoere they find
               To winke thereat, and keepe them in their mind.
            
            
               And if that in my verſes I haue err'd,
               (As no man but may erre what ere he be)
               I muſt confeſſe I never yet deſeru'd
               To haue the praiſe for excellent Poetrie.
               For God he knowes when I this worke began,
               I did it not for praiſe of any man.
            
            
               
               But for to pleaſe the humor and the heſt
               Of my good Lord and Princely Patron,
               Who dained not to me to make requeſt
               To write the ſame, leaſt that obliuson
               By tract of time, and times ſwift paſſing by,
               Such valiant acts ſhould cauſe obſcur'd to lie.
            
            
               As alſo cauſe his Princely high degree,
               Provokes him study ancient Hiſtories,
               Whereas in Myrrour be may plainely ſee
               How valiant Knights haue won the maſteries
               In battailes fierce, by proweſſe and by might,
               To run like race, and proue a worthy knight.
            
            
               And as they ſought to clime to honors ſeat,
               So doth my Lord ſeeke therein to excell,
               That as his name, ſo may his fame be great,
               And thereby likewiſe Idleneſſe expell.
               For ſo he doth to vertue bend his mind,
               That hard it is his equall now to find.
            
            
               To write his Princely vertues, and declare
               His valor, high renowne, and Maieſtie,
               His braue exploits, & Marſhall acts that are
               Moſt rare, and worthy his great dignitie,
               My barren head cannot deviſe by wit
               T'extoll his fame with words & phraſes fit.
            
            
               This mighty Prince whom I ſo much cōmend,
               (Yet not ſo much as well deſerues his fame.)
               By royall blood doth li
                     •
                  ally deſcend
               From Henrie king of Englād forth by name
               His eldeſt Son, & heire vnto the Crowne,
               And by his vertues Prince of high renowne.
            
            
               (For by the graft the fruit men eaſly know)
               Excreaſing th'honour of his pedigree:
               His name Lord Henrie as our ſtories ſhow,
               And by his title Prince of Wales is hee:
               Who with good right, his father being dead,
               Shal weare the Crown of Brittain on his head.
            
            
               This mighty Prince hath made me vndertake
               To write the ſiege of Troy the ancient towne,
               And of their warres a true diſcourſe to make
               From point to point, as Guydo ſets it down:
               Who long ſince wrot the ſame in latin verſe,
               Which in the Engliſh now I will rehearſe.
            
            
               The time when firſt I tooke the ſame in hand,
               To ſay the truth was in the fourteenth yeare
               Of famous Henrie King of England
               
               The Fourth by 
                     ••
                  ne, my Princes Father deare.
               When Phoebus ſhew'd in altitude to be,
               Fine three times told, and foure and one degree.
            
            
               When he did in his Chariot downe deſcend
               With golden streames into the Ocean strand
               To bath his steeds, and light to others l
                     •
                  nd,
               That farre remote inhabite th'Indian land▪
               
               Where when our Summer is clean
                     •
                   paſt and gon,
               Their spring beg
                     ••
                  s but newly to come on.
            
            
               And when Lucina faire with paler light
               Began in cold October to ariſe.
               (T'enhaſe the darkenes of the winters night,
               And gliſtring ſtarres appeard in chriſtall skies:)
               And then was in the ſigne of Scorpion,
               
               And Heſperus then weſtward running downe,
            
            
               His courſe to haſten gainſt tomorrow bright,
               As Lucifer, that driues darke clouds away,
               Is ſayd to bee the meſſenger of light,
               And ſhineth at the dawning of the day:
               When Phoebus early ſhoes his gliſtring face,
               Aſcending from Proſerpins obſcure place,
            
            
               Where Pluto ſits environed about
               With furies of the fowle infernall Lake.
               In this yeare, moneth, and time as it fell out,
               This Historie I first in hand did take.
               And of the Troyan wars the truth vntwind,
               As in my ancient Author I it find.
            
            
               For if no Authors had the truth ſet downe
               In written Bookes, of things that are forepaſt,
               Forget fulnes would ſoone haue trodden downe
               Each worthy act, and cleane extinct at laſt.
               Which Serpent never ceaſeth to aſſaile
               The world, to cauſe all truth on earth to faile.
            
            
               And had no ancient Histories been found,
               But all things vnto memorie were left;
               Truth ſurely then would ſoone be layd in ground,
               And men of knowledge vtterly bereft.
               But God intending Sathan to prevent,
               That hath foreſeene, and writers alwaies ſent
            
            
               From age to age, ſtill to renew the ſame,
               That truth might alwaies spring and come to light,
               And thereby win an everlasting name,
               Againſt the which ſowle envy still doth fight.
               But famous Clarkes not ceaſing truth to ſhow,
               By writing leaue the ſame to vs to know.
            
            
               Els time with ſyth, would ſoone cut downe the graſſe,
               And re
                     •
                  ening death extirpe the root and all,
               And nothing whatſoere on earth did paſſe
               Should haue record, the ſame to mind to call.
               Nor honor due to valiant Knights be read,
               But it with them ſhould reſt, and lie as dead.
            
            
               
               And ſo not onely name, but fame would die,
               And wholy be defaced out of mind.
               But Hiſtories explain the ſame to th'eie,
               As daylie by experience we may find.
               Nere ceaſing spight of envy to vnfold
               The truth of all which may not be controld.
            
            
               Therein we ſee of high and low eſtate,
               The life and acts as it were on a stage,
               For writers that are wiſe in heart do hate
               To speake vntruth, or flatter any age.
               For tyrauts being dead they will not feare
               To write and ſhew their follies as they were.
            
            
               And t'yeild each man as he ſhall well deſerue
               Be't good or bad, and therefore it i
                     •
                   beſt,
               For every one that credit will preſerue,
               In life to vertue cleaue, and vice deteſt:
               For after death know this and marke it well,
               Clarkes will not ſpare the truth of them to tell.
            
            
               For ſuch vnpartiall dealing in their daies,
               Great Princes in them tooke no ſmall delight
               For truely blaſing forth their laud & praiſe,
               Their high renown, their power & their might
               Their knightly acts, their victories, & fame,
               Eternally with glory of their name.
            
            
               For they still ſought to ſhun the ſisters three,
               
                  Fraud, Negligence, and Sloth, that none might doubt
               Ought was forgot, or more p
                     •
                  t in to bee,
               Then truth requird, and as the truth fell out.
               Els worthy acts were wholy done in vaine,
               And thoſe that honour ſought had loſt their paine.
            
            
               And time by length of yeares and ages past,
               Would haue defaced name and honor cleane
               Of Conquerors, (for what can ever last)
               Vnleſſe record thereof were to be ſeene:
               Which Clarkes (for which they merit and deſerue
               Continuall praiſe,) haue ſought still to preſerue.
            
            
               For Histories and Bookes are ſayd to bee
               The keyes of learning, memory, and skill,
               In them, and by them all men plainely ſee,
               What, hath forepaſt, and what is good, or ill:
               Witneſſe the fall of Thebes the ancient Towne,
               In Stacies Booke for truth at large ſet downe.
            
            
               Where you may read and ſee how Polinece
               
               Was nere content with Etocles a day,
               Nor would like louing Brother liue in peace,
               Till Thebes Towne was brought vnto decay.
               And h
                     •
                  w Tedeus through that mortall ctrife,
               And by diſſention was bereft of life▪
               
            
            
               How Oedipus with ſorrow, griefe, and woe,
               Did looſe his eies ſo bitterly he wept,
               And how the Smo
                     •
                  kes devided were i
                     •
                   two,
               Of fiers made, when funerall feaſts was kept,
               Which fier brothers hatred did engender,
               And death to both for iust reward did render.
            
            
               Mine author Guydo in like ſort doth ſhow
               (As by his Booke moſt plainely it appeares)
               Of all the Troian Princes overthrow,
               While Greeks beſieg'd the towne ſo many yeares:
               In very truth, and though tis long ſince past,
               No time, nor age, the storie hath defaſt.
            
            
               For maugre them, you may it ſtill behold
               In Bookes ſet downe most plainely to mens eies,
               For truth by lying will not be controld,
               Though enviouſly ſome ſeeke it to diſguiſe:
               Transforming all the ſubſtance of the matter
               By fayned tales, diſſembling to flatter
            
            
               As Homer did, who truth would ſeeme to ſhow,
               Yet covertly did ſeeke the ſame to hide,
               And by vntruth which he full well did know,
               With Artificiall words doth truth deride:
               Who ſeeming Greecians honour to defend,
               Doth faine the Gods from heaven to descend
            
            
               In ſhape of men, and openly were knowne
               To helpe the Greeks againſt the Troians fight,
               And many ſuch vntruths by him are ſhowne
               In ſugred words, and phraſes for delight:
               Pretending ſo his malice for to hide,
               For falſehood ſeekes in darkenes to abide.
            
            
               The cauſe why he the Greeks ſo ſmothly praiſ'd,
               Was for that he vnto them was allide,
               And therefore ſought their glory to haue raiſ'd.
               But ſuch as loue the truth cannot abide
               Gainſt conſcience for to praiſe or diſcommend,
               Where no deſert their action may defind.
            
            
               But Cupid (as the Poets faine) is blind,
               And giues his doome more after luſt, then law:
               So Sicophants as we by proofe doe find
               Commend and praiſe the men they never ſaw,
               By falſe report extolling them to skie,
               Of whom in heart they know full well they lie:
            
            
               Whereby ſuch men as never merit fa
                     •
                  e
               But iuſt diſgrace, are highly magnified:
               And they contrary that deſerue good name,
               Are either not remembred or beli'd:
               For favor now doth beare ſo great a ſ
                     •
                  ay,
               That true deſert is driven cleane away.
            
            
               
               
                  Ovidius Naſo likewiſe hath deviſ
                     •
                  
               
               A Booke in verſe, of Troian 
                  
                     •••
                  s to ſhow,
               Part true, part falſe, but in ſuch ſort diſguiſd,
               That who ſo reads it, can by no meanes know
               Which way to ſound the deapth of his intent,
               His phraiſe therein's ſo miſ
                     •
                  ically bent.
            
            
               Like ſtory alſo Virgill doth declare,
               When of Aeneas tra
                     •••
                  les he doth write,
               Where truth to tell in part he doth not spare,
               Although ſ
                     •••
                   time he ſeemth to delight
               In Homers courſe, with Rethoricke to gloſe,
               And truth with falſehood often to compoſe.
            
            
               
                  Dares an ancient Author firſt was found,
               And Ditus eke of Troian warres to write,
               Who both ſet down the truth & perfect groūd,
               As being there, and did behold the fight.
               And thogh their books in ſeuerall language be,
               Yet they are knowen in all things to agree.
            
            
               The Books in time to Athens being brought,
               
                  Saluſtius couſen, one Cornelius,
               
               By diligent enquirie out them ſought;
               And being of a mind industrious,
               Tranſlated them with great & earnest care
               In each respect, as th' Authors doth declare.
            
            
               His only fault was, that he did not write
               The story full at large as he it found,
               But 
                     •
                  ure he did in breuity delight;
               Els would he not haue ſpar'd to ſhew the groūd
               And firſt beginning of that mortall strife,
               Which coſt ſo many thouſand men their life.
            
            
               And how the Greeks came both by ſea & lād
               The nūber of their 
                     •
                  en, and of their ſhips,
               The manner how they firſt did take in hand
               To plant their ſiege, (all this he ouerskips.)
               How envy was the root and cauſe of all
               The miſchiefe that on Troy at laſt did fall.
            
            
               How many Kings and Princes thither went
               In warlike wiſe to win them high renowne,
               How they agreed all with one conſcent
               To ſee the full ſub
                     •
                  er
                     •
                  i
                     •••
                   of the Towne:
               What armes they 
                     •
                  are, what men they did retaine,
               Who in the ſiege did longest there remaine.
            
            
               How one the other Knightly did aſſaile,
               How many valiant Princes loſt their life:
               How of t they met in field to giue battaile:
               How hatred still increaſt and bred new ſtrife:
               Nor of their deaths 
                     •
                  e 
                     •
                  iteth not the yeare:
               Thus much he leaueth out as doth appeare.
            
            
               Which lately cauſd an Author to ariſe,
               Whoſe truth in writing is not to be bla
                     •
                  'd,
               That tooke in hand this st
                     ••
                  i
                     •
                   i
                     •
                   ſuch wiſe,
               As that of Ditus and of Dares nam'd:
               He hath not ſought one ſentence to neglect,
               Nor yet in ought the meaning to reiect.
            
            
               This Clarkethat wrote ſo true, ſo iust, ſo well,
               Was Guydo of Columpna by his name,
               Who in ſweet Rethoricke did ſo much excell,
               That he enricht his storie with the ſame:
               So Eloquently hath he ſet it downe,
               That he deſerueth praiſe and high renowne.
            
            
               For which in heart and voice I will not stay,
               To giue him praiſe and commendation due,
               And with applauſe in truth, and rightly ſay,
               He was the flower moſt certainely and true,
               Of all that ſought this storie to compile,
               For wit, and ſoveraignty of ſtile.
            
            
               Whoſe treces as I can I will obſerue,
               If God vouchſafe me time and grace to do't,
               And graunt my labour may of him deſerue
               The Princely praiſe that firſt provokt me to't:
               Beſeeching all that ſee't, with heart & mind
               Not spare to speake, if any fault they find.
            
            
               And with good will I ſhall amend the ſame,
               (For many eies may ſee much more then one.)
               Correct then freely where you find the blame,
               But find not fault whereas deſerueth none.
               And ſo in hope I ſhall your favours win,
               With your ſupport this storie ile begin.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR.
            THE FIRST BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. 1.
               
                  I How Peleus King of Theſſalie, loſt his people, men, women, and Children, by diuine puniſhment; and after by prayer vnto the Gods, obtained others.
               
               
                  IN Theſſalie King Peleus once did raigne,
                  For vertue held a Prince of worthy fame,
                  Whoſe ſubiects as mine Author doth explaine,
                  Were Myrmidons ſo called by their name.
                  Of whoſe beginning Ouid doth rehearſe,
                  The Hiſtory at large in Latine verſe.
               
               
                  And ſaith, that in that Countrie downe did fall
                  So furious a tempeſt from the skie,
                  That it conſum'd the people great and ſmall,
                  And left not one, but all di'de ſodainlie,
                  Except the King, who deſolate alone,
                  Went wandring in the woods, to make his mone.
               
               
                  Where for a time he walked to and fro,
                  Lamenting ſore in mind his dolefull ſtate,
                  And to himſelfe complaining of his woe,
                  Began to curſe his hard and cruell fate:
                  Till in the wood he chanſt to ſpie a tree,
                  For height and thickneſſe huge of quantity.
               
               
                  Which at the foot a hole had in the ground,
                  From whence of Ants great quantitie did creepe,
                  Which when this Prince ſo deſolate had found,
                  He fel
                        •
                      vpon his knees and ſore did weepe:
                  And Paynim-like his prayer gan to make,
                  To moue the Gods ſome pittie on him take.
               
               
                  By miracle to ſhew their power as then
                  In transformation of thoſe Ants ſo little,
                  Into the right and perfect ſhape of men,
                  Therewith againe his Land to fill with people:
                  And ſo his poore diſtreſſed caſe to tender,
                  For which he vow'd continuall thanks to render.
               
               
                  Which his requeſt as Ouid ſetteth downe,
                  With pitty mou'd God Inpiter did heare,
                  And by a ſodaine tranſmutation,
                  The Ants did cauſe in forme of men t'appeare:
                  Who preſently ariſing on their feet,
                  With all ſpeed went their famous Prince to meet.
               
               
                  Which people by their ſtrength and hardineſſe,
                  The Storie ſaith, obtained lofty fame,
                  And anciently for their great worthines,
                  As firſt I ſaid, Myrmido
                           •
                        s had to name:
                  Who for their great fore-ſight in euery thing,
                  The Poet fain'd them from thoſe Ants to ſpring.
               
               
                  (For as the Ant in Summers heat by care,
                  Prouides his food in Winter time to liue,
                  This people ſo their labour did not ſpare,
                  Induſtriouſly their bodies to relie
                        •
                     e.
                  In Peace and Warre prouiding for their need,
                  As all men ſhould, the better for to ſpeed.
               
               
                  
                  For if that care and labour we neglect,
                  Our food and clothes in time for to prouide,
                  We may perchance our follie ſo derect,
                  That men our 
                        •
                     loath will▪ openly deride:)
                  But to affirme this fable to be true,
                  Therein I leaue the iudgement vnto you.
               
               
                  And of King Peleus further will declare,
                  Who as mine Author ſaith, did take to wife
                  One Thetides of ſhape and beauty rare,
                  And liu'd with her a long and happie life:
                  From whome deſcended by paternall right,
                  
                     Achilles while he liu'd, a valiant Knight.
               
               
                  (For mong the Greeks none might compare with him,
                  For valour, high renowne, and chiualrie,
                  He would ſo boldly venture life and lim,
                  Which caus'd the Troians feele his cruelty
                  Before the Towne, which if you liſt to heare,
                  Read on this Booke, and there it will appeare.)
               
               
                  And though that Peleus did the Scepter hold,
                  Yet was his elder Brother liuing ſtill,
                  Whoſe name was Aeſon, but of yeares ſo old,
                  That vnto loue and luſt he had no will:
                  And was ſo feeble and decayd in wit,
                  That for to rule the land he was vnfit.
               
               
                  His memorie as then became ſo bad,
                  And ſences all from him were cleane bereft;
                  Who when he ſaw age him depriued had▪
                  
                  Of meanes to rule the Land, the Crowne he left,
                  And regall ſtate which he ſo long had held,
                  Vnto his Brother, in his ſtead to weld.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  ¶ How King Aeſon by reaſon of his age would no longer rule in the Kingdome of Theſſalie: but cauſed his Brother Peleus to be crowned in his ſtead.
               
               
                  YOu heard that when King Aeſon did perceiue
                  His ſences, eyes, and all his ſtrength decay,
                  Expecting death would ſhortly him bereaue
                  Of life and all, he did no time delay,
                  To cauſe his Brother Peleus to be crownd,
                  As his next Heire then liuing to be found.
               
               
                  And made him King of Theſſalie by name,
                  (For of his body was no jſſue left
                  When he was dead, for to enjoy the ſame:)
                  And ſo of Princely power cleane bereft;
                  He liu'd a quiet ſolitarie life
                  In peace and reſt, cleane voyd of care and ſtrife.
               
               
                  But as ſome Authors in their Bookes explaine,
                  The Gods ſuch grace to Aeſon did jmpart,
                  That they reſtor'd him to his youth againe
                  By falſe enchantment, and by deuiliſh Art
                  Of charmes deviſed by Medeas skill,
                  That could command foule ſpirits at her will.
               
               
                  For ſhee compoſ'd a drinke (as it was found,)
                  By magicall confections in ſuch wiſe,
                  That caſting it vpon a barren ground,
                  Both buds and bloſſomes preſently would riſe
                  As freſh and greene as poſſible might bee,
                  Or any man in pleaſant ſpring could ſee.
               
               
                  The which for that it ſemeth ſtrange and rare:
                  And truth to ſay impoſſible like wiſe,
                  I will it vnto you at large declare,
                  And how ſhe did her diu
                        •
                     liſh charmes deviſe:
                  As Ovid doth ſet downe the ſame to vs
                  With in his booke, the which he ſaith was thus:
               
               
                  
                     Medea who by Art and skill knew well,
                  What hearbs would ſerue t'effect ſo ſtrange a thing▪
                  
                  For that ſhe did in Magicke much excéll,
                  Deſiring it with ſpeed to paſſe to bring,
                  That ſhe might praiſe obtaine; made no delay,
                  But preſently alone did goe her way
               
               
                  Abroad into the fields to ſeeke for ſome,
                  Such as ſhe lik▪t, whereof when ſhe had ſped,
                  And with the ſame into a place did come,
                  Which ſhe as then of purpoſe halowed:
                  She made two Altars all of Tur
                           •
                        e, of which,
                  One vnto triple Hecate the witch,
               
               
                  Th'other vnto youth was conſecrate.
                  And hauing couered them in decent wiſe,
                  With Vervi
                        •
                      and with ſhrubs, ſuch as ſhe gat
                  There in the fields, to offer ſacrifice:
                  She cut the throats of two black Rammes, whoſe blood
                  Mixt with a bowle of pure white milke and good▪
                  
               
               
                  And with as much ſweet hony clarified,
                  She put into two pits of purpoſe made
                  Within the ground, and after that ſhe cryed,
                  And certaine mumbling prayers ſoftly ſayd
                  To Pluto and his Wife, the Lords of hell,
                  And all the Elfes and Gods on earth that dwell.
               
               
                  To ſpare old Aeſons life a little ſpace,
                  And not in haſt his wearied lims depriue
                  Of his moſt aged ſoule, and t'giue him grace
                  To hold the ſame: That he might longer liue.
                  Whom when ſhe had in that ſort long beſought▪
                  
                  She wild that Aeſons corps ſhold forth be brought
               
               
                  
                  To her. Whereas with certaine carmes ſhe ſaid,
                  She caſt him ſtraight into a ſlumber deepe;
                  And then before the Altar he was layd
                  Vpon the hearbs, as dead; but yet a ſleepe.
                  Which done, with haire diſperſt about her head,
                  The Altars ſhe devoutly compaſſed.
               
               
                  And dipping ſticks within the pits of blood,
                  She kindled them vpon the Altars twaine,
                  Betwixt the which at that ſame time ſhe ſtood▪
                  
                  And then vnto her purpoſe to attaine,
                  She did with Brimſtone, fire, and water pure,
                  Thriſe purge old Aeſons corps that ſlept full ſure.
               
               
                  Meane time the medecine boyld within a pan
                  Of Braſſe, which ſhe of purpoſe had broght thither,
                  Which at that time to gather froth began,
                  Where roots, ſeeds, flowers, and leaues ſhe ſod together.
                  (Which for that ſtrāge confectiō ſhe thoght beſt)
                  With pretious ſtones that came out of the Eaſt.
               
               
                  And grauell fine that in the Weſt ſhe had.
                  And dew that fell vpon a Monday night.
                  With fleſh and feathers of a wicked jade
                  A filthy witch, (that had her ſole delight
                  In ſhape of Owle by night, to flie and ſlay
                  Young children, or to beare them cleane away▪
                  
               
               
                  And changlings in their cradles vs'd to leaue,)
                  The ſingles of a greedy Wolfe (that can
                  As ſome report, himſelfe of ſhape bereaue,
                  And when he liſt take on him forme of man.)
                  The ſlimes of water-ſnailes the which ſhe found,
                  With labour great within the Indian ground.
               
               
                  The liuer of a Hart that liues ſo long.
                  And of a Crow that loathſome carrion beaſt,
                  (The which by cauſe the nature was ſo ſtrong,
                  Had liued then Nine hundred yeares at leaſt▪)
                  The head and bill: of all which when ſhe had,
                  An admirable compoſition made.
               
               
                  To lengthen Aeſons aged yeares withall,
                  A withered bough (the which not long before
                  Downe from an Oliue tree did chance to fall,)
                  In hand ſhe tooke, and with the ſame did pore,
                  And ſtir the liquor till the ſticke waxe greene,
                  And ſodainly both leaues and buds were ſeene
               
               
                  To ſpring thereon, & ſtraight did berrie
                        •
                      beare.
                  And where the fire the skum thereof did throw
                  Vpon the earth, where it had drop
                        •
                     , euen there▪
                  
                  The ground began as freſh and green to ſhow,
                  As it in ſummer did, and flowers to riſe
                  Out of the ſame. Wh
                        •
                     h wh
                        ••
                     n Medea ſpies,
               
               
                  She tooke a knife, and with a courage ſtout
                  Did cut old Aeſons throat, where preſently
                  His aged bloud did all come guſhing out,
                  And with the boy ling iuce did new ſupply,
                  Which when to Aeſons corps ſhe had powr'd in,
                  His haire that was ſo gray did ſtraight begin
               
               
                  To turne, and wax as blacke as any coale,
                  His leane pale, withered skin grew faire and freſh,
                  The wrinckles in his face, and euery hole
                  Therein, were fild with yong and luſty freſh,
                  His limbs waxt lith, and all his ioynts did grow
                  So ſupple that he plainly then did ſhow
               
               
                  To be a man of yong and youthfull yeares.
                  At which when to his ſences Aeſon came,
                  He was abaſht, but caſting off all feares,
                  He knew at forty yeares he was the ſame.
                  And as backe from old age to youth he drew,
                  A youthfull ſpirit did in his heart renew.
               
               
                  By which ſo ſtrange deuiſe ſhe did reſtore
                  King Aeſon vnto ſtrength and former youth;
                  With wit and reaſon as he had before,
                  In each reſpect as much (if it be truth,
                  But be it true, or falſe, I haue not ſpar'd,
                  To write it as the ſtory hath declar'd.)
               
               
                  And after on his wife he did beget
                  A valiant Sonne, that Iaſon had to name▪
                  
                  In whoſe creation nature did not let
                  To ſhew hir skill, and to incurre no blame:
                  For neuer man mord perfectly was form'd▪
                  
                  Nor with more graces inwardly ado
                        •
                     n'd▪
                  
               
               
                  If I ſhould ſtriue here to deſcribe at will,
                  His ſtrength, his beauty, and his comlineſſe,
                  His good behauiour, and his perfect skill,
                  His wiſedome, vertue, and his gentlenes:
                  To all and euery one both high and low,
                  Like as mine Author plainly doth it ſhow▪
                  
               
               
                  My art and wit therein would be to little.
                  His qualities ſo pleaſed mens deſire,
                  That he obtained praiſe of all the people,
                  For young and old each one did him admire▪
                  
                  Iudge then what he would proue in elder yeares,
                  That in his childhood ſuch a one appeares.
               
               
                  But while he was of age and ſtature ſmall,
                  And far vnfit as then to rule the Land,
                  His Vnckle Peleus by conſent of all,
                  Still held the Crowne and Scepter in his hand▪
                  
                  From whom in ought he neuer ſeem'd to vary,
                  Nor his prcepts at any time contrary.
               
               
                  
                  So diligent was he in euery thing,
                  To pleaſe and ſerue his Vnckle at a becke;
                  (As is the child held vnder tutors wing,
                  And ſeareth to incurre his Maiſters checke:)
                  In heart no
                        •
                      outward ſhew whats'ere him toucht,
                  He neuer did repine, nor at it grutcht.
               
               
                  And though his Vncle held his heritage,
                  And rul'd his Princely Scepter at his will;
                  While he remained ſtill in tender age,
                  Yet was he neuer mooued vnto ill:
                  Nor once of him a bad conceite to haue,
                  In any wiſe his honour to depraue.
               
               
                  But Peleus he contrarie mind did beare,
                  And 
                        •
                     ullie had his heart to enuie bent;
                  Diſſembling that in face and outward cheare,
                  Which inwardly was whollie his intent:
                  (Like Adder lurking cloſely in the graſſe,
                  To ſting all thoſe that throgh the ſame doth paſſe.)
               
               
                  His heart and tongue contrary each to other.
                  For with pretence of faire and friendly ſhow,
                  He ſeem'd to loue the Son of his deare Brother,
                  When inwardly his heart did ouerflow
                  With malice, though not outwardly eſpy'd,
                  So cunningly he did his malice hide.
               
               
                  For no man could by any meanes per
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     au
                        •
                     ,
                  That he to Iaſon bare an enuinous eie;
                  (No cauſe he had) but feare he ſhould bereaue
                  Him of his Crowne, and regall dignitie:
                  And at the time of riper yeares obtaine,
                  The right ſucceſſion of his fathers raigne.
               
               
                  Which he as then vnjuſtly occupied,
                  And daily did deviſe how that he might,
                  On Iaſon whome in heart he envied,
                  Worke his pretended malice and deſpight:
                  Which made him oft build Caſtles in the aire,
                  Like one that liu'd in feare and great deſpaire.
               
               
                  Still compaſing ſome way or meanes to find
                  T'intrap, and take his Nephew in a ſnare;
                  Which ſecretly 
                        •
                     e kept ſtill hid in mind,
                  Yet ceaſed not his engins to prepare:
                  (Like Sathan cuery minute▪ day, and hower,
                  Deuiſing how mans ſoule he may deuour.)
               
               
                  And as the Sun ſhines hot when raine is paſt,
                  So did his enuie burne more feruently;
                  And vext him ſore till he deuis'd at laſt
                  To execute his wilfull trechery.
                  A Lambe in ſhew, a Lyon in his heart,
                  Fell (Tiger like) to play a double part.
               
               
                  A ſugred face but falſe and bitter mind,
                  None might of him conceaue ſuſpition;
                  That he ſhould to his Nephew be vnkind,
                  And priuily worke his deſtruction:
                  Pretending loue but hatred was the end,
                  Deſcription true of foule diſſembling frend.
               
               
                  His bad intent diſcloſed might not be,
                  It was ſo well conceal'd within his heart;
                  (So is all cloſe and priuy enmity,)
                  And yet although he playd ſo well his part:
                  His enuy ſtill encreaſing more and more▪
                  
                  Did inwardly torment and vexe him ſore.
               
               
                  Attending time t'effect and bring about,
                  That which he did in heart ſo much deſire;
                  And ſo to be cleane freed from care and doubt,
                  (The only ioy that enuy doth require:)
                  But Iaſon he did not conceaue in mind,
                  His Vncle would vnto him proue vnkind.
               
               
                  Their thoughts were cleane contrary in effect.
                  The Couſin ſimply ſeeking Vncles good;
                  The Vncle he all friendſhip doth reiect,
                  Deuifing how to ſhead his Nephews blood.
                  Pro
                        •
                     ok't by malice and deſire of gaine,
                  The roots of miſchiefe, ſorrow, woe, and paine.
               
               
                  For many Realmes and Cities old do feele
                  The poyſon of the ſerpent Avarice;
                  But let all thoſe that cruelly will deale,
                  Learne this of me, and thinke it good aduic
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  That what ſo euer miſchiefe they intend,
                  It's ſweet at firſt, but bitter in the end.
               
               
                  And though the world doth flatter for a while,
                  Let not the enu
                        •
                     ous man be proud withall;
                  For he that thinks another to beguile,
                  Perhaps may chance in ſelfe ſame pit to fall.
                  But let vs enuy leaue as fiend of hell,
                  And of King Peleus further to you tell.
               
               
                  Who all this while imagined and ſought
                  Meanes how he might attaine vnto his will;
                  Till at the laſt ſtrang newes to him was brought▪
                  
                  Which did his heart with admiration fill:
                  And thereby taking ſome occaſion,
                  He purpoſed in mind to worke thereon.
               
               
                  The newes which at that time vnto him came,
                  (Though ſtrange it were to heare & to be told;)
                  Was, that in Colchos jſ
                        •
                     e there was a Ramme
                  Which bare a fleece of pure and fineſt gold:
                  And for it was ſo rich eſteem'd to bee,
                  They kept it cloſe that no man might it ſee▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  Within that Iſle a King of worthy fame,
                  Long had remain'd, and yet therein did dwell,
                  Well ſtricken in yeares, and Oeta had to name,
                  Who in his daies (as antient Authors tell)
                  Moſt noble acts archieued had and done,
                  Wherby much honor to himſelfe he wonne.
               
               
                  His Pedigree (as Poets liſt to faine)
                  Doth ſhew he was the Sonne of Phebus bright,
                  Of whom, they ſay, he did the grace obtaine
                  For to become a braue and valiant Knight.
                  Let this ſuffice his Anceſtor to know,
                  And of the Ram now will I further ſhow;
               
               
                  That to be kept where no man ſhould it find,
                  By Magicke art, was ſhut within a tower,
                  Whereas two Bulls of fierce and ſauage kind,
                  With Braſen feet attended day and hower
                  To gard the place▪ that no man might go neere,
                  Out of their mouths ſtill caſting flames of fier.
               
               
                  Their eyes like burning fournace ſhining bright,
                  From whence great ſtreams of lightning ſeem'd to▪ ſtart,
                  So terrible that at the very ſight,
                  It ſtroke a feare and terror to the heart
                  Of thoſe that boldly ventur'd to aſſay,
                  To winne the golden Ram and bear't away.
               
               
                  For who ſo would that conqueſt take in hand,
                  Muſt firſt of all thoſe furious Buls aſſaile▪
                  
                  And both of them by force & ſtrength withſtand,
                  (Elſe could he by no meanes therein preuaile:)
                  And make them came and gentle as a Cow,
                  And being yok't, force thē the ground to plow.
               
               
                  That done, he muſt a ſecond combat make,
                  As dangerous and fearfull as the firſt,
                  The which to thinke vpon might cauſe him quake,
                  Yet muſt he not refuſe to doe his woo
                        •
                     ſt
                  Againſt a Serpent
                        •
                     gly, huge, and fell,
                  Much like a fiend that commeth out of hell.
               
               
                  Which had ſo 
                        •
                     oule and v
                        •
                     nomous a breath,
                  That it infected all the aire about,
                  And who ſo ere it fel
                        •
                      was ſure of death,
                  All, were he ne're ſovaliant, ſtrong, or ſtout▪
                  
                  With ſcales vpon his backe as hard as ſteele,
                  That blow of ſword or Lance he could not feele.
               
               
                  And to conclude, he that did vndertake
                  That enterpriſe, to bring vnto an end,
                  Ere he began a full account muſt make
                  Of cruell death▪ vnleſſe himſelfe defend,
                  And well reſiſt he could in open field
                  That monſter, and by force make him to y
                        •
                     eld.
               
               
                  Which done, and ſo the Serpent being dead,
                  The ſtory ſayth, it was ordain'd by law,
                  That he that did it ſlay ſhould take the head,
                  And all the teeth out of the mouth muſt draw,
                  And after caſt and ſow them in the field,
                  The which the furious Buls before had tild.
               
               
                  Whereas vpon a ſodaine men beheld,
                  Out of the ground a troope of Knights ariſe,
                  And euery one well arm'd with ſpeare and ſhield,
                  Who valiantly in braue and war-like wiſe
                  Stayd not, but met moſt furiouſly together,
                  And fiercely kild & beat downe each th'other.
               
               
                  And in that ſort dide preſently againe,
                  In ſelfe ſame place where firſt they gan to liue;
                  For ſo the fatall furies did ordaine,
                  And to each one his deſteny did giue:
                  That none ſhould longer life on earth poſſeſſe,
                  But all together die in that diſtreſſe.
               
               
                  By this ſame way ſo ſtrange and perillous,
                  Who ſo would ſeeke the Ram of gold to gaine,
                  And with the ſame returne victorious,
                  He muſt aduenture with no little paine:
                  And take his chance although t▪were nere ſo bad,
                  For remedy therein might not be had.
               
               
                  For by a law the King did ſo ordaine,
                  That who ſo ere aduentu
                        •
                     'd to aſſay;
                  To proue his force in hope the ſame t'obtaine,
                  Might not turne backe, nor take another way:
                  But forth muſt goe, & though his heart did faile,
                  His cowardiſe ſhould him no whit preuaile.
               
               
                  Some menaffirme (which of this Ram entreat)
                  That by the ſame was meant great ſtore of gold;
                  Which Oeta valiantly in time did get,
                  And by inchantment did ſo cloſely hold,
                  That who ſo euer ſought to winne the ſame,
                  Muſt firſt begin thoſe Monſters fierce to came.
               
               
                  The fame whereof did ſpread both far & neare,
                  Which made full many ventrouſly deſire,
                  To winne the ſame, although it coſt them deare,
                  (For gold doth ſet a greedy mind o
                        •
                     fi
                        ••
                     )
                  Through vaine report their honou
                        •
                      to ad
                        •
                     ance,
                  Reſpecting not what vnto them might chance.
               
               
                  For neither wit nor hardines of armes,
                  In that purſuit could any wh
                        ••
                      av
                        ••••
                     
                  
                  Gainſt ſuch accurſt and fowle infernall charmes,
                  Which made full many Knights therein to faile:
                  But he that ſets his mind on greedy gaine,
                  To haue his will regards not death▪ nor paine.
               
               
                  
                  This news ſo brought to Peleus pleas'd him well,
                  Intending ſecret vſe thereof to make,
                  And of his hidden malice (truth to tell)
                  The hard and heauy burthen off to ſhake.
                  For he the reby did ſodainly ſurmiſe,
                  Some bad pretence his Nephew to ſurpriſe.
               
               
                  For by that meanes, he had a hope to moue
                  Young Iaſon valiantly to vndertake
                  The conqueſt of the golden Ramme to proue,
                  And preſently a voyage thither make,
                  Suppoſing he nere ſhould returne again,
                  And he thereby be eaſde of inward paine.
               
               
                  Concluding thus, he doth pretend a ſhow
                  Of outward ioye, yet inwardly did hide
                  The treaſon of his heart, that none might know
                  What miſchiefe he full ſmoothly did prouide.
                  Still ſpying time conuenient and fit,
                  In painted ſhew his malice out to ſpit.
               
               
                  With words of Art and eloquence refin'd,
                  Perſwading men he meant nought elſe but good,
                  As knowing well his Nephews willing mind,
                  In ſuch a cauſe to ſhead his deareſt blood:
                  And for to bring his purpoſe to effect,
                  He doth no longer time therein neglect.
               
               
                  But ſtraight throughout the land of Theſſalie,
                  
                  Commiſſion ſends forth preſently to call
                  His noble Peeres and all his Baronny,
                  Commanding them what euer might befall,
                  Without delay t'aſſemble and to meet
                  At Eagee Towne, in parliament to ſit
               
               
                  For three whole daies. Where with a fained face,
                  And ſugred words he doth vnfold his mind,
                  And openly before them in the place,
                  Makes ſhew to be moſt louing and moſt kind
                  To Iaſon, who as then he did commend,
                  That none might deeme he would his death pretend.
               
               
                  And ſaid, the cauſe that mou'd him to the ſame,
                  As alſo that aſſembly there to make,
                  Was ſpecially t'aduance his Nephews name,
                  If ſo he would that voyage vndertake:
                  And then at large declar'd it in ſuch wiſe,
                  That no man once his treaſon could ſurmiſe.
               
               
                  With countenance ſo glad, and ioyfull ſhow
                  Of fained faith as after did appeare,
                  That they th
                        ••
                      were in preſence could not know,
                  But that he lou'd his Couſin very deare:
                  For which they all to praiſe him do begin,
                  Full little knowing his intent within.
               
               
                  Which hauing done, with faire & ſmiling cheare,
                  He did behold Prince Iaſon in the face,
                  And ſpake to him that euery man might heare,
                  When firſt he had cauſde ſilence in the place.
                  Such words as might ſeeme outwardly to ſhow,
                  His heart with ioy did inwardly ore-flow.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  ¶ How King Peleus fearing to be depoſed by his Nephew Iaſon, a worthy and valiant young Knight, counſelled him to vndertake the perillous and moſt inuincible conqueſt of the Golden fleece at Colchos, who was content to grant to his Vncles deſire.
               
               
                  DEare Couſin harke what I to thee ſhall ſay,
                  And thinke not that I ſlatter, lie, or faine,
                  And ſee thou beare it well in mind away,
                  For wholeſome counſell neuer comes in vaine:
                  And who ſo ere doth ſeeme it to reiect,
                  The prouerbe ſaith, his folly doth detect.
               
               
                  When as I thinke on thee I ſtill do find,
                  Such ſudden ioy euen at my very heart,
                  That whatſoeuer ſorrow's in my mind,
                  It cannot chooſe but preſently depart:
                  And ſpecially when as I do remember,
                  Thy gifts ſo rare in this thy age ſo tender.
               
               
                  For (truth to ſay) thou wholy art enclind
                  To vertue, honour, curteſie, and fame,
                  So that on whether ſide ſo ere I winde,
                  My onely ioy's to thinke vpon the ſame,
                  And hold my ſelfe with all my whole eſtate,
                  For thy cauſe onely to be fortunate.
               
               
                  That by thy meanes am like to liue in reſt,
                  And be aduanc't to honour and renowne,
                  (So that all vice in heart thou doſt dereſt)
                  Whoſe valour will ſo much aduance our Crowne,
                  That it not onely ſhall the ſame amend,
                  But (which is more) encreaſe, and it defend
               
               
                  Againſt all thoſe that ſeeke with vs to ſtriue,
                  Maliciouſly our ſtate to ouerthrow,
                  And ſuch as cauſe new quarrels to arriue,
                  Through pride within their hea
                        ••
                     s ſhall ouerflow,
                  This countries peace to alter and deface
                  Our glory, if they may with foule diſgrace.
               
               
                  
                  Who to withſtand thou art our onely wall,
                  Our mighty ſhield, and our protection,
                  So that whatſoere vnto vs doth befall,
                  Can vs not hurt in mine opinion.
                  Such truſt I doe repoſe in thy foreſight,
                  Thy wit, thy prudence, and thy Princely might.
               
               
                  Which vnto thy great honour and renowne,
                  Reported are almoſt the world throughout:
                  For that thy fame in euery land and towne
                  Is knowne, and ſcene with wings to flie about;
                  Which makes me neither day nor howre ceaſe
                  To find & ſeeke out meanes the ſame t'encreaſe.
               
               
                  For ſith that thine, mine honour doth augment,
                  I can no better doe then ſeeke to rayſe
                  Thy worthie fame with all my whole intent,
                  That thou maiſt haue thy well deſerved prayſe.
                  Which my deſire to tell thee without fayle,
                  Proceeds of loue, and doth me ſo aſſayle,
               
               
                  That my inſatiate mind can take no reſt,
                  Till I aduance thine honour to the skie,
                  Which as I hope ſhall turne vnto the beſt.
                  This purpoſing, I did my ſelfe applie
                  To find the meanes t'effect my long deſire,
                  And bring to paſſe the thing which I require.
               
               
                  At laſt it was my chance to vnderſtand
                  This ſtrange adventure of the golden fleece:
                  Which if thou dar'ſt vouchſafe to take in hand
                  With courage bold (thine honour to encreaſe,)
                  And that thou maiſt returne with victorie,
                  And ſo thy name for euer magnifie;
               
               
                  I ſhall eſteeme my ſelfe 
                        •
                     oue others bleſt,
                  And this my Realme (when others ſhall it heare)
                  Be ſure to liue in peace and quiet reſt▪
                  
                  For by thy valor great men will vs feare.
                  Of Knighthood then, I pray thee grant to mee,
                  This juſt requeſt, and I will promiſe thee
               
               
                  Vpon the faith and honour of a King,
                  That whatſoere is requiſite to haue,
                  I will provide the call and euery thing,
                  Both Men and Armes as inuch as thou wilt craue.
                  Or any other neceſſarie thing
                  That needfull is, the ſameto paſſe to bring.
               
               
                  And vnto thee a further promiſe make,
                  That if with cheerefull hear
                        •
                      thou goeſt about,
                  This enterpriſe with courage
                        •
                      vndertake,
                  Thou ſhalt not need to feare not ſtand in doubt,
                  Whenſoeuer it ſhalbe my chance to die,
                  To we
                        •••
                      the Royall Crowne of Theſſalie.
                  
               
               
                  Let courage therefore enter in thy mind,
                  And thinke thy fame hereby ſhalbe extold:
                  For he that ſhrinks for euery blaſt of wind,
                  In honours Booke ſhall neuer be intold.
                  Speake freely then, and ſee thou doe not ſpare,
                  Thy full intent and meaning to declare.
               
               
                  When Iaſon did King Peleus mind perceiue,
                  With joyfull heart conſent thereto he did,
                  Not once ſo wiſe his treaſon to conceiue,
                  Nor that in ſugred words lay poyſon hid,
                  Nor yet that hony ſweet was mixt with gall,
                  To be a potion to deceiue withall.
               
               
                  The outward gloſe ſo cunningly was laid,
                  That poyſon cloſely hid, could not appeare.
                  Prince Iaſon thought all true that he had ſaid,
                  For he ſuppoſ'd the King of conſcience cleare
                  From miſchiefe, falſehood, and from bad intent,
                  Or that his mind to villany was bent.
               
               
                  With ſpeed therefore he did an anſwere make
                  In few and pithy words, and did declare,
                  He was content that voyage t'vndertake,
                  And that no paine nor labor he would ſpare,
                  His Vncles mind in all things to fulfill,
                  With all his heart, his power, and his skill.
               
               
                  Wherewith ſuch joy poſſeſt King Peleus heart,
                  That much it were to tell or to declare.
                  And that he might the ſooner thence depart,
                  He did all things in readines prepare,
                  Appointing many Knights with him to goe,
                  To honour him the more in outward ſhow.
               
               
                  But for becauſe that Colchos ſo did ſtand
                  Within the Sea, which did encloſe it round,
                  That for to travell vnto it by land,
                  There could no way by any meanes be found.
                  The King an order preſently did take,
                  That Argos ſhould a ſhip of purpoſe make.
               
               
                  (Who as ſome Auchors ſay, did firſt invent
                  The Art to Sayle by Sea, and tooke in hand
                  To make a Ship the firſt that euer went
                  Vpon the Seas, to ſayle from land to land.
                  And Argos 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the ſame, as Guydoes booke
                  Declares at large, who liſt therein to looke.)
               
               
                  Which Ship in all points rigd and well ſet out,
                  Attending wind did in the harbourlie,
                  Where many Knights with courages moſt ſtout,
                  Prepard themſelues their fortunes then to trie,
                  With willing minds and ioyfull hearts to ayd
                  Prince Iaſon: Who therewith was well apayd.
               
               
                  
                  Among the which ſtout Hercules was one,
                  For courage and for ſtrength a peereles Knight,
                  Whoſe mother was the faire Alcumenon,
                  
                  In whom God Iupiter did ſo delight,
                  That in Amphitreons ſhape down from the skie
                  He did deſcend on earth, with her to lie.
               
               
                  And did on her ſtout Hercules beget,
                  Who in his time for valour did exceed;
                  Whoſe labours all in Ouids Booke are ſet,
                  Whereto his praiſe at large you may there read:
                  The which for that they ſeem'd both ſtrange & rare,
                  I will in briefe the ſame to you declare.
               
               
                  The firſt how with Buſiris he did fight,
                  Whoſe cuſtome was to waſh the ground with blood
                  Of men, and did orethrow him by his might,
                  And after ſhewd his fierce and furious mood
                  Gainſt Antheon, and kild him valiantly,
                  And by the hornes in Candie furiouſly
               
               
                  A cruell Bull by force to ground he threw.
                  That don, on ſtrong King Auger he did ſet,
                  Whom after long and cruell fight he ſlew.
                  And on a mighty Spaniard did not let
                  To trie his force, though it reported were,
                  That in one ſhape he did three bodies beare.
               
               
                  And after went vnto the gates of Hell,
                  And there aſſaild the Triple headed hound
                  Cald Cerberus, moſt cruell fierce and fell,
                  Who there to keepe th'infernall gates was bound.
                  And hauing overcome him at the laſt,
                  Did tie him in an Iron chainefull faſt,
               
               
                  And like a Dog did lead him in his hand.
                  And ventring with a ſtout and valiant mind,
                  The Harpies ſlew within th'Arcadian land.
                  And after that in Mayden wood did find
                  A flying Hart, which he did ſwiftly take,
                  And by his force a priſe thereof did make.
               
               
                  And did the monſtrous Centaurs overthrow.
                  And after kild the ſtrong and cruell Snake
                  Of Lerna, which in peeces cut did grow
                  Together ſtill, and double force did take.
                  And in the Thracian Land when he did ſee
                  The pampred Horſes mangers fild to bee
               
               
                  With fleſh of men, in ſuch a rage he grew,
                  That after he their mangers downe had caſt,
                  The Iades themſelues in cruell wiſe he ſlew,
                  And to their Maiſter did the like at laſt.
                  The monſtrous Giant Cacus he orecame
                  By Tiber. And to his eternall fame,
               
               
                  With ſtout and Valiant courage he aſſaild
                  A Lyon fierce and horrible to view't,
                  Againſt the which his force ſo much prevaild,
                  That after long and dangerous fight he ſlew't,
                  And from the backe thereof the skin did teare,
                  Which after for an Armour he did weare.
               
               
                  His valor alſo did ſo much excell,
                  That boldly he adventured to take
                  The golden Apples from the Dragon fell.
                  And after did a bloody combat make
                  Againſt a fiery Cat with vgly ſight,
                  Which loſt her life by his exceeding might,
               
               
                  And entring in Arcadia againe,
                  His fortune was to trie his mightie ſtrength
                  Vppon a cruell Bore: which hauing ſlaine,
                  He travelled to Atlas Mount at length,
                  And there tis ſaid vpon his ſhoulders ſquare,
                  By extreame force the Firmament he bare.
               
               
                  But for becauſe to mind I cannot call
                  His worthy deeds, each one as they were don,
                  In Ovids Booke there ſhall you find them all,
                  And how his fame throughout the world did run.
                  As alſo of the Pillars he did rayſe,
                  Within the Straights to his eternall prayſe.
               
               
                  (Which Alexander Prince of great renowne,
                  Who for to conquer all the world did mind,
                  As Guydo in his ſtorie ſetteth downe,
                  With his great hoaſt went purpoſely to find.)
                  For that beyond the ſame there was no ground
                  Inhabited, that any man had found.
               
               
                  Nor Sea to Sayle, for then it was vnknown,
                  As beeing farre beyond the Ocean ſhore,
                  For neuer any man that way had gon,
                  Nor Saylor paſt that narrow place before,
                  Which now is cald the Straights of Gibraltarre,
                  
                  Well knowen to euery Nation neere and farre.
               
               
                  Which Guydo ſaith ſtout Hercules did ſet,
                  And in that place erect vnto this end,
                  The paſſage of all men that way to let,
                  And while he liu'd did valiantly defend.
                  That none durſt be ſo bold through it to pas,
                  So great a terror to the world he was.
               
               
                  This now ſhall ſerue his puiſſance to know,
                  Who in his time of honor bare the priſe.
                  And now againe I will of Iaſon ſhow,
                  Who joyfully in moſt couragious wiſe
                  Without delay did great proviſion make,
                  Of ſuch things as he ment with him to take.
               
               
                  
                  And ſo began his ſtrange and hard adventure,
                  As Guydo ſaith about the very time,
                  When as the Sunne in Cancer gan to enter,
                  And parching Summer then was in his prime.
                  When ſilly ſhepheards were full blith and glad,
                  To ſhun the heat, and ſeeke the pleaſant ſhade.
               
               
                  Whē 
                     Phebus beames moſt bright & cleare did ſhine
                  And caſt their extreame heat vpon the ground
                  Directly downe, and ſtraight as any line,
                  Whereby the aire exceeding hot was found,
                  And every place great ſtore of Corne did yeild,
                  And men did mow the graſſe in pleaſant field,
               
               
                  And on the hills and valleys let it reſt,
                  Till moiſture cleane conſum'd from it away.
                  And prittie Laſſes with their cheerefull breſt,
                  Did ſing ſweet notes at toſſing of the hay,
                  At that ſame time Prince Iaſon did begin:
                  With joyfull heart his Ship to enter in.
               
               
                  And with him many a hardy grecian Knight
                  All furniſhed, in braue and Warlike wiſe,
                  With gilt and graven Armour for delight,
                  As then it was the manner and the guiſe.
                  And hoyſing ſayle, did lanch into the deepe,
                  With purpoſe their directeſt courſe to keepe
               
               
                  To Colchos ward. Philoctetes their guide,
                  Still caring loadſtone in their ſight to keepe.
                  Whoſe skill in that ſame Art both ſarre and wide,
                  Was knowne to be moſt exccellent and deepe.
                  As alſo to prepare for ſtormes and wind
                  Before they came, which Saylers often find.
               
               
                  For no man more experience had then he▪
                  
                  In both the Pooles, (which every one ſhould know
                  That takes on him, or will a Sayler be)
                  And how the Poole Articas ſtill doth ſhow
                  And cleerely ſhine vnto vs in the night,
                  But Antarticus neuer comes in ſight.
               
               
                  But Saylers that are provident and wiſe,
                  Doe thinke they haue experience 
                        •
                     nough,
                  When as the ſtarres ſhine cleerely in the skies
                  For to direct their courſe by Arthures Plough,
                  By which they make account they cannot faile
                  Of any coaſt, or place whereto they ſayle:
               
               
                  With help of Loadſtone and true compaſſing,
                  For Saylers that are expert, wiſe, and bold,
                  Whenſoever they a voyage doe begin,
                  Their courſe directly by the ſtarres to hold,
                  That Arthur
                           •
                        
                      doe inviron round about,
                  Which circle for to put you out of dout
               
               
                  Is called Artophilx by his name.
                  Which vnto Saylers, (when it giveth light
                  If that they be acquainted with the ſame)
                  Sufficeth to direct them in the right.
                  And bring them ſafely to their journeis end,
                  If God from ſtormes and tempeſts them defend.
               
               
                  To tell you what the ancient Poets faine,
                  And in their Bookes of thoſe two Pooles do wright
                  Although it ſeeme a fable falſe and vaine,
                  Yet will I ſet it downe for your delight,
                  With choice for to conceiue thereof in mind,
                  As you beſt liking of the ſame ſhall find.
               
               
                  They ſay Calixto and Arcadius
                  
                  Hirſonne, were both in heaven ſtellefied,
                  Where they remaine as Starres moſt glorious,
                  And by devine permiſſion deified.
                  For that the Goddeſſe Iuno did hir ſpie
                  When ſhee with great God Iupiter did lie.
               
               
                  For which ſhe did hir to a Beare transforme,
                  And ſo ſhe long remaind on earth below
                  And did her woofull ſtate lament and morne,
                  Till Iupiter that favor did her ſhow,
                  (As Ovids Metamorphoſis doth tell)
                  To place hir in the skies, where ſhe doth dwell
               
               
                  Among the ſtarres, and there ſhee is inſtald,
                  To be a certaine ſigne at Sea to find▪
                  
                  And by the name of Vrſa Mayor cal'd.
                  Her Sonne likewiſe a ſtarre of ſelfe ſame kind,
                  Was oppoſitely ſet, and for his fame
                  Of Vrſa Minor beareth ſtill the name.
               
               
                  Which fixed ſtarres their Pilot knew ſo well,
                  (As being in that Art the moſt expert,
                  And did in Navigation ſo excell,
                  That he deſeru'd great praiſe by due deſert,)
                  That of his courſe he could not lightly faile,
                  If ſtormes and winds did not too much prevaile.
               
               
                  And when the greekes with trauell overpreſt,
                  Had long on Seas been toſſed too and fro,
                  Deſiring to relieue themſelues and reſt
                  Their wearied limmes, they ſought on land to go,
                  And being caſt vpon the Tr
                           •
                        i
                           ••
                        
                      ſoyle
                  They lande there to eaſe their wearied toyle.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  ¶ How Iaſon 
                     
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     is Voyage to Co
                           •
                        chos, by fortune was cast vppon the c
                        ••
                     st of Troy, where he were on Land to refreſh himſelfe, and his company.
               
               
                  
                  THe Ship at anker by the Frigian coaſt,
                  Vntill the weather waxed cleare and faire,
                  The Greekes that had ſo long on Seas been toſt
                  Went all on ſhoare, to walke and take the aire,
                  Glad to relieue their wearied lims of paine,
                  And after to returne to ſhip againe.
               
               
                  At Sy
                           •
                        eon
                           •
                        
                      a haven hard by Troy
                  
                  Where they did ſtay, and ment there to abide
                  Not hurting any Woman, Man, or Boy,
                  A day or two, attending time and tide,
                  To hoyſe vp Sayle, and toward Colchos wend,
                  Where firſt to go they onely did pretend.
               
               
                  Not once jntending treaſon, hurt, or guile,
                  In any wiſe, nor troubleſome to bee,
                  Vnto the countrey people all the while,
                  They ſtaied there for their neceſſitee,
                  For that as long as on the ſhoare they lay,
                  They did nought els but ſport thēſelues, & play.
               
               
                  But Fortune that ſo ſwiftly turnes about,
                  Delighting men of pleaſure to bereaue,
                  Was th'onely cauſe, (though cauſeles without (doubt)
                  To make the Troians falſely to conceiue,
                  The Grecians ſodaine landing did pretend
                  Some miſchiefe to their countrey in the end.
               
               
                  For by ſuch bad and falſe ſuſpition,
                  Moſt puiſſant Kings and Princes of great fame
                  Haue brought themſelues vnto deſtruction,
                  And been the onely cauſes of their ſhame.
                  Let Troyes example for this time ſuffice,
                  Which firſt did breed vpon a bare ſurmiſe.
               
               
                  Which was the cauſe and chiefe occaſion,
                  As in the ancient Hiſtorie is found,
                  Of that moſt famous Townes deſtruction,
                  Whoſe mightie walles were raiſ'd vnto the ground.
                  And many men, and many a worthy Knight
                  Did looſe their liues in that moſt bloody fight.
               
               
                  And many Ladies proper fine and faire,
                  (Their Husbands, and their Children being dead)
                  Were heard lament their loſſe in great diſpaire.
                  And Mayds in tender yeares by Grecians led
                  As ſlaues in bondage to their paine and griefe,
                  Did liue without all comfort or reliefe.
               
               
                  And onely for that fortune doth delight,
                  To ſhew her power, and her majeſtie,
                  And make it knowne vnto each mortall wight
                  In taking vengeance with ſuch crueltie,
                  As on that famous Citie ſhee did ſhoe,
                  To their deſtruction, miſerie, and woe.
               
               
                  Great pittie t'was that men of ſuch eſtate,
                  Both on the valiant Greekes and Troian ſide,
                  For little cauſe ſhould fall at ſuch debate,
                  But truth it is and cannot be deni'd,
                  That envy having entred in the hart,
                  From thence doth not ſo readily depart.
               
               
                  For from a little graft doth oft ariſe
                  A faire and goodly tree, both huge and tall.
                  And he that climeth high may well ſurmiſe
                  If that he ſlip, to haue the greater fall.
                  And of a ſparke full ſmall wee often ſee,
                  And find that mighty fiers kindled bee.
               
               
                  And as a gnat that's but a little thing
                  Doth often cauſe the fleſh of man to riſe,
                  And ſwell abroad with pricking of his ſting.
                  So many Princes mighty, ſtrong, and wiſe,
                  And famous Townes at mortall warres do fall,
                  For ſlight or elſe for cauſes very ſmall.
               
               
                  But if they had been well adviſ'd in time,
                  When ſparks of envy firſt began to ſhow,
                  And ſought to quench and kill them in the prime
                  Full many Cities now that lie full low,
                  Would haue ſtood ſtill and flouriſht till this day,
                  Which hatefull malice brought vnto decay.
               
               
                  For when the flame of envy ſpreads ſo wide,
                  That it embraceth heart, and head, and vaine,
                  And makes them bnrne ſo hot on either ſide,
                  There is no meanes to remedy that paine,
                  But fowle and cruell murther, warre, and ſtrife,
                  Bereaving each the other of their life.
               
               
                  And thus death is the 
                        •
                     ine of enmetie.
                  And though the firſt beginning be but ſmall,
                  Th'encreaſe doth breed to ſuch extremitie,
                  That th'end bereaueth joy and pleaſures all.
                  As vnto Troy wee read it ſo befell
                  Which makes me ſigth the truth thereof to teſt.
               
               
                  That for ſmall cauſe ſuch vengeance ſhold proceed▪
                  
                  Vnles it were by providence divine,
                  And heavenly wiſedome ſecretly decreed:
                  Their fall ſhould cauſe a greater joy in 
                        •
                     ine.
                  For Troy deſtroy'd by ſuch occaſion,
                  And finally brought to deſtruction,
               
               
                  Was th'onely meanes that th'ancient Citie Roome,
                  
                  Receav'd her firſt beginning from the race:
                  And offspring of Aeneas, that did come
                  From Troy, when Grecians baniſht him the place.
                  Which Towne of Roome as Authors plainely ſay
                  Of all 
                        •
                     he world, once bare the chiefeſt ſway.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Troy likewiſe brought into ſo great diſtreſſe,
                  And vtter ouerthrow of ancient fame,
                  Was cauſe that many Cities did encreaſe,
                  And divers Countries firſt obtain'd their name.
                  For Troiaus wanting habitation,
                  By force did enter many a Nation.
               
               
                  And after long and weary toyle orepaſt,
                  
                     Aeneas many Countries Sayling by
                  With all his ſhips, did chance t'ariue at laſt
                  Vppon the pleaſant coaſt of Italy,
                  
                  Who wan the ſame by conqueſt and by might;
                  And made himſelfe the Prince thereof by right.
               
               
                  And after him his Sonne Aſcanius,
                  
                  Succeeded, and as lawfull heire he raign'd,
                  Who beeing dead, his ſonne Prince Siluius
                  
                  The Diadem of Italy obtaind:
                  Of whom did come by right diſcent and true,
                  Moſt worthy Brute that Albion did ſubdue.
               
               
                  Wwo having woon't by force from Giants fell
                  And conqueſt braue, did thereof change the name,
                  And cal'd it Britaine as our ſtories tell,
                  And was the firſt inhabited the ſame.
                  With this Aeneas from the Troian towne
                  Came Francus alſo Lord of great renowne.
               
               
                  Who afterward his honour to advance,
                  Did build a towne both ſtately faire and great
                  Cald Parris, whieh doth ſtand in midſt of France,
                  
                  The which he made his chiefe and Princely ſeat.
                  And firſt gaue name of France vnto that land,
                  Which he did win by ſtrong and valiant hand.
               
               
                  And Anthenor a Lord of Troian race,
                  Began the towne of Venice to erect,
                  Where during life he made his reſting place,
                  And Sicanus (in whom was no defect
                  Of Troian blood) as Cronicles doe tell
                  Won Cicile, and long time therein did dwell.
               
               
                  And after him a Prince of worthy fame,
                  His Valiant brother Siculus did raigne
                  Within that Ile, of whom it tooke the name
                  Of Cicile, as records therein explaine.
                  
                     Aeneas hauing conquered Italy,
                  
                  Did not himſelfe therewith ſo ſatisfie.
               
               
                  But into Tuſcan entred which he wan,
                  And in the Ile of Cicile to his praiſe,
                  The regall Towne of Naples firſt began,
                  Which flouriſheth ſo much in theſe our dayes
                  With braue and welthie Marchant men of fame,
                  Who throgh their traffick great inricht the ſame.
               
               
                  And of the Greekes that Troy did helpe to ſpoyle,
                  King Diomed, who with moſt great deſire,
                  When he had ſpent his time with paine and toyl
                        •
                     
                  
                  Ten yeares in warre, and thought home to retire,
                  And there to liue and reſt ſecure from harmes,
                  He found his men and countrey vp in armes.
               
               
                  With full intent his entry to withſtand,
                  And to bereaue him of his Diadem
                  And princely ſtate, thruſt him out of his land,
                  Who being thereby brought to that extream,
                  Was forſt for his reliefe as ſtories tell,
                  To ſeeke another Countrey where to dwell.
               
               
                  And entring in Callabria by ſtrength,
                  He brought the Countrey to ſubiection,
                  And there did rule in peace, till at the length
                  Dame Fortune ſeeking his ſubverſion,
                  By Cerces meanes his grecian Knights did change
                  Into the forme of Birds moſt rare and ſtrange.
               
               
                  Which preſently did flie into the aire,
                  (And euer ſince continew thereabout)
                  Their ſeathers ſhining bright and very faire,
                  And called are (to put you out of dou
                        •
                     t)
                  As wee in Iſydore the ſame may read
                  Among the Greekes the Birds of Diomede.
                  
               
               
                  But as ſome Authors liſt hereof to wright,
                  They ſay this Metamorphoſis was don
                  By Venus in her malice to that Knight,
                  Becauſe againſt Aeneas hir deare Son
                  Feirce Diomede did caſt a cruell dart,
                  As they too fought to ſtrike him to the h
                        •
                     rt.
               
               
                  Which when his Mother Venus had eſpide
                  She cauſd a miſtie clowd twixt them to riſe,
                  And therewith did hir Sonne Eneas hide
                  From ſight of Diomedes cruell eies:
                  And afterward wroght him that ſpightfull ſcorne
                  And did his men in ſhape of Birds transforme.
               
               
                  And in that ſort from time to time they flie,
                  Vnto the place of Diomedes graue,
                  Where as his body deepe intombd doth lie,
                  To ſhew that ſtill a mind of him they haue.
                  For yearely on his day of Funerall,
                  They flock about that place both great & ſmall.
               
               
                  And there from morne till night you ſhall thē find.
                  It further is reported to be true,
                  That thoſe ſtrāge Birds do loue the Greekes by kind,
                  And vtterly doe hate and ſtill eſchew
                  The Latins, and do know them well aſunder,
                  When they thē ſee. Which ſeemeth ſuch a wonder
               
               
                  
                  To me, that I by no meanes can eſpey,
                  Nor yet conceiue by any manner way,
                  The hidden cauſes of ſuch ſorcery;
                  But this I know, and that I dare well ſay,
                  The firſt beginning of ſo bad jntent,
                  Was wrought by art of foule jnchantment.
               
               
                  But faith doth teach vs boldly to defie,
                  And flatly baniſh all jlluſion;
                  Which Satan daily caſts before our eye,
                  To bring vs thereby to confuſion.
                  And thus by famous Troyes ſubverſion,
                  Full many ancient Cities firſt begun.
               
               
                  And diuers Lands, with many a wealthy towne,
                  By ſequell of that warre long flouriſhed;
                  Which fore that Troye was cruelly throwne downe,
                  Lay waſt, and were not then jnhabited.
                  But to declare them orderly by name,
                  Were labour great for me to do the ſame.
               
               
                  And therefore to Prince Iaſon jle returne,
                  That went a ſhore at Simeont by Troye;
                  
                  And for a day or two did there ſoiourne,
                  The comfort of the pleaſant aire t'enjoye:
                  And of his weary toyle himſelfe to eaſe,
                  Till wind and waues did calme vpon the Seas.
               
               
                  But enviouſly a falſe report was blowne,
                  And to the King Laomedon declar'd;
                  That certaine Grecian Knights to him vnknowne,
                  To enter in his land themſelues prepar'd:
                  Well armed at each point, which bred ſurmiſe,
                  They ſought t'jnvade the Country by ſurpriſe.
               
               
                  Elſe would they firſt (ſay they) a licence craue,
                  And not ſo proudly land without conſent
                  Of him or his, and no ſafe conduct haue,
                  Which argued but a ſigne of bad intent:
                  Which if the King would not prenent in time,
                  They ſaid, might proue his prejudice in fine.
               
               
                  For if (ſaid they) he will not ſeeme to feare
                  Their landing, but deferre by negligence,
                  T'enquire & know from whence they are, & where
                  They meane to go, and what is their pretence:
                  He may perchance repent his little care,
                  Of making haſt againſt them to prepare.
               
               
                  For ſodaine things require ſodaine ſight,
                  And ſhould not be deferd till miſchiefe fall;
                  And Dogs are to be fear'd that firſt do bite,
                  And flie vpon a man before they braule:
                  So wiſedome doth require preſent ſpeed,
                  To ſtop a miſchiefe ere it further breed.
               
               
                  Thus did the Troyans murmure in the towne,
                  And ſpeake thereof each one vnto the other,
                  As in the ſtreets they walked vp and downe,
                  That at the length there ſpread ſo great a rumor▪
                  
                  That Laomedon did forthwith prepare
                  A meſſenger, to know from whence they were.
               
               
                  And without counſell taking in the ſame,
                  In haſt did ſend to will them to depart;
                  Or elſe he ſaid their pride he would ſo tame,
                  That ſtouteſt of them all ſhould wiſh in heart
                  He had not been ſo bold, to giue the venter
                  Without his leaue, within his land to enter.
               
               
                  The meſſenger in this ſort ſent away,
                  Made haſt to let Prince Iaſon vnderſtand,
                  What Laomedon willed him to ſay,
                  And to command him to auoyd the land:
                  Who all this while did nought but ſport & play,
                  Attending time from thence to ſaile away.
               
               
                  Th'effect of which his meſſage to declare,
                  From poynt to poynt, verbatim as it was;
                  As neere as ere I can, I will not ſpare,
                  And what thereof did after come to paſſe:
                  Which in the Chapter following ſhall appeare▪
                  
                  If to the ſame you giue attentiue eare.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  I How Laomedon King of Troye ſent to Iaſon to command him and his company forthwith to depart out of his Countrie; and what anſwere they returned to the King againe.
               
               
                  THe high and mighty Prince of great renowne,
                  My moſt redoubted Lord and ſoueraigne true▪
                  
                  
                     Laomedon of Troye that beares the crowne,
                  By me his meſſenger hath ſent to you:
                  To let you know he doth not well conceaue,
                  Of this your bold arriuall without leaue
               
               
                  Within his land, thus armed as you ſeeme,
                  Not once vouch
                        •
                     afing firſt to know his mind;
                  As though of him you made ſo ſmall eſteeme,
                  That no reſiſtance gainſt you he could find:
                  The which to let you well perceiue and ſee,
                  He doth expreſly ſend you word by mee:
               
               
                  
                  That preſently and that without delay,
                  Both you and yours depart out of this land
                  And Troia
                           •
                        
                      bounds, and get you hence away,
                  Or elſe by force he minds you to withſtand
                  And will you nill you, make you leaue the place,
                  If you preſume to offer him diſgrace.
               
               
                  My counſell is (beleeue it if you liſt)
                  To get you hence in peace and quietnes,
                  For folly great t'were for you to reſiſt,
                  And of meer pride or glorious wilfullnes,
                  Seeke to diſturbe my Lorde feli
                        •
                     itie,
                  Which now doth liue in great tranquilitie.
               
               
                  And doth his kingdome governe and maintaine,
                  With ſo great wiſedome and magnificence
                  By valor and by might, that twere in vaine,
                  For any to withſtand him of pretence.
                  Wherefore I wiſh you all if you be wiſe,
                  Herein to take and follow mine adviſe.
               
               
                  And ſeeke not further now to moue offence,
                  Leaſt you procure your perill woe and ſmart,
                  And find that true by good experience
                  Which friendly vnto you I doe impart.
                  This is my Lords embaſſage too you ſent;
                  Conceiue it as you will tis his intent.
               
               
                  The meſſenger in this ſort having ſaid
                  What Laomedon charged him as then.
                  
                     Iaſon therewith not very well apayd;
                  In face and colour waxed pale and wan.
                  Yet ſoberly with wiſedome held his peace:
                  Not ſeeming once in chollor to encreaſe.
               
               
                  Nor yet to take offence what ere fell out,
                  Although it vext and grieu'd him at the hart,
                  But ſtood as mute: at laſt he turnd about;
                  And vnto all his fellowes did jmpart
                  What meſſage Laomedon had him ſent,
                  And how to him and them he ſeemed bent.
               
               
                  And willing them about him to draw neare,
                  He thus began his words and ſpeech to frame.
                  My friends and fellowes whom I loue ſo de
                        ••
                     e,
                  Know that King Laomedon doth vs blame
                  For entring (as he ſaith) within his land,
                  Before we craved licence at his hand.
               
               
                  And for that cauſe a meſſenger hath ſent
                  With threatning words, to let vs know his mind,
                  That to driue vs from hence is his intent
                  If here we ſtay. Wherefore he doth vs bind,
                  And ſtraightly charge eft-foones without delay,
                  All ſcuſes ſet apart to packe away.
               
               
                  Behold ſaid he what blindnes he doth
                        ••
                     e,
                  And how he doth on honor ſet his mind,
                  That vnto wearied ſtrangers doth refuſe
                  To giue them leaue a little eaſe to find
                  In their diſtreſſe, who nothing leſſe pretend,
                  Then him or his in any wiſe t'offend.
               
               
                  But where is antient libertie become,
                  Is neigher loue, nor kindnes to be found?
                  Both which in Princely harts ſhould haue a roome.
                  And where is honor gon that vs'd t'abound
                  In Princes minde? who of an antient right,
                  Still mooved them with care and great delight,
               
               
                  To entertaine all ſtrangers that reſort
                  Vnto their Courts, or countreys whatſoere,
                  That afterward they might of them report,
                  What Princely and what noble minds they beare.
                  But neither loue nor libertie are found
                  In this Kings Court, or countrey to abound.
               
               
                  For if he were of noble heart and kind,
                  He could not chuſe 
                        •
                     ot in them both delight:
                  And to ſhew forth his great and Princely mind;
                  He would command his ſubjects to their might,
                  To ſuccour men oppreſt with woe and griefe
                  And not haue ſent vs hence without reliefe.
               
               
                  For if that he had chanced from the ſeas,
                  By fortune or adventure whatſoere,
                  T'ariue and ſet his foot on ſhoare for eaſe
                  Where any Grecian Prince doth Scepter beare,
                  With much more honor like to his degree,
                  He ſhould not faile by vs receau'd to bee.
               
               
                  But ſith that he for ought I can eſpie,
                  Hath baniſht out of mind and doth diſdaine,
                  All freedome, honor, and humanitie,
                  And cleane contrary vices doth retaine,
                  We muſt and will his mind herein fullfill,
                  Becauſe as now our power's not like our will.
               
               
                  For this is ſure and ſo it ſhall be found,
                  That this diſgrace which to vs now is don,
                  In th'end may chance vpon himſelfe rebound,
                  Sith that he hath of malice thus begon,
                  And peradventure it may chance fall out,
                  Ere Phebus thrice the Zod
                        •
                     ack runnes about.
               
               
                  For let him truſt and thereof be aſſurd,
                  We will him ſerue, with ſuch as he hath ſent,
                  And if I liue, and what he hath procurd,
                  He ſhall not faile thereof by my intent,
                  Albeit now I ſet no time nor tide,
                  Sith longer here I mindd not to abide.
               
               
                  
                  Till I haue better leiſure to ſoiorne,
                  And ſo with ſtearne and yet with liuely cheare,
                  At that ſame word began about to turne,
                  And ſuddenly vnto the meſſenger
                  That from the King as then to him was ſent,
                  In this wiſe he declared his jntent:
               
               
                  My friend (quoth he) know well and vnderſtand
                  The meſſage which as now thou bringſt to me,
                  From Laomedon King of Tr
                           •
                        i
                           ••
                        
                      land,
                  Vnfit doth ſeeme from ſuch a Prince as he.
                  For by each point thereof I doe perceaue,
                  How he doth vſe of ſtrangers to conceaue.
               
               
                  And cannot chuſe but deepely in my mind,
                  Thinke much on his great favor to vs ſhowne,
                  And of his liberalitie ſo kind,
                  And gifts which on vs now he hath beſtowne.
                  Nor can I well let ſlip out of my thought,
                  The leaſt reward that thou to vs haſt brought.
               
               
                  For truſt me well I can it not forget,
                  But needs muſt deepe jmprint it in my mind,
                  How by his honor he ſo much doth ſet,
                  As that he ſtudieth onely to be kind.
                  That by thee now doth ſend vnto vs here,
                  Such intertainment, great and dainty cheare.
               
               
                  Cleane contrary to that we did expect;
                  From ſuch a worthy famous Prince as he,
                  But god which doth all ſecrets deepe detect,
                  Can beare vs witnes jnnocents to be
                  From any hurtor any bad pretence,
                  That we ere ment gainſt him to cauſe offence.
               
               
                  And Gods to record in this caſe I call,
                  With my whole heart to juſtifie the ſame,
                  (Whatſoever may hereafter chance to fall.)
                  We haue not once deſerved any blame.
                  Nor violently taken any thing
                  From man, or boy, ſo mayſt thou tell the King.
               
               
                  But being forſt by great and ſtormy wind,
                  Neceſſity compelled vs to land
                  Vpon this coaſt, ſome ſuccour here to find,
                  And reſt our wearied limmes vpon the ſtrand.
                  Intending but a day or two to ſtay,
                  And then againe with ſpeed to go away,
               
               
                  Vnto the place where we deſire to bee.
                  Which thou vnto thy Lord for truth maiſt ſay,
                  And further that the time he ſhall once ſee,
                  When as perchance more thanks receiue he may
                  From vs, or els it may be from ſome other,
                  So go thy waies, and farewell gentle brother.
               
               
                  When Iaſon thus an anſwere had returnd,
                  And bad the Tr
                           ••
                        an meſſenger depart:
                  The noble Knight ſtout Hercules that burn'd
                  With rage, and fury inwardly in hart,
                  As he was gon
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ad him againe turne backe
                  Diſdainefully, and thus to him he ſpake▪
                  
               
               
                  Good fellow thou that art the meſſenger
                  Of thy good Lord, who hath thee hither ſent▪
                  
                  Content thy ſelfe, and ſtand thou not in feare,
                  That here to ſtay is ought of our jntent,
                  For that before the Sunne ſhall riſe againe
                  We will be gon, and ſo I tell thee plaine.
               
               
                  And not a man of ours on ſho
                        •
                     re ſhall be,
                  To morrow at this time what e
                        •
                     e befall,
                  And therevpon my troth I pledge to thee,
                  And Gods to witnes to the ſame I call.
                  For we intend no longer here t'ſoiorne,
                  But to our ſhips againe with ſpeed returne.
               
               
                  As ſoone as it is dawning of the day,
                  On paine to ſuffer fowle reproch and blame,
                  But ere three yeares ſhall fully paſſe away,
                  Who euer ſaith contrary to the ſame,
                  We will returne againe into this land,
                  And caſt our Ankors here vpon this ſand.
               
               
                  Take heed thereof and note full well the time,
                  And let this now ſuffice and warning be,
                  That ſome new change ſhall follow of this Prime,
                  Which if Iliue thy King ſhall plainely ſee,
                  And when his power gainſt vs ſhall not extend,
                  For his ſafe conduct we will ſcorne to ſend.
               
               
                  And then I tell thee plainely for no lie,
                  We will no more regard him then a ſtraw,
                  Nor of his words nor threats that are ſo hie,
                  The leaſt of vs ſhall ſtand in any awe.
                  Till when becauſe we will him not deceaue,
                  We mind not once of him to take our leaue.
               
               
                  For that of vs he ſeemes to make a jeſt,
                  As though we were not worthy better cheare;
                  But though he now doth thinke to liue at reſt,
                  I ſweare by God he ſhall abide it deare.
                  Which in the end ſhall turne vnto his ſhame:
                  And ſee that to the King you tell the ſame.
               
               
                  The meſſenger thereto did thus reply,
                  And ſayd, though for the King you do not care,
                  This privileged you can me not deny,
                  In decent tearmes the meſſage to declare,
                  Which now to you I bring what ere it bee,
                  Good or els bad, there is no fault in mee.
               
               
                  
                  And whereſoere it pleaſeth you to ſtay,
                  The choiſe is in yourſelues as being free,
                  Yet thus much vnto you I muſt needs ſay
                  You haue no cauſe now to be wroth with me.
                  But leaue your threatning while you here remain,
                  And doe your worſt when as you come againe.
               
               
                  For wiſedome doth require ſilence now
                  And ſecreſie till that you be at large,
                  And then you may your courage boldly ſhow.
                  But truth to ſay it longs not to my charge,
                  To ſtand and ſtriue with you or make debate,
                  Yet better t'were betimes, then all to late
               
               
                  For you to ſhun the harmes that may befall.
                  And at this time I will with you be plaine,
                  For my diſcharge to tell it to you all,
                  That pittie t'were that here you ſhould be ſlaine,
                  Or offered any point of villany,
                  Sith that no man whatſoeuer can deny,
               
               
                  But that your good behaviour doth declare,
                  And ſhew you worthie Perſonages to bee,
                  To governe and command in peace, and warre,
                  And to deſcend of great and high degree.
                  But leaſt with words perchāce I might you grieue
                  Ile ſay no more but take of you my leaue.
               
               
                  The night ore-paſt at dawning of the day,
                  When as the Larke with ſweet and pleaſant note,
                  Doth ſtraine hir breſt as much as well ſhe may,
                  To greet the ſtreames of Phoebus Chariot,
                  As then beginning in the Orient skie
                  To ſhew themſelues with crimſon colourd die.
               
               
                  And faire Aurora with her ſilver ſhowers,
                  The fragrant Roſes had begon to wet,
                  And all bedew'd the blooming ſilver flowers,
                  As Lillies, Cowſlippes, and ſweet Margaret.
                  And made them ſpread their leaues both freſh & bright
                  Which had been cloſed vp by glooming night.
               
               
                  And hony-Suckles mong the buſhes green
                  Perfumed had the aire with pleaſant ſent:
                  Long ere that Titans gliſtring beames were ſeene,
                  And to our Hemiſphere their courſe had lent,
                  To comfort and relieue each living wight,
                  Which by his heat receiue their ſtrēgth & might.
               
               
                  Long time I ſay, before the Sun did riſe,
                  Prince Iaſon and his fellow Hercules
                  
                  With all the ſpeed they could in haſty-wiſe
                  Prepard themſelues to put vnto the Seas.
                  Commanding every man his way to take,
                  Abord the ſhip, and all things ready make▪
                  
               
               
                  The Ankor vp with merry heart and glad,
                  They hoyſed Sayles, and ſtraight put from the land.
                  For Iaſon knew the little traine he had,
                  Could not ſuffice the Troians to withſtand:
                  As being much more weaker to conclude,
                  Then Troians were for ſtrength and multitude.
               
               
                  So that as then warre with them to begin
                  Was not his wiſeſt way to take in hand,
                  Nor likely was the victorie to win,
                  As having but a ſmall and feeble band.
                  (For he that hewes aboue his head too hie,
                  Perchance a chip may fall into his eie.)
               
               
                  And therefore made great ſpeed to get away,
                  And having wind at will did ſaile ſo faſt,
                  That finding no occaſion them to ſtay,
                  They did ariue at Colchos ſafe at laſt
                  By Fortunes aide, (although ſometime vnſtable)
                  That did them helpe as much as ſhe was able.
               
               
                  In Colchos Iſle a goodly towne did ſtand,
                  Which for the riches, worthines, and fame,
                  Was principall and chiefe within that land
                  That called was Iaconites by name,
                  With ſtreets full large and howſes very faire,
                  And ſeated in a good and wholſome aire.
               
               
                  Round compaſſed with towred walles about,
                  The which did make a ſtately ſhow to ſee.
                  And ſtrong and deepely ditched all without
                  To make defence againſt the enemy.
                  Wherein King Oeta with his Princely traine,
                  (As fitteſt place) did ſpecially remaine.
               
               
                  (And at ſuch time as Iaſon thether went,
                  He found him there with many a worthy Knight,
                  For whom the King then purpoſely had ſent,
                  To ſhew his great magnificence and might.
                  That ſo his fame reported farre and neare,
                  Vnto the Greekes for truth might then appeare.)
               
               
                  About this towne were hilles and mountaines ſteep
                  And valleies faire and pleaſant to the eie,
                  With divers Rivers ſweet, and freſh, and deep,
                  That every where within the land did lie.
                  And many a lake, and many a goodly well,
                  Commodious for their vſe which there did dwell
               
               
                  And ſtore of Parkes for beaſts both wild and 
                        •
                     ame,
                  And wods and medowes freſh and very greene,
                  With ſundry hearb
                        •
                      and flowers in the ſame,
                  Of faire and divers colours there were ſeene.
                  As pleaſed nature paint and ſet them out,
                  As time of yeare when Summer came about.
               
               
                  
                  For fiſhing fowling, and for Princely game,
                  Of hunting and of hauking in the field,
                  No countrey in the world did paſſe the ſame,
                  Nor yet more ſtore of fiſh and fowle did yeild,
                  And plenty of each other kind of thing,
                  As Corne, and graine, that firtile ſoyle did bring.
               
               
                  There likewiſe did the Birds moſt ſweetly ſing,
                  In time of yeare with pleaſant harmony,
                  When trees and buſhes gan to bud and ſpring,
                  Procuring with their cheerefull mellody.
                  Great joy and comfort to the wounded harts
                  Of lovers, that were peirſt with cupids darts.
               
               
                  That certainely when Summer paſt away,
                  And winter cold and chill did end the yeare,
                  And that the faire delighfull month of May
                  With Lady Flora did begin t'appeare,
                  And deckt the fields with flowers of ſtrange deviſe
                  That ſtately land did ſeeme a Parradiſe.
               
               
                  And for all kind of dainty food and fine,
                  Dame Ceres that the name had alwaies borne,
                  To be the Queene of plenty, ſent them wine,
                  Fleſh, fiſh, and fowle, with every kind of co
                        ••
                     e,
                  in ſo great plenty and exceeding ſtore,
                  No Nation in the world could wiſh for more.
               
               
                  For what ſoere Dame Nature could deviſe
                  Was found therein, for nothing there was ſeant,
                  That pleaſure might procure to hart or eyes,
                  Nor any man therein complaind of want,
                  So great increaſe this little Iſl
                        •
                      did bring,
                  Of all and eke of every kind of thing.
               
               
                  Vnto this Towne Prince Iaſon ſtraight did goe
                  With Hercules, and all their noble traine,
                  Who in the way did make a goodly ſhoe
                  As hand in hand they marcht in rancks of twaine,
                  Each one of ſtature big and very tall,
                  Young, luſtie, ſtrong, and hady therewithall.
               
               
                  Their countenances ſad and full demure,
                  In ſo good ſort and in ſuch comely wiſe,
                  That vnto every man it did procure,
                  Such pleaſure to behold their greekiſh guiſe,
                  That all the Towne did run in flocks to ſee,
                  And learne what countrey people they might be.
               
               
                  That in ſuch manner came into the Towne,
                  So vnexſpected of the King and Peeres.
                  And every one went walking vp and downe
                  To hearken, and to tell what newes he heares.
                  So rude they were to wonder, ſtare, and gaſe.
                  And gape, and looke, as it were in a maze.
               
               
                  For ſuch as in great Townes do vſe to dwell,
                  Are commonly jnquiſitiue of newes.
                  But of King Oates now I muſt you tell,
                  How kindly he thoſe ſtrangers then did vſe,
                  And at their firſt ariuall in the court,
                  Receiu'd and welcom'd them in princely ſort.
               
               
                  For preſently as he did vnderſtand
                  Th'ariuall of Prince Iaſon and his traine,
                  Of worthy grecian Knights within his land,
                  He did not ſeeme their comming to diſd
                        ••••
                     ,
                  But riſing from his chaire without delay,
                  In perſon went to meet them on the way.
               
               
                  Receaving them with glad and joyfull cheare.
                  In ſtately wiſe as it becomes a King.
                  And that his bountie might the more appeare,
                  Vnto his royall court he doth them bring,
                  With charge vnto his officers to ſee,
                  They ſhould be ſeru'd each one in his degree.
               
               
                  And that not any thing what ere ſhould want,
                  That might procure their pleaſure or their eaſe,
                  Nor any one in duty ſhould be ſcant
                  To honor them, if him they ſought to pleaſe.
                  That don he leads them to his Royall place
                  Where he doth welcom thē with Princely grace.
               
               
                  And paſſing through a Marble paved yeard,
                  He went into a ſtately ſumpteous hall,
                  Wherein no coſt of any thing was ſpard,
                  That might adorne and beatifi't withall.
                  The walles beſer with Images of gold,
                  And hangd with Arras coſtly to behold.
               
               
                  Where being entred in, and he ſet downe,
                  He doth them all in hearty manner greet,
                  And welcome bids to Iacomtes towne,
                  Each one in his degree as he thought meet.
                  Commanding ſtraight great ſtore of wine & bear
                  To be broght forth their wearied limbs to chear.
               
               
                  The King thus ſet and plaſt in Royall chaire,
                  All hang'd with rich and coſtly cloth of gold,
                  And gilt and ſet with pearles very faire,
                  Moſt ſumptious and moſt ſtately to behold.
                  Environed with Lords and Knights that were
                  At his command, then ſummond to be there,
               
               
                  Beholding with a gracious countenance,
                  Prince Iaſon, and his fellow Hercules,
                  
                  Their honors more t'encreaſe and to advance,
                  Willd them to ſit downe by him for their eaſe.
                  But Iaſon would no longer time let pas,
                  To ſhew the King wherefore his comming was▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  Which he in words but few, (yet wiſely told,)
                  Began to tell, with ſuch a comely grace,
                  And ſo demurely (as full well he could)
                  That all that were then preſent in the place,
                  Admird his wit, his memory, and tongue,
                  To be moſt perfect in a Prince ſo young.
               
               
                  But ere he did begin his tale to frame,
                  With good adviſe, and great diſcretion,
                  He did in mind premeditate the ſame,
                  And to each ſentence gaue direction,
                  And did his meaning then ſo wiſely ſay,
                  That Oetes his requeſt could not denay.
               
               
                  And ſo with ſto
                        ••
                      and princely courage bold,
                  He ſtarted vp; with due obedience,
                  And kneeling fore the King, began t'vnfold
                  Wherefore he came, and ſhewed the full pretence,
                  Of his ſo ſtrange and valiant enterpriſe,
                  Which in this manner thus he did deuiſe.
               
               
                  Moſt puiſſant Prince, and King of Colchos land,
                  May't pleaſe you of your high and ſpeciall grace,
                  Beningly now to heare and vnderſtand
                  The cauſe of my repaire vnto this place,
                  And in good ſort not taking of offence,
                  Vouchſafe therein to giue me audience.
               
               
                  To vſe long ſpeech and many words were vaine,
                  And might perhaps breed cauſe of tediouſnes,
                  Or moue offence: but ſoothly to be plaine,
                  Reiecting rethoritian curiouſneſſe,
                  In briefe t'vnfold the ſome of mine intent,
                  I muſt confeſſe that honour hath me bent,
               
               
                  To trie th'adventure of the golden fleece,
                  And win the glory to atchiue the ſame,
                  And for that cauſe I paſſed out of Greece,
                  In hope t'augment my valor and my fame,
                  Which if your grace will giue me leaue t'aſſay,
                  I doubt not but to beare the priſe away,
               
               
                  And though I know what ever men pretend,
                  And vndertake in hope of victory,
                  (Vnleſſe the gods ſome ſavour to them lend,
                  In whom conſiſteth all felicitie)
                  It were in vaine for any man to venter,
                  Or on him take in perill great to enter.
               
               
                  For peace, and warre, diſhonor eke, and fame,
                  Doe all vpon their willes and mights depend,
                  And no man can withſtand them in the ſame.
                  What ever fortune ſhall vnto me ſend,
                  I will not ſpare th'adventure now to trie
                  And doe my beſt, for once I can but die.
               
               
                  If that your Grace thereto will giue conſent,
                  And grant me leaue my force therein t'aſſay
                  Vnto your lawes therein, is my intent
                  In each reſpect to yeild and to obay,
                  And craue no favour whatſoere betide,
                  Hap good or ill, I will it all abide.
               
               
                  Moſt humbly craving that without delay,
                  My mind heerein your grace will not withſtand,
                  But rather flatly bind me to a day,
                  The ſame t'achieue, if ſo I tak't in h
                        •
                     nd.
                  Speake gracious Prince, & grant to my requeſt,
                  And loe your Knight at your command is preſt.
               
               
                  While Iaſon thus his mind did boldly ſay,
                  The King that full attentiuely the while
                  His ſpeech had mark't, with ſilence ſeem'd to ſtay
                  Before he ſpake, at laſt he gan to ſmile,
                  And friendly him beholding in the face,
                  Vnto him ſayd with glad and cheerefull grace;
               
               
                  Young Knight, although thy mind be fully ſet,
                  And wholly bent vpon this enterpriſe
                  So dangerous, that no man can thee let,
                  Nor hold thee from't; yet follow my adviſe,
                  And wiſely with thy ſelfe reſolue in mind,
                  Ere thou begin't, what danger thou ſhalt find.
               
               
                  For know thou muſt (though valiant be thy hart)
                  That this adventure is ſo hard to win:
                  (As being wrought and fram'd by magicke Art)
                  That ſtrength of man can not prevaile therein:
                  But he that dares the ſame once vndertake,
                  To end his life a full account muſt make.
               
               
                  No favor, nor no hope for him is left,
                  That doth preſume to take the ſame in hand,
                  For by the law he is thereof bereft,
                  (Which by no means he may in ought withſtand)
                  As having choiſe before he gines to venter,
                  To leaue the ſame, and not therein to enter.
               
               
                  But once begun, he muſt therein proceed,
                  For backe he may not turne, what ere betide.
                  And though he ſtand in never ſo great need,
                  His dome is paſt, he muſt his chance abide.
                  For death is his reward that doth begin
                  And take in hand the golden fleece to win.
               
               
                  So ſtrickt a law binds him that this will trie,
                  Which vnto thee yong Iaſon I muſt tell,
                  I can by no meanes change, nor yet deny
                  To any one: therefore adviſe thee well,
                  Before thou ventreſt t'vndertake the ſame,
                  Leaſt afterward, on me be layd the blame
               
               
                  
                  Of thy ſo deſperate deſtruction.
                  Wherefore for my diſcharge I thee require,
                  With hearty and with true intention,
                  To leaue the ſame: and let not high deſire
                  Procure thee to incurre thine owne decay,
                  By this ſo hard and vnexpected way.
               
               
                  Sith then thou ſeeſt what danger lies therein,
                  For that from point to point I haue thee told
                  The truth of all before thou doſt begin,
                  Let reaſon rule, and be not overbold
                  To take in hand, while time thou haſt to chuſe,
                  Leaſt when thou wouldſt, thou canſt it not refuſe.
               
               
                  The time doth now afford thee ſpace to take,
                  Or to refuſe th'adventure, which you will,
                  For looke what law God Mars himſefe did make,
                  I muſt the ſame in all reſpects fulfill.
                  What ere he be that venters in this caſe,
                  Let him be ſure, he gets no other grace.
               
               
                  Thus (youthfull Iaſon) whatſoere betide,
                  I haue thee told and openly let know
                  What danger thou art ſure thereby t'abide:
                  Which if I could, I would haue kept thee fro.
                  But truth to ſay, I can it not deny
                  To any man that ſekes the ſame to try.
               
               
                  Then to conclude, ſith now thou doſt perceiue
                  What danger lies herein, take heed in time
                  Of her that turnes the wheele, leaſt ſhe bereaue
                  Thee of thy life, while it is in the prime.
                  Doe as thou wilt, thou getſt no more of mee,
                  Of weale or woe, the choiſe conſiſts in thee.
               
               
                  With that the King did riſe out of his ſeat,
                  When time drue neare for dinner to provide,
                  Whereto the preparation was ſo great,
                  That care of all things els being ſet aſide,
                  Each Officer was buſied to ſee,
                  That nothing whatſoere, ſhould wanting bee.
               
               
                  The tables couered ſtately to behold,
                  And Cubbards well and coſtly garniſhed
                  With ſtore of plate, of ſilver, and of gold,
                  (Whereof the King was richly furniſhed)
                  And Trumpets ſounding every man to call,
                  When as the meat was brought into the hall:
               
               
                  The King ſet downe with in his Royall ſeate,
                  With Hercules and Iaſon at his bord,
                  Great ſtore of ſundrie kinds of dainty meate,
                  Were ſerved in as time did then afford:
                  That done, the Marſhall placed all the reſt,
                  Each one in his degree, as he thought beſt.
               
               
                  Where every man was entertaind ſo well,
                  That wonder t'was to ſee their coſtly fare,
                  Which in each thing did there ſo much excell,
                  By reaſon that the King no coſt did ſpare,
                  That all the Court admir'd his noble mind,
                  Cauſe he to ſtrangers ſhew'd himſelfe ſo kind.
               
               
                  And more for to delight their minds withall,
                  Muſitions never ceaſed ſtill to play
                  On Citern, Lute, Bandore, and Baſe-Viall,
                  Cornet, and Flute, to paſſe the time away:
                  With pleaſant notes, and in ſuch ſtately wiſe,
                  As it had been an earthly Paradize.
               
               
                  For truth to ſay, ſuch plenty there was found,
                  That Oetaes liberalitie was prayſ'd,
                  And ſo extold in all things to abound,
                  That his great fame vnto the skies was rayſ'd,
                  For entertaining ſtrangers in ſuch wiſe,
                  By all the wayes and meanes he could deviſe.
               
               
                  To tell each ſeverall kind of meate by name,
                  Or halfe thereof in order to deſcrie,
                  Impoſſible it were to do the ſame,
                  There was ſo much and great diverſitie.
                  It ſhall ſuffice to ſay ſuch was the ſtore,
                  That wit of man could well deviſe no more.
               
               
                  And to be briefe, the King did ſo excell
                  In every point of liberalitie,
                  That rightly might be ſayd, in him did dwell
                  The patterne of true magnanimitie:
                  No marvell then, as it did well appeare,
                  He made the Greekes ſo great and royall cheare.
               
               
                  And more for to augment his fame withall,
                  He cauſ'd his onely Daughter to be brought
                  Out of her chamber downe into the hall,
                  Whoſe beautie if the world throghout were ſought
                  Could not be matcht, ſo much it did excell,
                  That to deſcrib't were hard for me to tell.
               
               
                  Whoſe Princely preſence wrought no ſmal delight,
                  Within the hearts of all the company,
                  When in moſt ſtately wiſe each Grecian Knight
                  She gan ſalute, and no man did deny
                  Hir courteous entertainment to afford,
                  As ſhe did paſſe along from bord to bord.
               
               
                  And chiefely to behold hir comely face,
                  For whitenes like to Alablaſter cleare,
                  With Roſeat cheekes, yet mixed with ſuch grace,
                  That no acceſſe of colour did appeare,
                  Wherein dame Nature plaid ſo kind a part,
                  That well ſhe proved miſtreſſe of her Art.
               
               
                  
                  This Princeſſe cald Medea as we read,
                  Was th'only child King Oeta had aliue,
                  And rightly in his Kingdome ſhould ſucceed,
                  If ſhe her father chanced to ſuruiue.
                  So ripe of yeares and gallant to behold,
                  That nature neuer fram'd a finer mold.
               
               
                  But notwithſtanding this, her beauty rare,
                  And youthfull yeares, (ſufficient to inſpire
                  Her heart with loue) yet was her onely care
                  To read and ſtudy with no ſmall deſire,
                  All kind of books that might or could be found,
                  Whereby ſhe learn'd of euery Art the ground
               
               
                  So perfectly, that neuer yet was found
                  A man that did attaine vnto her skill;
                  Her learning was ſo great and ſo profound,
                  For to diſcuſſe of euery thing at will:
                  And nothing what ſo e're but ſhe could tell,
                  Concerning things in heauen, earth, and hell.
               
               
                  No ſecrets of the earthly globe ſo round,
                  But ſhe could well diſcloſe them at her will,
                  The courſe of Starres and Planets ſhe had found,
                  And did attaine vnto ſo lofty skill,
                  That by their motion ſhe could truely ſhow,
                  What ſhould befall vpon the earth below.
               
               
                  She was ſo learned in Aſtronomie.
                  The Nigromancian Art ſhe knew ſo well,
                  And thereto did her mind ſo well apply,
                  That by her charmes ſhe called out of hell
                  Th'infernall ſpirits, and forſt them to obay
                  Her word and will, they durſt it not denay.
               
               
                  With words ſhee vſd to ſay in ſundry wiſe,
                  (Firſt caſting incenſe ſweet into the fire,
                  And doing of ſome diueliſh ſacrifice,
                  With Goat, horns, milke, & bloud) her whole deſire
                  She could attaine, when time conuenient
                  She knew would be, to worke Inchantement.
               
               
                  Such was her skill, and eke ſo well ſhe had
                  The heauenly and celeſtiall bodies found
                  How to diſcerne, that times both good and bad
                  By them ſhe choſe, to make and to compound
                  Her drugs, wherby ſhe brought to paſſe her will
                  In euery thing, what euer good or ill.
               
               
                  She could command the winds to ſtorme & blow,
                  And make the ground to freeze in euery vaine;
                  And cauſe it thunder, lighten, haile & ſnow,
                  And when ſhe liſt it ſodainly ſhould raine.
                  And turne the day full cleare to vgly night,
                  And then againe cauſe Sun to ſhine moſt bright.
               
               
                  She could the waters make to riſe and rage,
                  With huge and lofty billoes to the skye;
                  And then againe make calme, & eke aſſwage
                  The tempeſt, were it nere ſo great and hie.
                  She could yong trees dry vp both root & rind,
                  And them reuiue againe in ſelfe ſame kind.
               
               
                  And in the deepeſt time of Winter cold,
                  When buds and bloſſomes wither and decay;
                  And euery thing doth fade and waxeth old,
                  She could the earth make greene, & eke array
                  The fields with flowers of euery ſeuerall kind,
                  And colours as in Summer we them find.
               
               
                  And when ſhe liſt ſhe could the Summer cleare,
                  Cleane alter and convert to Winter cold,
                  And make it looke with darke & glooming cheare,
                  Strange, woonderfull, and vgly to behold.
                  Old men ſhe could to youth againe reſtore,
                  And make them freſh and luſty as before.
               
               
                  And yong men that no haire on face could ſhow,
                  Soone would ſhe cauſe appeare both gray and old.
                  Such was her skill, that bought on earth below
                  But ſhe could change, and ſecrets all vnfold.
                  And trees with fruit ſhe would at will make bare
                  Of barke and leafe, a ſecret ſtrange and rare.
               
               
                  She could the Sun and Moone 'gainſt nature ſtay,
                  And cauſe ecclipſes out of time by force;
                  For no man that is learned can denay,
                  But they are tyed vnto a certaine courſe.
                  (As by the Lord ordain'd at firſt it was,)
                  The which they may nor can by no means paſſe.
               
               
                  For till the Sun with gliſtering beames doth run,
                  By vſuall courſe vnto th'ecclipticke line,
                  And then is in coniunction with the Moone;
                  There's no ecclipſe as writers do define,
                  But when the Sun with fiery beames moſt red,
                  His manſion hath in th'vgly Dragons head.
               
               
                  And that the Moone is ſeated in the taile
                  Of Dragon fell, then 'tis a thing moſt true,
                  That an ecclipſe by nature cannot faile,
                  But certainly thereof muſt needs enſue:
                  By reaſon of interſecations,
                  Of circles and of reuolutions.
               
               
                  Which fixed are within the skies aloft,
                  And cauſe the ſhining beames of Phoebus bright,
                  (As it is ſeene within the world full oft)
                  To be obſcur'd and ſhadowed from our ſight;
                  For that the Moone doth make diuiſion,
                  By naturall interpoſition.
               
               
                  
                  Betweene our eyes and Phebus gliſtring beames,
                  So as we may not then behold nor ſee,
                  How Tytans flaming Chariot weld his ſtreames,
                  Which for a time cleane darkned ſeeme to bee.
                  But for bycauſe Ptholome the King,
                  Within his Booke ſhews cauſe of euery thing:
               
               
                  Both of ecclipſes and coniunction,
                  Of Sun and Moone, with other planets bright,
                  That they doe hap by common motion.
                  I will no longer of this matter write.
                  And though that Ouid in his booke doth praiſe,
                  
                     Medeas skill her honour ſo to raiſe,
               
               
                  And doth of her ſuch fained fables tell,
                  Yet God forbid that credite we ſhould giue
                  Vnto ſuch fond conceits, as knowing well,
                  No creature that vpon the earth doth liue,
                  Hath power to work againſt dame natures courſe,
                  To make the Sun and Moone ecclipſt by force.
               
               
                  For God that ruleth all things by his might,
                  Hath ſo diſpoſd his heauenly creatures,
                  That they cannot remooue by day nor night,
                  Without his will as long as world endures:
                  But in a mutuall order ſtill are bound,
                  Continually the world to compaſſe round.
               
               
                  For no ecclipſe as yet was euer knowne,
                  The Moone not being in coniunction,
                  As I haue ſaid, vnleſſe that God hath ſhowne
                  A miracle, as in the paſſion.
                  For then the Sun was found ecclipſt to be,
                  Gainſt natures courſe, as all the Iews might ſee.
               
               
                  For when that Chriſt vpon the croſſe was nail'd,
                  The Son of life was darkened for our good,
                  And then of heauen and earth the powers fail'd,
                  (At ſhedding of his pure and precious bloud)
                  And ſhewed ſignes moſt ſtrangely to behold,
                  The glory of his God-head to vnfold.
               
               
                  The earth did quake, great darknes did appeare,
                  The dead did riſe (which caus'd no little wonder)
                  Within the Church the vale in midſt did teare,
                  Hard ſtones and rocks did burſt & cleaue in ſunder.
                  That for the tokens ſtrange and marueilous,
                  Which then were ſeene wiſe Diomſians,
                  
               
               
                  When as he did ſuch ſodaine darkneſſe find,
                  (Although that he a heathen was by right)
                  Yet ſeemed much aſtoniſhed in mind,
                  And flatly ſaid, that ſure the God of might,
                  Did ſuffer death, or elſe 'twas to preſume,
                  The world as then would periſh and conſume.
               
               
                  Thus did this heathen man as then conceaue,
                  When as he did ſuch wonders great behold;
                  For God his creatures can of power bereaue
                  As being all of him to be contrould.
                  For he that did all things on earth ordaine,
                  Can heauen & earth of vſuall courſe reſtraine.
               
               
                  As ſacred Scriptures plainly teſtifie,
                  How Ioſua caus'd the Sun his courſe to ſtay,
                  (While he did force his enemies to flie
                  At Gabaon, for ſpace of one whole day)
                  Which God did grant vnto his faithfull Knight,
                  At his requeſt to ſhew his power and might.
               
               
                  Then think't not ſtrange, if at the paſſion
                  Of Ieſus Chriſt, incarnate for our ſake,
                  The heauens ſhew'd ſuch alteration,
                  And bright Sun beames became of color blacke,
                  Sith he hath made both skie, & ſea, & land,
                  And all are rul'd by his moſt mighty hand.
               
               
                  But though that Ouid liſt ſo much to wright,
                  And of Medea tells ſo falſe a fable,
                  And to extoll her ſeemes to take delight,
                  Yet all he ſaid to proue he was not able;
                  Although ſhe were a cunning ſorcereſſe,
                  As ancient ſtories manifeſt no leſſe.
               
               
                  This ſhall ſuffice to ſhew her wit and skill.
                  And now I will proceed to mine intent,
                  To tell how ſhe obayd her fathers will,
                  When as ſhe knew that he for her had ſent,
                  Inueſting coſtly furniture great ſtore,
                  That ſhe might cauſe her beauty ſeeme the more.
               
               
                  For if of beauty women haue good ſtore,
                  They will not faile to play a womans part,
                  By skill t'encreaſe dame natures worke the more,
                  And are therein ſuch miſtreſſes of Art:
                  That what ſo er's amiſſe they will it hide,
                  That no defect may outwardly be ſpide.
               
               
                  But ſhe was faire and beautifull in face,
                  (And in behauiour womanly withall)
                  And ſet it forth with ſuch a princely grace,
                  That euery man admir'd her in the hall:
                  Her entry ſo maieſticall did ſeeme,
                  As if ſhe had a heauenly creature beene.
               
               
                  King Oeta as the ſtory ſheweth it,
                  As ſoone as ſhe into the hall was brought,
                  Caus'd her by yong Prince Iaſon downe to ſit,
                  For his deſire, will, and onely thought
                  Was, how he might him princely entertaine,
                  And ſo his bounty to the Greeks explaine.
               
               
                  
                  But in this point (alas) he ſeem'd to bee,
                  Cleane voyd of good aduiſe & prudent care;
                  (For wiſedome wills vs wiſely to foreſee
                  Each danger, and againſt the ſame prepare)
                  To cauſe a maiden light of wit, and eie,
                  His pleaſure in that caſe to ſatisfie.
               
               
                  And though his ſpeciall meaning and deſire
                  Was onlie for the honour of his gueſt;
                  Yet it did ſet his Daughters heart on fire,
                  Which burnt within the furrows of her breſt,
                  So ſore that it bred his confuſion,
                  And finally her owne deſtruction.
               
               
                  Great follie 'twas ſo much her youth to truſt,
                  And giue her cauſe of ſuch a motion,
                  That might prouoke and ſtir her vnto luſt,
                  And that through want of good diſcretion,
                  To thinke vpon (as reaſon doth require)
                  A womans light and mutable deſire.
               
               
                  Which any man that's wiſe no doubt will feare.
                  For who was euer yet ſo mad or wood,
                  (Vnleſſe he did ſo ſound affection beare,
                  As that he ſeemed careleſſe of his good)
                  Without good triall women to beleeue,
                  or haſty credite to their words to giue.
               
               
                  In whome is neither conſtancy nor truſt,
                  They are ſo double and ſo full of wile,
                  That hard it is t'reſtraine them of their luſt:
                  And ſet their minds ſo much on fraud & guile,
                  That no man can himſelfe of them aſſure.
                  For it to them belongeth of nature.
               
               
                  Euen from the time they firſt creepe out of cradle,
                  To be both wilie, wauering and light,
                  Their hearts they are ſo fraile and ſo vnſtable,
                  In youthfull yeares wherein they take delight:
                  For that while they in growing yeres are yong,
                  Their inward thoughts agree not with their rong.
               
               
                  Which is the cauſe that many wiſe men write,
                  That wau'ring, change, and mutability,
                  To women doth belong of ancient right,
                  As fram'd of mould of inſtability:
                  Which all that know them well cannot denay,
                  (Although it grieueth me ſo much to ſay.)
               
               
                  For if you could perceaue their inward mind,
                  And all their ſlights and wilie fetches know,
                  You might the true and liuely patterne find,
                  Within their hearts (they do ſo ouer flow)
                  Of fond and wauering falſe inconſtancy,
                  Which here and there with euery wind doth fly.
               
               
                  For they are of ſo mutable a kind,
                  As if that valiant Hercules ſhould prooue,
                  And Sampſon, both would not ſuffice to bind
                  A womans heart, that it ſhould not remooue:
                  For as the ſubtill flames of burning fire,
                  So too and fro they flie in their deſire,
               
               
                  Till they accompliſh fullie their delight.
                  For like as nature ſeeketh after forme,
                  And therein taketh kindly appetite,
                  Till ſhe her courſe by proceſſe may performe:
                  So womens hearts will ne're refraine from man
                  In wau'ring luſt, deuiſe what meanes you can.
               
               
                  Nor will they ceaſe till they haue all aſſaid,
                  Though that their minds to twenty men were bent,
                  But would to God as nature is appaid
                  With one forme onely, holding her content,
                  And nere deſireth further to proceed,
                  But therein reſts, and will it not exceed,
               
               
                  That women her example follow would,
                  And hold themſelues content, and ſtill abide
                  Conſtant to one, as they in duty ſhould,
                  But want of footing makes them often ſlide:
                  For not content with perfect vnity,
                  They bend their minds to ſeeke plurality.
               
               
                  So much in mutability they flow,
                  Yet oft pretend a kind of ſtablenes;
                  Which outwardly by ſignes they ſeeme to ſhow,
                  But inwardly is hidden doublenes:
                  So cloſe and ſure, that outwardly with eye
                  Full hard it is their malice to eſpy.
               
               
                  For vnder ſhow and vaile of honeſtie,
                  Their deepe deſire is kept full cloſe in mew,
                  With fained ſhow of ſimple modeſty,
                  Refuſing that which they in heart purſue;
                  And that an outward praiſe they may obtaine,
                  They will diſſemble, flatter, lie, and faine.
               
               
                  Then muſt I needs King O
                           •
                        t
                           •
                        s tell thee true,
                  That in this caſe thou hadſt too little care,
                  In that thou didſt not doubt what might enſue,
                  But let thy daughter faire proceed ſo farre
                  Without aduiſe, with ſtrangers ſo to deale,
                  To ouerthrow thy ſelfe and common weale.
               
               
                  For by that meanes thy treaſure it was loſt,
                  Thine honour ſtaind, thy country cleane vndone,
                  Thy ſelfe in thouſand cares in ſorrows 
                        •
                     oſt,
                  Thy Daughter with a ſtranger way did run:
                  And in a fo
                        •
                     raigne land through care & thought,
                  Was in the end to vtter miſchiefe brought.
               
               
                  
                  And with no little ſcandall to thy name,
                  By miſerie, by ſorrow, and by griefe;
                  At laſt was brought vnto her death with ſhame,
                  And thou thy ſelfe bereſt of all reliefe,
                  Might'ſt 
                        •
                     it and mourne thy hard & doleful caſe,
                  That to preuent it had no better grace.
               
               
                  If thou by wiſe and prouident foreſight,
                  Hadſt had the wit to thinke on future harmes,
                  And in thy mind would'ſt haue conſidered right,
                  Of women
                        •
                      ſoule and moſt deceitfull charmes:
                  Their fraud, their falſhood, and fragility,
                  And that in them is no ſecurity:
               
               
                  (As Guydo in his verſe doth well declare)
                  Then ſurely by thy too much wretchleſnes,
                  Thou haddeſt not with ſorrow and with care,
                  Bereft thy ſelfe of all thy happines,
                  Thy treaſure, and thy onely Daughter deare,
                  Which both at once were loſt as doth appeare.
               
               
                  What could auaile the carefull prouidence,
                  And ſtrange deuiſe fram'd by inchantement;
                  The warie heed and double diligence,
                  By thee ſong vs'd all danger to preuent,
                  Againſt the wylie wit of women-kind,
                  Whoſe ſubtilties as right by proofe we find,
               
               
                  Are of great force, for will with them is law,
                  Bee'
                        •
                      good or bad it muſt not be denide;
                  Nor yet do they of any ſtand in awe,
                  They are ſo full of will, deceit, and pride.
                  For as mine Author plainely doth expreſſe,
                  
                     Medea by her wit and craftineſſe,
               
               
                  Bereau'd her father of his treaſure great,
                  And that becauſe ſhe would her mind fulfill;
                  And Iaſon to her loue by wiles intreate,
                  Wherein ſhe did vſe all her Art and skill;
                  As you ſhall heare if that ye will proceed.
                  The ſequell of this Hiſtory to read.
               
               
                  For as ſhe had at table take her ſeat,
                  Tweene Oeta and the valiant Graecian knight;
                  And that ſhe ſhould haue fallen to her meat,
                  Loue did her heart with ſodaine paſſion ſmight:
                  And made her colour alter in her face,
                  And fetch an hundred ſighes in little ſpace.
               
               
                  Sometime the blood down to her heart did fall,
                  And vp againe into her face would riſe;
                  Sometime ſhe bluſht, ſometime ſhe ſhewed pael,
                  Now look't ſhe downe, then caſt ſhe vp her eyes;
                  Yet ſtill among to beautifie her colour,
                  The fragrant Roſe was mixt with Lillie flower.
               
               
                  And though the Roſe would ſomtimes ſeem to flee
                        •
                     
                  
                  Yet did the Lillie hold her woonted place,
                  Till nature gaue them meanes againe to meet,
                  And ſhew alike within her comely face:
                  And thus with cold and eke with ſodaine heat,
                  
                     Medeas mind with griefe was ſore beſet.
               
               
                  Sometimes ſhe burnt, ſometimes ſhe waxed cold,
                  And ſtill as ſhe did ſeeke with great deſire,
                  Young Iaſon in the face for to behold,
                  Her heart it was ſet more and more on fire,
                  With his great beauty and his comlineſſe,
                  Which ſhe in heart moſt deepely did impreſſe.
               
               
                  His yellow criſped haire like golden wire,
                  His ſeemely face, his gracious countenance;
                  His War-like looke, his valerous deſire,
                  (Which he then ſhew'd his honour to aduance)
                  His goodly ſhape of bodie, and of lim,
                  And all things elſe whatſoeuer was in him,
               
               
                  Within her eies and heart bread ſo great pleaſure▪
                  
                  That only to behold and view him ſtill,
                  She did eſteem't taboue all earthly treaſure.
                  And could haue ſpent her time by her good will
                  In contemplation of his perſon rare,
                  For that as then for meat ſhe did not care.
               
               
                  As hauing wholy loſt all appetite,
                  So much he ſtucke in her rememberance;
                  That for to looke on him was her delight,
                  Loue had her then ſo brought into a trance,
                  And mark't her with her burning fiery brand,
                  That by no meanes ſhe could eſcape his hand.
               
               
                  For ſhe was yoked body, heart, and all,
                  To Iaſon, who within her heart did lie,
                  And when that oportunity did fall,
                  She would at him caſt vp a glancing eye.
                  And then againe looke downe vnto the ground,
                  Leaſt men ſhould deeme ſhe had ſome fancies found
               
               
                  For as all women right diſſemblers bee,
                  She kept it cloſe with ſuch an outward ſhow;
                  That by herface none might percerue nor ſee
                  What ſhe did meane, nor her intent once know;
                  Thereby to take the leaſt occaſion,
                  Out of their minds of bad ſuſpition.
               
               
                  For openly there could nothing be ſeen,
                  That ſhould be cauſe of any heauineſſe;
                  Her ſeeking was to make them all to ween
                  The reaſon, why ſhe vs'd ſuch ſoberneſſe,
                  Onely of ſimple woman-hood to bee,
                  With honeſt ſhame and virgin chaſtitie.
               
               
                  
                  Which both at once within her heart had met,
                  And cauſed her that modeſty to vſe:
                  And outward ſhow on inward thought to ſet,
                  In that ſhe ſeem'd her meat then to refuſe;
                  The cauſe as then not being any ſuch,
                  But onely loue which her at heart did touch.
               
               
                  She could ſo her hypocreſie excuſe,
                  And with an outward ſhow of modeſty,
                  Giue matter vnto fooles whereon to inuſe,
                  When as ſhe ſought
                        •
                      abuſe her chaſtity.
                  For not one word out of her mouth did paſſe,
                  Her looke vnto her heart contrary was.
               
               
                  For maidens ſeeme moſt commonly to ſpare,
                  In outward ſhow t'expreſſe their inward griefe;
                  Or in their words their meaning to declare,
                  Of things wherein they wiſh to haue 
                        •
                     liefe.
                  For while they liue in pure virginity,
                  And by the ſame are bard of liberty,
               
               
                  They keepe all cloſe and will not ſeeme too bold,
                  To ſhew their minds although it grieue thē much:
                  Nor tell the thing which otherwiſe they would,
                  Although full neere vnto their hearts it tuch.
                  And ſo although t'were with a fained grace,
                  
                     Medea ſat with ſober cheare and face.
               
               
                  And yet expreſt her meaning with her eye,
                  So ſecretly that no man could diſcerne,
                  The burning fire that in her breaſt did lye,
                  The which becauſe it did her much concerne:
                  She could not chuſe her troubled mind t'appeaſe,
                  But vſe ſome words in ſecret, which were theſe:
               
               
                  Would God this braue and luſty Gentleman,
                  Which ſhowes ſo faire and gallant in my ſight,
                  Whoſe comelineſſe not well expreſſe I can,
                  Aſſured were to me to be my Knight:
                  That I might once embrace him in mine arme,
                  Then would I to my will his ſences charme.
               
               
                  His haire that ſhines like to the golden wire,
                  His limbs compact and fram'd in co
                        ••
                     ley wiſe▪
                  
                  His ſtature as proportion doth require.
                  In ſeemely height, ſo well doth pleaſe mine eies:
                  That by my will it would my heart content,
                  To winne his loue if fortune would conſent.
               
               
                  For that his knightly face for to behold,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s vnto me an earthly Deity;
                  Though inwardly I feele my heart full cold,
                  And yet in truth it may none other be.
                  Alas will he not pitty my eſtate,
                  And cauſe me thinke my ſelfe moſt fortunate?
               
               
                  I would he knew my true and good in
                        •
                     ent,
                  (Whereof I thinke he takes but little 
                        •
                     eed)
                  And how my loue to him in fully bent,
                  Which inwardly doth make my heart to bleed;
                  Yet ſhould I die I date i
                        •
                      not diſcloſe,
                  Although for him I fo
                        •
                     le a thouſand 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  But cureleſſe is my ſor
                        ••••
                      and my paine,
                  To friend no
                        •
                      foe I dare 
                        ••
                      not vnfold▪
                  
                  Nor yet in any fort thereof complaine,
                  To find redreſſe▪ if any way I could▪
                  
                  And yet I would not any ſhould 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  But that I would procur't in honeſt wiſe.
               
               
                  As openly in time it ſhall be found,
                  For that in lawfull wedlocke vnto him,
                  Is my deſire truely to be bound,
                  And ſo my meaning's voyd of any ſinne:
                  As being grounded vpon faithfulneſſe,
                  Without all fraud or any doubleneſſe.
               
               
                  Behold how women craftily can play,
                  To wiſh a thing, and nothing leſſe 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  And ſecretly that no man ought ſhould ſay,
                  With face full ſmooth can ſhadow their deſire:
                  And hide their luſt by wile and ſubtilty,
                  With meere pretence and vaile of honeſty.
               
               
                  And though that to be faithfull they pretend,
                  And that the depenes of their trechery,
                  They can with outward flouriſhes defend▪
                  
                  And all their wiles ſo cloſely couer'd lie,
                  Yet ſecretly deceit by them is meant,
                  With ſugred words of good and true i
                        ••
                     en
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  As if they did all honeſty pretend,
                  When certainly 'tis but an outward ſho
                        ••
                     
                  
                  As it is found and proueth in the end,
                  And many men by true experience know:
                  So well they can ſay one, and other meane;
                  And colour blew, full lightly turne to greene
               
               
                  For vnder vaile of painted ſtableneſſe,
                  And fained ſhew of honeſt modeſty,
                  The wilie ſerpent cald now 
                        •
                     angleneſſe,
                  Within their hearts full ſecretly doth lie:
                  For what they moſt deſire in outward ſho,
                  They will deny't, and ſweare it is not ſo.
               
               
                  Thus Guydo ſeemes of women to indi
                        •
                     e
                  Alas that he with them ſhould make debate▪
                  
                  Or curſedly ſo much of them ſhould 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  It grieueth me in Engliſh to tranſlate
                  Their foule diſgrace, o
                        ••
                      to iuſtifie,
                  For rather had I for their ſakes to die.
               
               
                  
                  And therefore I will craue their patience,
                  To beare with me, becauſe I write thus much,
                  My purpoſe is not for to giue offence,
                  As knowing well they are not any ſuch.
                  They are ſo true and perfect in their thought,
                  That I ſuppoſe not one of them is nought.
               
               
                  And further I doe thinke there is not one,
                  But that in will and heart ſhe will be true,
                  And keepe her ſelfe vnto one man alone,
                  But be it ſome doe chooſe them louers new:
                  To ſay the truth they are not worthy blame,
                  For oftentimes they ſee men do the ſame.
               
               
                  They muſt prouide for new when men refuſe,
                  To loue them more, & ſeeke for other change,
                  And if I could, I would them full excuſe,
                  (For why ſhould men haue liberty to range)
                  And women not, which cannot liue alone,
                  Store is no ſore, if they haue more then one.
               
               
                  Wherefore I muſt of them deſire leaue,
                  Although I write as matter doth befall;
                  I hope it ſhall not giue them cauſe to grieue,
                  When as I follow mine originall:
                  For reaſon is that puniſhment ſhould light
                  On him that doth ſo hard'gainſt women write.
               
               
                  And them ſo much and cauſleſly offend,
                  By ouermuch inuaying'gainſt their kind,
                  But if I might I would it ſoone amend,
                  And him to judgement of the women bind;
                  That they might him vnto his pennance ſet,
                  For if for to repent he ſhould forget,
               
               
                  I would diſpaire of his ſaluation,
                  And think that he ſtraight down to hell ſhould go,
                  And neuer ſhould obtaine remiſſion,
                  Vnleſſe he did ſome ſatisfaction ſhow.
                  For all's not true that we in bookes do find,
                  And if it were, 'twere hard for women kind.
               
               
                  If Guido therefore were as now aliue,
                  So bitter pennance he ſhould furely haue;
                  If I were Prieſt and had him heare to ſhriue,
                  That till the time that he were layd in graue,
                  He ſhould remember daily to repent,
                  And earneſtly in heart his fact relent,
               
               
                  That he ſo ſpake to his confuſion.
                  But let this paſſe, and now I will proceed,
                  And meane to make no more digreſſion,
                  To tell how faire Medea then did ſpeed;
                  Who taking leaue, did preſently depart
                  Out of the hall, with ſad and heauy heart.
               
               
                  And Iaſon when the King likewiſe did riſe,
                  With Hercules, was to his chamber brought;
                  Moſt richly hang'd in braue and ſumptuous wiſe,
                  With cloth of Gold in curious manner wrought:
                  Where they did reſt and take their eaſe a while,
                  Vpon their beds the time ſo to beguile.
               
               
                  Meane while (as it already hath been ſayd)
                  
                     Medea was into her chamber gone,
                  Where to her ſelfe ſhe thought vpon and wayd
                  (As ſhe therein ſat muſing all alone)
                  How ſhe might eaſe the ſorrow & the ſmart,
                  Which her ſo ſore then pinched at the heart.
               
               
                  For loue, which had her ſet in ſuch a rage,
                  That eaſely ſhe could it not forgo,
                  Nor find a ready meanes the ſame t'aſſwage,
                  For furious Cupid had her wounded ſo,
                  With his moſt fiery ſhafe within her breſt,
                  That whereſo e're ſhe ſat ſhe could not reſt.
               
               
                  So violent and ſeruent was the heat,
                  That ſtill it did her paine and griefe encreaſe:
                  For in her breaſt there was a conflict great,
                  Twixt loue and ſhame which either did her preſſe,
                  To yeeld vnto their wills in ſome reſpect:
                  So that ſhe could not tell which to reiect.
               
               
                  For loue a Knight of great renowne and fame,
                  Who neither feareth, dagger, ſword, nor knife;
                  Like Lyon fierce purſued ſtill his game,
                  And hot and haſty was t'aduenture life:
                  And there withall moſt proud in higheſt degree,
                  For Cupids chiefeſt officer is hee.
               
               
                  Who doth enforce both high and low of ſtate,
                  In perills great and troubleſome to enter,
                  And bringeth men by hard and cruellfate,
                  Vnto their ends, and thouſand dangers t'venter.
                  For loue of feare nor perill takes no heed,
                  So that in his proceedings he may ſpeed.
               
               
                  But ſhame of other nature that conſiſts,
                  Is alwaies baſhfull, cowardly, and faint:
                  And dares not once ſo much as bend her fi
                        ••
                     s,
                  Vnleſſe it be through very meere conſtraint:
                  For cowardiſe doth make her hide her face,
                  For feare leaſt ſhe ſhould fall into diſgrace.
               
               
                  Much like a child of young and tender yeares,
                  As hauing neither courage, will, nor heart,
                  To giue aſſault, ſhe is ſo full of feares:
                  And yet full oft hath playd a peuiſh part,
                  And many louers croſt when they ſhould ſpeed,
                  By counſell of his foſter brother dread.
               
               
                  
                  For feare and ſhame if they together lie,
                  Bereaue hot loue of heart and hardines,
                  And both together flatlie him denie,
                  The meanes or any power a word t'expreſſe:
                  Or once his mind to open and declare,
                  To eaſe himſelfe of ſorrow, woe, and care.
               
               
                  For when that loue doth boldlie thinke to ſpeake,
                  And is vpon the very point t'aſſay.
                  And giue the venture forth his mind to breake,
                  Sharue ſ
                        •
                     eppeth out and vtterly ſaith nay:
                  And cauſes loue like Snaile his hornes to ſhrinke,
                  And baſhfully with both his eies to winke.
               
               
                  And by that meanes he doth his ſuite impaire.
                  And thus is ſhame ſtill froward and doth vary
                  From hardie loue, and puts him in deſpaire,
                  By helpe of feare, which both do him contrary.
                  For if that ſhame fond loue would neuer cheake,
                  Loue often times his lawes would ſurely breake.
               
               
                  For as a horſe that ſeeks to be at large,
                  In furious wiſe breaks bridle, bit, and raine,
                  And ſtriues to free himſelfe from Keepers charge:
                  Solouers true to eaſe themſelues of paine,
                  (I
                        •
                      feare & ſhame did not their wyls with-hold)
                  T'effect their luſts would be too hot and bold.
               
               
                  But all the while that ſhame is kept in mew,
                  Within the breaſt that no man doth it know,
                  No ſuch effect of loue there doth enſue,
                  But ſtill it makes an honeſt outward ſhow.
                  For did not ſhame withſtand loues lawleſſe luſt,
                  Loue out the hart all danger ſoone would thruſt.
               
               
                  And were not ſhame the keeper and the gaile
                  Of womens hearts (as Authors plainely ſay)
                  It were in vaine the Caſtle to aſſaile,
                  Or any ſiege againſt the ſame to lay:
                  For in that caſe long parle ſhold not need,
                  For women hate delay, and loue to ſpeed.
               
               
                  But ſhame and feare loues combe ſo ſhort had cut,
                  And humbled him ſo much in heart and mind,
                  That they had him cleane vnto ſilence put,
                  And he no meanes to eaſe himſelfe could find:
                  And thus twixt loue and ſhame in great diſtreſſe,
                  
                     Medea ſat in care and penſiueneſſe.
               
               
                  Which ſhe could not by any meanes endure.
                  So hot ſhe burnt within her tender breſt:
                  For when as loue did her in part aſſure,
                  In fine to giue ſome comfort, eaſe, and reſt
                  Vnto her heart, ſhame put her in a doubt,
                  With feare to thinke how that it would fall out.
               
               
                  And thus ſhe ſtood ſtill more and more in feare,
                  Twixt loue and ſhame as it were at a ſtand,
                  For ſhame was great, but loue more force did beare,
                  And in the end did get the vpper hand.
                  For feare and ſhame ſhe durſt not once diſcouer,
                  The fire of loue which in her heart did houer.
               
               
                  Which eaſely ſhe could not well ſhake off,
                  And ſo ſhe ſat perplex't without reliefe,
                  (Till fortune full diſpos'd at her to ſcoffe,
                  By turning of her wheele, did eaſe her griefe:
                  But with vnhappy chance as ſhe doth vſe,
                  All thoſe that put their truſt in her t'abuſe.
               
               
                  For when that men do thinke to ſit at eaſe,
                  On top of fortunes wheele, and nothing doubt;
                  That ſmiling Lady can them ſoone diſpleaſe,
                  By giuing it but one ſmall turne about:
                  And cauſe them fall as much as they did riſe,
                  When they leaſt of her treaſon do ſurmiſe.
               
               
                  For ſhe is alwaies falſe and eke vnſtable,
                  Prouoking men to things aboue their reach,
                  Which though that they t'attaine thē are not able,
                  With fained ſhowes ſhe can them finely catch,
                  And make thē break their brains both night & day
                  Bout haddy-wiſt, when ſhe with them doth play
               
               
                  With her deceitfull face and flattery,
                  As ſhe that well cap bring ſuch fooles to bed,
                  And caus'd them to their own deſtruction hie,
                  And when that ſhe to miſchiefe hath them led;
                  She turnes her back & with a pleaſant ſmile,
                  Doth joy to thinke how ſhe can men beguile.)
               
               
                  And ſtriuing thus within her ſelfe, at laſt
                  When reaſon could not win the field of rage,
                  And ſhe ſometime in muſing had ore-paſt,
                  At length her inward torment to aſſwage:
                  She ga
                        •
                     n both pro & contra to debate,
                  The matter with her ſelfe as ſtill ſhe ſate.
               
               
                  And ſaid, in vaine Medea thou doſt ſtriue,
                  For ſure one of the heauenly Gods it is,
                  That bends his force gainſt thee. Doth any liue
                  That euer ſaw ſo ſtrange a thing as this?
                  Is any thing like vnto burning loue?
                  Should I my Fathers heſts eſteeme aboue
               
               
                  All meaſure hard? truth 'tis th'are hard and ſore,
                  Why ſhould I feare this ſtrangers death ſo much,
                  Sith he's a man I neuer ſaw before?
                  Why ſhould his perill me at heart ſo tuch?
                  Vnhappy wench, if thou couldſt find ſome reſt,
                  And coole the heat which burneth in my breaſt,
               
               
                  
                  It were a good and bleſſed turne for thee.
                  For where as griefe now ſeemeth thee to kill,
                  Thou mightſt thereby at heart well eaſed be.
                  But now a ſtrange diſeaſe againſt my will
                  Doth draw me on, fond loue perſwadeth me.
                  And though by Art whats beſt for me I ſee,
               
               
                  Yet do I headlong follow that is worſt.
                  Why ſhould I thus ſo fondlie ſeeme to raue?
                  And on a ſtranger dote as one accurſt,
                  And ſeeke a forraine husband ſo to haue?
                  When as at home to my content and mind,
                  I may a louer meet for me well find.
               
               
                  But who can tell if he ſhall liue or no?
                  And yet I pray long life may be his lot,
                  For without all offence I may pray ſo,
                  And wiſh him well although I loue him not:
                  For what offence hath Iaſon done to me?
                  Who pittieth not his youth, ſhould cruell be.
               
               
                  What is ſhe but his valour might her moue?
                  But ſetting that aſide, who would not rage,
                  And burne at heart with hot and feruent loue
                  With Iaſons faire and goodlie perſonage?
                  My heart is toucht therewith aſſuredly.
                  And if that I prouide not remedy,
               
               
                  The burning breath of Buls will him ſo blaſt,
                  That with the fires his body ſing'd ſhall be,
                  And of the ſeeds that he in ground ſhall caſt,
                  A ſtrange and vncoath harueſt he ſhall ſee,
                  Of armed men, that out the earth ſhall grow,
                  Againſt whom he had need his valour ſhow.
               
               
                  And as a prey he ſhall likewiſe be ſet,
                  Againſt the fierce and cruell Dragon fell:
                  Which things if that I do not ſeeke to let,
                  Then muſt I trulie ſay, and ſhew full well,
                  That Tyger did me breed, and in my breſt
                  A heart more hard then flint or ſteele doth reſt.
               
               
                  Why rather ſhould I not with wrathfull eie,
                  His death behold, and in the ſame delight?
                  Why mooue I not the Buls moſt furiouſlie,
                  Gainſt him to hold a fierce and cruell fight?
                  And all the knights that ſhall riſe out the ground,
                  Incite to ſet on him, and him confound.
               
               
                  And that ſame Dragon fell which nere doth reſt?
                  The Gods forbid that I ſuch things ſhould do,
                  Such treacherie I vtterlie deteſt,
                  But praier is ſmall remedy thereto,
                  Vnleſſe that I do lend my helping hand.
                  And ſhall I then betray my natiue land?
               
               
                  Shall I a ſtranger ſaue I do not know?
                  And giue him aid that me perchance may leaue
                  Behind him, and into his Countrie go
                  And take an otherwiſe? It ſhould me grieue.
                  But if I knew he would worke me that ſpight,
                  And in an other woman take delight:
               
               
                  Die ſure he ſhould. But he beares not the face
                  Like one that would ſo great a miſchiefe worke:
                  His birth, his valour, and his comelie grace,
                  Show that in him ſuch treaſon doth not lurke:
                  And me aſſure he will me not deceaue,
                  Nor once forget the good he ſhall receaue,
               
               
                  Thereby from me. Yet firſt he ſhall me plight
                  His faith and troth (according to the lawes)
                  To marrie me, and keepe his couenant right.
                  Why then am I in feare without a cauſe▪
                  
                  To take this matter preſently in hand,
                  And not delay it off, nor lingring ſtand?
               
               
                  
                     Iaſon ſhall thinke himſelfe much bound to me,
                  And gladly for his wife will me retaine,
                  And I thereby much honoured ſhall be
                  Of all the people, which as now remaine
                  Within the rich and fertile land of Greece,
                  
                  For helping them to win the Golden fleece.
               
               
                  Shall I then leaue my Father and my kin,
                  And houſhold Gods (to whome ſuch loue I beare)
                  My natiue ſoile and all that is therein,
                  And with a ſtranger ſaile I know not where?
                  Yea: theſe, and all that ere I haue, why not?
                  My Father's hard, my Countries rude God wot.
               
               
                  The greateſt good vnto my ſelfe will fall,
                  For that the things which I ſhall now forſake,
                  I may full well but meerely trifles call,
                  If I to thoſe compare them which I take.
                  For Graecians ſafetie honoured ſhall I bee,
                  And dwell in Towns that are both rich and free.
               
               
                  Whoſe fame doth freſhly floriſh euery where,
                  Mongſt people that in liberall Arts excell,
                  And which of all things elſe I hold moſt dere,
                  And for all earthly treaſure would not ſell:
                  I ſhall enioy King Aeſons Princely Son,
                  Whom had I once vnto my husband won.
               
               
                  Moſt happy then I would eſteeme my ſtate,
                  And thinke my ſelfe to be aduanſt ſo hie,
                  That with my head I ſhould be eleuate,
                  Boue all the ſtarres within the Chriſt all skie:
                  But men report that rocks in Seas doe meet,
                  And gainſt nature againe in ſunder fleet.
               
               
                  
                  And how Caribdis vtter enemie
                  To ſhips, doth cauſe the waues them ouethrow,
                  When vnder ſaile they chance to paſſe thereby.
                  And Scilla, with whome Dogs doth euer go:
                  Out of Cicillia gulfe comes barking out,
                  And puts ſuch as ſaile by in feare and doubt.
               
               
                  But what skils that, if I enioy my loue,
                  And in my Iaſons armes may ſafelie ſleepe,
                  It ſhall me not in any wiſe once moue,
                  Though ſeas be nere ſo dang'rous, foule, & deepe:
                  For while that I my louer may embrace,
                  Nought can make me to feare in any caſe.
               
               
                  And if that feare ſhould chance to trouble me,
                  And make my mind perplexed therewithall,
                  My feare ſhould onlie for my husband be.
                  Dar'ſt thou him then ſo boldlie husband call?
                  Pretendeſt thou Medea title gaie
                  To thy offence? thou rather ſhouldſt ſay naie,
               
               
                  And ſee what ledwnes thou doſt go about,
                  Thereby to ſhunne the miſchiefe dangerous,
                  Before that worſe vnto thee chance fall out.
                  She had no ſoonner in that ſort ſaid thus,
                  But ſhamefaſtnes and feare that by her ſtaid,
                  Made franticke loue to flie away diſmaid.
               
               
                  And raging mood thereof was well alaid,
                  And for the preſent time put cleane to flight,
                  Till ſpying Aeſons ſonne the flames that ſtaid,
                  And ſeemed as they had been quenched quight,
                  Did kindle, and againe began to ſhow,
                  And with their heat did cauſe her cheeks to glow.
               
               
                  And ſcarlet blood within his face did riſe.
                  And like vnto a ſparke of fire that's hid
                  In aſhes, with the whisking wind out flies,
                  And by that meanes againe is kindled.
                  So did her loue which then was put to flight,
                  Renew his former force at Iaſons ſight.
               
               
                  For when ſhe did behold his comelie Grace,
                  And Princelie port, ſhe judged him to bee,
                  Much fai
                        •
                     er, and more beautifull in face
                  Then ere ſhe had, when firſt ſhe did him ſee.
                  For which her iudgement ſure it doth behoue
                  To beare with her, becauſe ſhe was in loue.
               
               
                  Thus as Medea wrought to eaſe her griefe,
                  She ſpun the web of her aduerſitie,
                  For fortune making ſhew to ſend reliefe,
                  Procures her time her mind to certefie,
                  And to vnfold the ſecret of her heart
                  To Iaſon, though it bred her woe and ſmart.
               
               
                  For thus it chanſt, when Phoebus bright did ſhine,
                  In th'afternoone at hotteſt time of day,
                  As he began then Weſtward to decline,
                  And by degrees his feruent heat delay.
                  King Oeta finding time conuenient,
                  In all the haſt for faire Medea ſent,
               
               
                  And willed her with preſent ſpeed to go
                  Into the hall Prince Iaſon t'entertaine,
                  And vnto him all curteſie to ſho:
                  Whereby ſhe did occaſion fit obtaine,
                  (When time conuenient ſerued) to diſcouer
                  Her hearts deſire vnto her new found louer.
               
               
                  For when as ſhe her father had eſpied,
                  With Graecian Knights in earneſt ſpeech to bee,
                  And that each man his mind was occupied,
                  To paſſe the time. When no man did her ſee,
                  In courteous wiſe to Iaſon ſhe drew neere,
                  And he to her the like with ioyfull cheere.
               
               
                  And being ſet together in that ſort,
                  With louelie looke and countenance bening,
                  
                     Medea glad and willing t'yeeld the fort,
                  And parle firſt, well weighing euery thing,
                  With ſighs beheld Prince Iaſon in the face,
                  And vnto him declar'd her doubtfull caſe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  ¶ How Iaſon by the onely helpe and aduiſe of (Medea King Oetas Daughter) enamored of him, acchieued the conqueſt of the Golden Fleece.
               
               
                  PRince Iaſon ere I ſpeake to thee (ſaid ſhee)
                  I charge thee by thy valour and thy might,
                  Thy courteſie, and true nobilitie,
                  And as thou art a ſtout and hardy Knight,
                  Deſiring much t'aduance thy noble fame,
                  By valiant acts, and t'magnifie thy name.
               
               
                  That theſe my words (with raſh opinion)
                  Thou doſt not cenſure to proceed of guile,
                  Deceitfulneſſe, nor yet preſumption,
                  Nor from a womans heart that's full of wile.
                  In that I am ſo bold and do not ſpare,
                  My mind to thee at large now to declare,
               
               
                  Without all manner doublenes of heart.
                  Firſt praying thee vnto my words giue eare,
                  And marke full well what I to thee impart,
                  And faile thou not the ſame in mind to beare:
                  For what ſo e're I ſay it's for thy weale,
                  As ſhe that meanes in truth with thee to deale.
               
               
                  
                  Two things there are that makes me thus proceed,
                  (That's ſeruent loue, and common courteſie,
                  Which both in one ſo fully are agreed)
                  To worke thy good, that nought I can deny,
                  Nor yet conceale within my breaſt from thee,
                  As ere we part, moſt plainly thou ſhalt ſee.
               
               
                  For firſt I thinke of very courteſie,
                  That vnto ſtrangers men ſhould take delight,
                  To ſhew all kind of liberalitie,
                  (As being thereto bound of ancient right)
                  Both in their words and works, & them defend
                  From harmes, as much as power doth extend.
               
               
                  And for my part (braue Iaſon) cauſe I ſee
                  Within thy thoughts the ſignes of worthines,
                  I will not faile as much as lies in mee,
                  To further thee with hearty carefulnes:
                  (And with that word ſhe fetcht a ſigh full kind,
                  For him that ſo did ſticke within her mind.)
               
               
                  For thy ſweet ſake my heart within doth bleed,
                  Becauſe thou ſeek'ſt without aduiſednes,
                  The fleece of Gold to win, and to proceed
                  Therein of youth and wilfull hardines:
                  Which enterpriſe who ſo doth take in hand,
                  Is ſure of death, and can it not withſtand.
               
               
                  So perillous and dreadfull is the venter,
                  That pen nor tongue can well declare the ſame,
                  For doubtleſſe who ſo ere therein doth enter,
                  Finds nought but death, and after to his ſhame.
                  Whereas he thinkes his honour to aduance,
                  Report ſhall blaſe his foule & wretched chance.
               
               
                  So much the end is found to be contrary,
                  Vnto the firſt beginning of th'aduenter,
                  For at the laſt he's certaine to miſcarry,
                  Though't firſt it ſeemes an eaſie thing to enter:
                  For wit of man by engin, force, or might,
                  Although he had experience great to fight.
               
               
                  And had his armes moſt ſtrong and paſſing ſure,
                  And knew how to defend himſelfe full well,
                  And were well breathed long time to endure,
                  And nere ſo much in valour did excell:
                  Or what ſo euer weapon he could bring,
                  To ſtrike, to thruſt, to ſhoot, or elſe to fling.
               
               
                  All were in vaine, it could auaile him nought,
                  For neither force, deuice, nor ſubtilly,
                  Nor any other thing what ere he ſought,
                  Could ſaue his life but ſure he were to die:
                  For earthly meanes may him no way defend,
                  Vnleſſe that I mine ayd to him ſhould lend.
               
               
                  Wherefore of thee I haue compaſſion,
                  That wilfully would'ſt caſt thy ſelfe away,
                  And of thy youth with pure affection,
                  I ſhould bewaile the loſſe both night and day:
                  If that thou doſt with folly ſeeke to trie
                  This dangerous act, where nought but death doth lie▪
                  
               
               
                  Thy Princely, rare, and noble progeny,
                  Vnworthy is t'abide ſo cruell end;
                  For certainly it may none other be,
                  If thou effect'ſt the thing thou doſt pretend:
                  Vnleſſe that to my counſell thou wilt liſt,
                  For none therein but I, can thee aſſiſt.
               
               
                  Alas good Iaſon reſt thy ſelfe content,
                  And let thy noble courage yeeld herein,
                  And to my counſell ſee thy heart be bent,
                  Which if thou wilt before thou doeſt begin,
                  I dare be bold to ſweare thou ſhalt preuaile,
                  And of thy hoped victory not faile.
               
               
                  Whereby thou maiſt eternall praiſe obtaine,
                  And in fames booke of Regiſter be plaſt,
                  And ſhalt be ſure the Golden fleece to gaine,
                  (Which thou to win ſo great deſire haſt)
                  In ſpight of Mars, and all that thee withſtand,
                  If that by my aduiſe thou take't in hand.
               
               
                  Wherefore to me I pray thee giue conſent,
                  And that full ſoone, if thou pretend'ſt to ſpeed,
                  And to my counſell ſee thou doſt aſſent,
                  Which can thee helpe with all thou ſtand'ſt in need.
                  Speake valiant Knight if that thou wilt by me,
                  In this thy hard aduenture ruled be.
               
               
                  Prince Iaſon for reply ſaid Lady deare,
                  I can but yeeld you thanks for your good will,
                  And when occaſion ſerues (as ſhall appeare)
                  I will not faile with all my power and skill,
                  (Mine own hearts Queene & Lady Soueraigne)
                  In full effect by action to explaine.
               
               
                  How much the loue you vnto me do ſhow,
                  Shall bind me while that life in me doth reſt,
                  To be your Knight, at your command to go,
                  To ride, and run, and thinke my ſelfe moſt bleſt,
                  To be eſteem'd your true and faithfull man,
                  T'obay your heſt in all that ere I can.
               
               
                  With hearty zeale and true affection,
                  That thus with ſo great kindnes thinkes on me,
                  And of my life haue ſuch compaſſion,
                  As that you ſeeme in heart perplex't to be
                  For my miſhap, which maketh me of right,
                  To bind my ſelfe to be your faithfull Knight
               
               
                  
                  While life doth laſt. And that more ſpecially,
                  Becauſe you take ſuch care me to protect,
                  And to vouchſafe with great benignity,
                  Your counſell and your aid in each reſpect,
                  To him that neuer fauour did afford
                  Vnto your Grace, in action, thought, or word.
               
               
                  And more to bind me vnto you in heart,
                  Your words ſo kind ſo much enflame my ſence,
                  That Cupid with his piercing fiery dart,
                  Hath forſt me yeeld (and dare not make defence)
                  Againſt the ſame, leaſt I ſhould ſeeme ingrate▪
                  
                  To her that hath ſuch care of my eſtate:
               
               
                  Without requeſt or motion on my part,
                  Nor yet in any manner once deſeru'd.
                  Then ſith it doth proceed from out your heart,
                  To take ſuch care that I ſhould be preſeru'd:
                  I vow to you vpon my faith moſt ſure,
                  In ſeruing you as long I will endure
               
               
                  As life doth laſt, and nere therein ſhall faile,
                  Whereto I ſweare and plight with all my troth,
                  That life nor death ſhall any way preuaile
                  To change my heart, for I would be full 
                        ••
                     ath
                  That foule vntruth ſhould enter in my mind,
                  To do you wrong that ſhowes your ſelfe ſo kind.
               
               
                  Few words therefore to vſe I do pretend,
                  And meane my vow and promiſe to renew,
                  That till that Parcas doth my liues thread end,
                  I will remaine moſt conſtant vnto you:
                  Hap good or ill, my reſolution's bent,
                  T'effect and do your will and your intent.
               
               
                  Well then (ſaid ſhe) let wiſedome rule thy mind,
                  And ſo forecaſt with care and diligence,
                  The dangers that are inſident to find,
                  If wilfully thou followeſt thy pretence:
                  And thinke not lightly to orepaſſe the ſame,
                  By fond conceit to win perpetuall fame.
               
               
                  For thus much I dare well affirme for true,
                  That though thou doſt for honur tak't in hand,
                  Nought but diſhonour can thereof enſue,
                  Which thou by no meanes ſhalt nor mayſt withſtand:
                  For who againſt the powers diui
                        •
                     e can fight,
                  Or once reſiſt their all ſufficient might?
               
               
                  And this is ſure, that he which doth deſire
                  The fleece to win by valour and by might,
                  Shall nere attaine to that he doth aſpire,
                  But worke his owne diſhonour, ſhame and ſpight▪
                  
                  For though at firſt fortune doth ſeeme thy 
                        ••
                     iend,
                  Be well aſſur'd ſhee'll croſſe thee in the end.
               
               
                  For who ſo euer ſeeks to take in hand
                  This action ſtrange, can by no meanes eſcape
                  The fiery flames, nor yet the force withſtand
                  Of thoſe two braſen Buls, which when they gape▪
                  
                  Such furious flaſhes out their throats do ſend,
                  That folly t'were againſt them to contend▪
                  
               
               
                  For much more dreadfull is their dangerous fight,
                  (Then lightning which down frō the skies doth fall,
                  Before the thunder-clap on earth doth light,
                  Which often battreth Caſtle, Towne, and wall)
                  For vnto aſhes men they will conſume.
                  Wherefore beware and ſee thou not preſume,
               
               
                  The Ram t'aſſaile, leaſt thou thy labour looſe,
                  But take aduiſe and vſe diſcretion
                  To leaue the ſame, while thou haſt time to chooſe
                  How to preſerue thy honour and renowne.
                  And ſtriue not to aduance thy worthineſſe,
                  By follie, and by too much hardineſſe▪
                  
               
               
                  And caſt thy ſelfe away, where otherwiſe
                  Thou maiſt preſerue thy life from danger great.
                  If thou doſt 
                        •
                     arken now to mine aduiſe▪
                  
                  Whereto I would thee willingly entreat:
                  And therfore think what anſwere thou wilt make,
                  Before thou doſt this danger vndertake.
               
               
                  
                     Medeas ſpeech thus ended as you heare,
                  
                     Iaſon therewith did grow impatient,
                  And ſaid, mine onely loue and Ladie deare,
                  Is this your mind, your will, and your intent,
                  To counſell me to leaue mine enterpriſe,
                  And ſtaine my name and fame with cowardiſe?
               
               
                  A coward might I well be thought and deem'd,
                  That ſhould begin a thing to vndertake,
                  And could nor durſt not bring it to an end▪
                  
                  So men a common jeſt of me might make,
                  And giue report to my confuſion,
                  That I of pride and meere preſumption,
               
               
                  Had boaſted I would do a thing in word,
                  Which when it came t'effect I durſt no
                        •
                      venter.
                  Nay Lady deare I ſweare vpon my ſword,
                  I rather had in perill great to enter,
                  Of life and lim, then cowardly forſake
                  The enterpriſe I meane to vndertake.
               
               
                  Your counſell to this end is meerely vaine▪
                  
                  And ſo good Lady mine I you entreat,
                  To leaue your care herein, for this is plaine,
                  What ere you ſay, no more of me you get,
                  But that I meane my purpoſe to effect,
                  And feare of danger vtterly reiect.
               
               
                  
                  For it I ſhould through faintnes of my heart,
                  Refraine from ſuch an enterpriſe begun,
                  And from your Court and pleaſant jſle depart,
                  Ere for mine honour ſome thing I had done:
                  While life doth laſt reproach would me purſue,
                  And ſhame eternall be mine onely due.
               
               
                  For through the world report ful ſoone would ſpread
                  That Iaſon did this conqueſt vndertake;
                  And that his heart was ſo poſſeſt with dread,
                  That he an end thereof durſt neuer make:
                  But be aſſur'd it neuer ſhall be ſaid,
                  That danger could yong Iaſon make afraid.
               
               
                  And there vpon my faith I you enſure,
                  I will performe the thing I haue begun,
                  As long as life and limbs of mine endure,
                  Although thereby no honour may be woone:
                  And that mine onelie guerdon ſhould be death,
                  Yet had I rather yeeld my vitall breath,
               
               
                  Then be reproacht of cowardiſe and ſhame,
                  For worſe report of man cannot be ſpread,
                  Then that he hath diſhonoured his name,
                  It were much better for him to be dead:
                  For euery man ſhould ſeeke and ſtriue t'aſpire,
                  To honours ſeat with heart and whole deſire.
               
               
                  And though it were with loſſe of life and lim,
                  Before he would procure his owne diſgrace,
                  And breed the meanes for men to laugh at him,
                  And ſo for ſhame be forſt to hide his face:
                  Then be aſſur'd what euer I abide,
                  No danger ſhall me cauſe to ſtart aſide.
               
               
                  Then do I well perceiue your wilfull mind,
                  (Said ſhe to him) and that you ſooner chuſe
                  Your life to preſent danger now to bind,
                  (And my good counſell vtterly refuſe:)
                  Then to your ſelfe you'le reape perpetuall ſhame.
                  And yet it is in earneſt, and no game,
               
               
                  With Monſters ſtrange vnwarilie to deale,
                  And hazard life when as your choyce is free▪
                  
                  And therefore I am mooued for your weale,
                  In heart and mind your follie great to ſee:
                  That leauing all aduiſe, diſcretion,
                  Counſell, and good deliberation,
               
               
                  You rather chooſe hard and cruell end,
                  And wilfullie vnto the ſame will goe,
                  Then yeeld vnto the counſell of your friend,
                  Which ſhewes that youth and courage ouerſlow
                  Within your heart, & keepe your mind in awe,
                  And make you thinke your luſt to be a law.
               
               
                  Which in the end will breed your woe and griefe,
                  If you perſiſt as now you do pretend,
                  For be you well aſſur'd there's no reliefe,
                  From certaine death your bodie to defend:
                  For neither force nor humane wit can ſerue,
                  Your life in this great danger to preſerue.
               
               
                  Wherefore in heart I purpoſelie am bent,
                  To ſeeke your good and find a remedie,
                  Whereby you may this perill great preuent,
                  So loath and grieu'd I am to ſee you die,
                  And rather then your fortune ſhould be ſuch,
                  I will my father (whome I loue ſo much)
               
               
                  And all my friends for euermore diſpleaſe,
                  And vtterlie abandon them each one,
                  So that I may procure your ioy and eaſe,
                  Which certainly by me ſhall ſoone be done.
                  For ſetting care of all things elſe aſide,
                  In this your need I meane to be your guide.
               
               
                  And for your ſake I will my royall ſeat
                  And Princelie Pallace leaue with heart and will:
                  My honour too, which I eſteeme ſo great,
                  Ile ſet aſid▪ your pleaſure to fulfill.
                  All this and more (if you to me be kind)
                  For you lie do, and that you'le bend your mind
               
               
                  To recompence the kindnes I deſerue:
                  And thinke it not a thing of ſmall eſteeme,
                  From cruell death your body to preſerue:
                  (Though you perhaps contrarilie may deeme)
                  But ne're the leſſe I will ſo well ordaine,
                  By Art and skill of mine, betwixt vs twaine,
               
               
                  That fore that we from others ſhall depart,
                  I hope all ſhall be well. If you do reſt
                  Vpon this point, that happen woe or ſmart,
                  To ſatisfie my mind you'le do your beſt.
                  And there vpon my aid to you ile lend,
                  And vndertake you ſhall th'aduenture end.
               
               
                  Good Ladie (ſaid Prince Iaſon) 
                        •
                     eſt content,
                  And be aſſur'd it is mine onelie cane,
                  To ſatisfie your will and whole intent,
                  And nothing to omit, nor yet to ſpare
                  My life nor lims, all perill to endure,
                  Your pleaſure and preferment to procure.
               
               
                  Then friend (ſaid ſhe) refer to me the reſt,
                  But firſt to me by faith you ſhall be bound,
                  And with your heart vnfain c
                        •••
                     e proteſt,
                  That no vntruth in you there ſhall be found▪
                  
                  And ſweare you muſt to take me to your wife,
                  And hold me as your owne for tearme of life.
               
               
                  
                  This is the thing that I of you require,
                  If you will doo't and hold your word with me.
                  Yet onething more I will of you deſire,
                  That when to Greece you ſhall prepared be
                  To make returne, and readie to ſet ſaile,
                  To take me with you hence you will not faile.
               
               
                  And when your father dies, and you ſucceed
                  To raigne as King, ſee that you not forget
                  To ſhew your ſelfe moſt true in word and deed,
                  And let your heart on me be wholie ſet,
                  To maintaine me as my eſtate requires,
                  And ſeeke no change to pleaſe loues fond deſires.
               
               
                  And while you liue haue in rememberance,
                  My courteſie to you in this your need,
                  And think with what great hap it was your chance,
                  To win my heart, when none but you could ſpeed.
                  For be aſſur'd no man that liues hath might,
                  Againſt the Buls and Dragon fierce to fight.
               
               
                  Vnleſſe of me he firſt be taught the way,
                  And meanes whereby the conqueſt to obtaine;
                  The which as now my heart will not denay
                  To tell to you, when we ſhall meet againe.
                  So much I do my ſelfe vnto you bind,
                  For which I aske of you but to be kind.
               
               
                  All this and more (ſaid Iaſon) will I do,
                  And what ſo euer elſe you ſhall deuiſe;
                  And by my faith do bind my ſelfe thereto.
                  So much your face, and ſweet intiſing eies,
                  And beautie rare (ſurpaſſing all that liue)
                  Haue moou'd my heartall honour you to giue.
               
               
                  Your bountie in like ſort doth ſo exceed,
                  In that ſuch care of my eſtate you haue,
                  That while I liue (how euer that I ſpeed)
                  Ile be your faithfull Knight, (elſe do I eraue)
                  The Gods to ſend iuſt vengeance for deſert,
                  If I to you ſhall beare 
                        •
                      fained heart.
               
               
                  Conditionallie, that you to me fulfill
                  The promiſe which it pleaſeth you to make,
                  And as you ſay, ſo vſe your Art and skill,
                  That in the thing which I now vndertake,
                  I may preuaile and win the victorie,
                  My name and fame t'aduance perpetuallie.
               
               
                  For truth to ſay, your beautie is ſo great,
                  Surpaſſing all that euer I did ſee;
                  That well it doth deſerue the ſupreame ſeat,
                  In beauties bower and higheſt dignitie,
                  Excelling beauties all as much and more,
                  As doth the Roſe ſurpaſſe each other flore,
               
               
                  Which in the Summer mongſt the leaues full green,
                  (When as the ſpring hath forced out to flow,
                  The moiſture that had long encloſed been,
                  And caus'd the ſoile that'▪ barren greene to ſhow:
                  And trees & leaus that winters blaſts made bare
                  With buds and bloſſomes new refreſhed are:
               
               
                  And euerie garden's fild with flowers ſtore,
                  Of ſundrie kinds moſt pleaſant to the eie;
                  And makes the buds Dame Flora to adore,
                  With ioyfull and melodious harwonie:
                  And that the heaueulie dew doth moiſt each place,
                  And to his ſundrie colour yeeld his grace.)
               
               
                  Doth ſhew to be the fairſt of euerie one.
                  So nature hath you made with good aduiſe,
                  As ſhe that ſhould deſerue the ſame alone
                  Of beautie, and thereof to beare the priſe,
                  Aboue all earthlie and each mortall thing,
                  And of all bountie great to be the ſpring.
               
               
                  As you ſurpaſſe without compariſon,
                  All others what ſo ere on earth do liue,
                  For wiſedome, kindneſſe, and diſcretion,
                  The praiſe whereof I cannot chooſe but giue
                  Vnto your grace, as ſhe that vnto me,
                  So courteous and ſo kind I find to be.
               
               
                  For if in this extreame you had me left,
                  I were for euer vtterlie vndone▪
                  
                  And of all aid and ſuccour cleane bereft.
                  But your exceeding bountie hath ſo wonne
                  And ouercome my heart, that while I liue,
                  To pleaſure you, my life for you ile giue.
               
               
                  Sith that to aid me now when I haue need,
                  You ſpare not your good will to me t'extend,
                  In liew whereof if I ſhould ſhew the deed,
                  Of an vngratefull or vnthankfull friend,
                  I might of right be counted obſtinate,
                  And held a foole, ſo to with ſtand my fa
                        •
                     e▪
                  
               
               
                  For he that in extremitie ſhould lie▪
                  
                  And knew how to relieue or eaſe his want,
                  And would refuſe a Ladies curteſie▪
                  
                  I thinke of wit he ſhould be very ſcant,
                  And in the ſhip of fooles deſerues to b
                        ••
                     
                  
                  Preferred and extold to higheſt degree▪
                  
               
               
                  And therefore now I whollie do reſigne,
                  Heart, body, life and lim, into your hand,
                  And till that death ſhall vitall thread vn
                        ••
                     ne,
                  I will you not in any thing withſtand.
                  And hereby oath I bind my ſelfe to be,
                  Your faithfull friend as you haue promiſt me.
               
               
                  
                  And henceforth will not faile in ought t'obay,
                  What ere ſhall be your pleaſure and your will,
                  At any time as well by night as day,
                  Till death ſhall with his dart my bodie kill:
                  Let this ſuffice to ſatisfie your mind,
                  That vnto you ile neuer prooue vnkind.
               
               
                  
                     Medea hearing him proteſt and ſweare,
                  So earneſtly to be her faithfull Knight,
                  And that to her ſuch loue he ſwore to beare,
                  She was in heart ſurprizd with ſuch delight,
                  That for reply ere ſhe from thence did go,
                  The ſecrets of her heart ſhe did him ſho.
               
               
                  And ſaid, braue Prince, then will I ſoone ordaine
                  A way whereby we may together meet,
                  When we will with good leiſure twixt vs twaine,
                  Take order in this caſe, and louely greet
                  Each other, and by holy Sacrament
                  Confirme our vowes with heart and true intent.
               
               
                  For that as now the time will not permit,
                  Nor yet affoord vs place of ſecreſie,
                  But when night comes, when euening gins to ſhit,
                  In ſecret wiſe I will you certifie;
                  The time when as you ſhall your ſelfe conuay,
                  And come into my chamber by ſome way
               
               
                  In priuateneſſe. Where to our great delight,
                  We may each other louingly embrace,
                  Which ſhall be when as gliſtring Phoebus bright,
                  Doth Weſtward wend, & yeeld dark night his place,
                  With thicke and gloomie clouds to ouer-ſhade.
                  Our Hemiſphere, and cauſe the light to vade.
               
               
                  Which time (by fauour great which fortune ſends
                  To louers arue) affoords conueniency
                  T'effect their wills, and likewiſe to them lends
                  Occaſion how to ſpeake in ſecreſie.
                  Then as I ſay, my deare and louing frend,
                  To ſend for you I purpoſely intend,
               
               
                  To come to me, when as without all doubt,
                  In louing wiſe out minds we will vnfold,
                  And there determine how to bring about,
                  The thing whereof in part I haue you told.
                  And when we haue accompliſhed our will,
                  And of our pleaſures had the ſcope and fill,
               
               
                  I will deuiſe how we may meet againe
                  In ſecret ſort, when ſo it ſhall vs pleaſe,
                  (Who ere ſaith nay) and quietly obtaine
                  Our hearts delights, our comfort and our eaſe,
                  Which ſhall be when that Dame Lucine bright,
                  Doth walke abroad in darkeſt time of night.
               
               
                  For mighty Ioue who ſecrets all doth ſee,
                  Full well doth know my heart and my intent,
                  And how to you I will for euer be,
                  A faithfull friend, ſo much my mind is bent
                  To loue and honour you withall my hart,
                  If you will do the like for your owne part.
               
               
                  Wherewith Prince Iaſon lowlie did encline,
                  And ſaid to her, Dame ſet your heart at reſt,
                  And be aſſur'd I will my ſelfe combine
                  To you while life doth laſt. For I deteſt
                  To be accounted falſe in thought or deed
                  Vnto your Grace, how euer that I ſpeed.
               
               
                  And though with painted words I cannot gloſe,
                  Nor yet with phraſes fine perſwade your mind,
                  I would not haue you thinke nor yet ſuppoſe,
                  In this my vow you ſhall me faithleſſe find:
                  But while that breath doth in my corps remaine,
                  I will true loue within my heart retaine.
               
               
                  And to confirme my deed with heart and mind,
                  Lo here my hand and faith to bind the ſame,
                  Aſſuring you of certainty to find,
                  My ioue and zeale ſhall neuer merit blame:
                  And therewithall an end of ſpeech to make,
                  Each for that time of th'other leaue did take.
               
               
                  
                     Medea ſtraight roſe vp out of her place,
                  Firſt hauing taken leaue in ſtately wiſe,
                  And with a braue and paſſing Princely grace,
                  With-drew her ſelfe as was her woonted guiſe,
                  Into her priuate chamber, where at will,
                  She might her mind with contemplation fill
               
               
                  Of her new loue, and find meanes how to frame
                  The thing which ſhee had purpoſed in heart,
                  Without diſgrace or blot vnto her name:
                  Yet would ſhe not to any one impart
                  The leaſt conceit that reſted in her mind.
                  Deuiſing how conveniently to find
               
               
                  The meanes to ſend vnto her deareſt louer,
                  In ſecret wiſe, when night began t'appeare:
                  But loath ſhe was her purpoſe to diſcouer,
                  Vnto her maids, ſo much ſhe ſtood in feare
                  To be diſgrac't, if they ſhould it bewray.
                  Thus (as ſhe thought) ſhe paſt the long ſome day,
               
               
                  Still muſing how to bring the ſame about,
                  And alwaies caſtng in her doubtfull head,
                  What lets to ſtay or ſtop it might fall out.
                  And ſo with flying fanſies toſt and led,
                  She reſted ſore perplext in griefe and woe,
                  Still walking in her chamber too and fro.
               
               
                  
                  The mid-day gone and ſlide away full faſt,
                  And Titan hauing fully run his race
                  From Eaſt to Weſt, the Horiſon had paſt
                  So farre, that no man could perceiue his face,
                  Nor yet behold his gliſtring beames ſo bright,
                  As being cleane deſcended out of ſight.
               
               
                  And Hiren with her mantle all of ſhade,
                  At th'euening ſhewd her darke & cloudy cheare,
                  In twy-light when the day began to vade,
                  And Hesperus with gliſtring ſtreames t'appeare;
                  Amongſt the twinckling ſtarres about midnight,
                  Which to behold did breed no ſmall delight.
               
               
                  
                     Medea who perplexed all alone,
                  Sat counting euery hower of the night,
                  And ſecretly vnto her ſelfe did mone,
                  That ſhe ſo long was abſent from her Knight;
                  At laſt did find a meanes for to content
                  Her troubled head. And with a full intent,
               
               
                  Determined the ſame to bring about:
                  Although ſhe kept it ſecret in her heart,
                  Which trembled like a leafe for feare & doubt,
                  Till hope ſtept forth, and as it is her part
                  Did comfort her and make her blith & glad,
                  But cheriſht by feare ſhe gan againe be ſad.
               
               
                  Leaſt her deuiſe which then ſhe tooke in hand,
                  Might chance be croſt, & ſhe to ſhame be brought.
                  And thus twixt hope and feare ſhe ſeem'd to ſtand,
                  Not knowing how t'effect the thing ſhe ſought:
                  But her affection, loue, and great deſire,
                  Had ſet her heart and mind on ſuch a fire
               
               
                  Of luſt, to ſee and meet her louely Knight.
                  That hope did put her in ſome good conceit,
                  At laſt t'attaine her pleaſure and delight,
                  But baſhfulnes her mind had ſo beſet,
                  That ſtill ſhe fear'd diſcouered to be,
                  And knew not how the ſame to remedy.
               
               
                  If fortune and the darkſome cloudy night,
                  Had not procur'd her eaſe and chear'd her heart,
                  By filling it with ioy and great delight,
                  Wherewith ſweet hope ſtept in & playd a part,
                  To pricke her forth, and caus'd her to deuiſe,
                  And calculate when that the Moone would riſe,
               
               
                  And with her hornes that are of colour pale,
                  Appeare in skies at dead time of the night,
                  To ſhew her face vpon both hill and dale,
                  Whereof ſhe found the courſe to fall out right,
                  A quarter of an hower after prime,
                  Which ſhe perccaued well would fit the time.
               
               
                  And as ſhe was full well beſeen in Art,
                  She knew the body of the Moone to bee
                  Deckt over with new light in one forth part,
                  And paſſed had by order and degree,
                  After the time of her conivnction,
                  One or two ſignes by Computation:
               
               
                  And ſo the daies full ſeuen of her age.
                  Which time ſhe being pierſt with Cupids dart,
                  And in her loue did burne with cruell rage:
                  She gan to pr
                        •
                     e and liſten in each part,
                  And to each dore and window had an eye,
                  If any one as then ſhe could eſpy,
               
               
                  Within the Court that was not gone to bed,
                  Or any man to walke about the ſame.
                  So much her mind poſſeſſed was with dread,
                  To blemiſh or in ought t'impaire her fame.
                  The leaſt and ſmaleſt ſtirring did procure,
                  Her panting heart a thouſand woes t'endure.
               
               
                  For when ſhe heard a whiſpering any where,
                  It was as ill as venome to her heart:
                  Such was her great impatience to beare
                  The leaſt obiect that might her purpoſe thwart,
                  She wiſhed all had ſlept full faſt in bed.
                  This wofull life the longſome night ſhe led,
               
               
                  And yet not any one the ſame might know,
                  So ſecretly ſhe kept it in her mind,
                  Till full midnight when Cockes began to crow,
                  (Which orderly they doe obſerue by kind.)
                  At which time when as all was huſht and ſtill,
                  To bring to paſſe her purpoſe and her will,
               
               
                  An old decrepit woman out ſhe ſought,
                  (Who in ſuch caſe experience wanted none)
                  To whom in breefe ſhe doth declare her thought,
                  And ſaid ſhe did depend on her alone,
                  To bring the thing ſhe purpoſed about,
                  (For skill & age makes thē forecaſt each doubt.
               
               
                  Their yeares to them ſo much experience ſhow,
                  And in their mind ſuch ſubtilty infuſe,
                  That they of loue the ſlights and wiles do know,
                  And counterminds againſt them all can vſe)
                  To her Medea ſhewd her whole deſire,
                  From point to point, and doth his helpe require,
               
               
                  To take the charge on her to eaſe her ſmart.
                  Which at that time ſhe ſaid encreaſed ſo,
                  And to reioyce her faint and troubled heart,
                  With preſent ſpeed ſhe willed her to go
                  To Iaſons chamber where as then he lay,
                  And him to her in ſecret wiſe conuay.
               
               
                  
                  Which ſhe forthwith (as ready to fulfill)
                  Her charge receau'd, did preſently effect,
                  And as it was hir Ladies heſt and will,
                  (No point of hir commiſſion to neglect,)
                  With ſoft and eaſie pace ſhe went her way,
                  And brought him vnto her without delay.
               
               
                  When as the Cocke th' Aſtrologer of night,
                  With chearefull voice at twelue began to crow,
                  And gainſt his breſt his wings to beat and ſmite,
                  The time and ſeaſon of the night to ſhow.
                  To war
                        •
                     e thoſe that in their beds do reſt,
                  To riſe betimes, and too much ſleepe deteſt.
               
               
                  
                     Medea to attend vpon her Knight,
                  Stood ready to receiue him at the dore,
                  (As ſhee that onely plaſt her hearts delight,
                  Her ſaint in her moſt ſecret ſhrine t'adore)
                  Full little luſt ſhe had as then to ſleepe,
                  Her care was onely watch for him to keepe.
               
               
                  Prince Iaſon to her chamber being brought,
                  Not once perceiud nor ſeene of any wight.
                  
                     Medea hauing got the thing ſhe ſought,
                  In heart was ſo poſſeſt with great delight,
                  That ſecretly ſhe led him on the way,
                  Into her Cloſe
                        •
                     , where ſhe made him ſtay.
               
               
                  The woman ſeeing them ſo cloſely plaſt,
                  Of three made two (as ſhe that knew the game,)
                  And out the chamber went in all the haſt,
                  Well knowing that hir Lady would the ſame,
                  And for to gaze and ſtare vppon the moone,
                  Walkt in the court, and left them there alone.
               
               
                  Wherewith Medea ſhut the chamber faſt,
                  And to her Iaſon preſently did call.
                  (But as mine Author ſaith ſhe firſt had plaſt
                  Wax candles burning cleare on euery wall.
                  Which made the place as bright as if the ſunne,
                  Had ſhon therein at twelue a clocke at noone.)
               
               
                  Then to her cheſt ſhe did with ſpeed repaire,
                  Which framed was of Chriſtall pure and cleare,
                  Out of the which ſhe tooke an Image faire,
                  Of fine and beaten gold as did appeare.
                  Which hallowed was, and conſecrate withall
                  To mighty Ioue, whom they their God did call.
               
               
                  Which Image vnto Iaſon ſhe did beare,
                  Deſiring him in ſolemne wiſe to take
                  His oath vpon the ſame, and there to ſweare
                  What ere befell he would hir not forſake,
                  But take and keepe her for his wedded wife,
                  From that time forth continuing all her life,
               
               
                  With ſtedfaſt heart and faith inviolate,
                  And that ſhe ſhould maintaind and cheriſht bee
                  According to her honour and eſtate.
                  (For till that time the ſtory ſaith that ſhee
                  Had liv'd a Virgin vndefiled and chaſte,
                  In deed, & thought, though then ſhe wholly caſt
               
               
                  Her loue and whole affection on that Knight.)
                  
                     Iaſon vpon the Image hand did lay,
                  And ſwore to her by Ioue the God of might,
                  He would her will in every thing obay,
                  And truely keepe his word and promiſe paſt
                  Perpetually while life of his did laſt.
               
               
                  (And yet he did his faith ſoone falſify,
                  For all the proteſtations he had made,
                  Were vaild and hid with fraud and flattery.
                  And proved cleane contrary as he ſayd.
                  And ſo her loue, her true intent and mind,
                  In th'end were croſt by him that prou'd vnkind.
               
               
                  For though that conſtant loue he did pretend,
                  And ſwore thereto, yet ſecretly in hart
                  He ment nought leſſe as well it prou'd in th'end,
                  And fainedly did play a double part,
                  With her that ſimply ſhipwracke ſeem'd to make
                  Of all her weale, and onely for his ſake.
               
               
                  Could ſhe haue don more for a man then ſo?
                  To looſe hir Crowne and royall dignitie,
                  Hir Countrey, friends, and kindred to forgo,
                  Reiecting wealth and all felicitie,
                  Hir honor, and hir Princely name and fame,
                  Onely to ſhield thee from diſgrace and ſhame.
               
               
                  She that was borne and came of parentage,
                  So Royall, and ſo Princely by degree,
                  And ſhould ſncceed in all the heritage,
                  That Oeta had by regall dignitie.
                  At once did all thoſe honors cleane forſake,
                  And vnto thee hir ſelfe did onely take.
               
               
                  Vpon meer hope thou wouldſt her kindnes ſhow,
                  She did abandon all the joyes ſhe had,
                  And choſe to liue in exile, and forgoe
                  With thee, hir natiue Countrey, and was glad
                  With all that loſſe thy loue ſo to obtaine.
                  Which ſhe eſteem'd aboue all earthly gaine.
               
               
                  It grieveth me thou provedſt ſo vnkind,
                  Did ſhe not ſaue and keepe thee from diſtreſſe,
                  Which thou by cruell death waſt ſure to find:
                  Had ſhe not been thy guide: thou muſt confeſſe
                  That of thy conqueſt ſhe was chiefe effect,
                  And couldſt thou her ſo ſhameleſly reiect?
               
               
                  
                  Her bounty was in each ſort ſo declard,
                  And manifeſtly tryed in the end,
                  That truth to ſay, for thee ſhe nothing ſpard,
                  Thy life from death, and danger to defend.
                  Which ſimply in few words now to explaine,
                  For me to take in hand it were in vaine.
               
               
                  For by her meanes the fleece of gold was won
                  And conquered by thee, which out of doubt,
                  Impoſſible had been for thee t'haue don,
                  If by her Art ſhe had't not brought about.
                  For when thou knewſt not how to effect thy will,
                  She did thee teach thoſe Monſters ſtrange to kill.
               
               
                  And furthermore thou canſt it not deny,
                  That to redeeme thee from all penſiueneſſe,
                  All earthly honors ſhee did cleane defie,
                  And left her father mourning in diſtreſſe,
                  For loſſe of his great treaſure, and his Child,
                  Whereof by thee he onely was beguild.
               
               
                  Let women all by her example learne,
                  Not to beleeue nor credite men too ſoone,
                  But wiſely ſeeke to find out and diſcerne
                  What minds they beare, and be not quickly woon,
                  Leaſt that they fall into the like diſtreſſe
                  That faire Medea did, by careleſneſſe.
               
               
                  She that accounted was to be ſo wiſe,
                  And deepely learned in Aſtronomy,
                  Could ſhe not by her skill and Art ſurmiſe,
                  Nor yet foreſee her fatall deſteny?
                  Loue againſt Art in her did ſo prevaile,
                  That all her skill could her no whit availe.
               
               
                  She was too ſlow by calculation,
                  The figure of her breath and wofull fate
                  To caſt, and know the conſtellation.
                  For want of care ſhee found it all too late.
                  Her Art it was falſe and deceiueable,
                  And in playne words wholy incredible.
               
               
                  For if thereby ſhe could before haue knowne,
                  What fortune hard ſhould vnto her befall,
                  She would not ſo her ſelfe haue overthrowne,
                  Nor haue indured ſuch miſerie and thrall,
                  As by the ſtory men may plainely ſee,
                  Fell vnto her by this extremitee.
               
               
                  But firſt you ſhall behold and plainely ſee
                  How that ſhe did proceed to effect her will.
                  For Iaſon having ſworne fidelitie,
                  She gaue him leaue his pleaſure to fulfill.
                  And that ſame night (as well you may ſuppoſe)
                  Her Maiden-head ſhe willingly did loſe.
               
               
                  (Great pitie twas that ſhe was ſo deceau'd,
                  And yet ſhe ment nought els but ſ
                        •
                     oneſtie,
                  For ſure ſhe thought and nothing els perceau'd,
                  But that his heart was ſet on loyaltie.
                  And that he would ſtill hold her for his wife,
                  And keepe her ſo as long as he had life.
               
               
                  But thereof will I not as now diſpute,
                  Yet one thing dare I ſweare and will maintaine
                  Gainſt any one, that will the ſame confute,
                  Though that they then agreed like, lovers twaine.
                  Their minds were different and contrary cleane,
                  For though that ſhe plain truth & loue did meane,
               
               
                  In honeſt ſort intending that was juſt:
                  (As jnnocent and harmeleſſe Virgins doe.)
                  He to performe his fowle and fleſhly loſt
                  With faire and flattering ſpeeches did her woe.
                  Yet with pretence contrary to hir mind.
                  But pittie t'was ſhe prou'd to him ſo kind.
               
               
                  As ſo to truſt vnto his curteſie,
                  Headlong to runne in danger, woe, and ſmart,
                  And be bereau'd of her Virginitie.
                  But women are ſo pitifull in heart,
                  That fore a man himſelfe for lo
                        •
                     e ſhould kill,
                  They will not ſpare to grant him all his will,
               
               
                  And rather ſaue his life then he ſhould die.
                  
                     Medea ſo not thinking what might fall,
                  What ere he did, ſhe would him not deny;
                  But his deſire, his luſt, and pleaſures all
                  Obaid with all her power, will, and might,
                  Wherein ſhe tooke ſuch pleaſure and delight.
               
               
                  That fore ſhe wiſt, the night was overpaſt,
                  And beautifull Aurora gan t'appeare.
                  At which time Iaſon holding her full faſt
                  Within his armes, ſaid Loue and Lady deare,
                  Its now high time for me to haſt away,
                  And get me hence for ſoone it will be day.
               
               
                  See you not how the light begins to ſpring,
                  And day appeares with faire and crimſon face,
                  Liſten and heare how Birds begin to ſing,
                  And bids vs part for
                        ••
                     are of ſome diſgrace.
                  But fore I go, let me in hearty wi
                        •
                     e
                  Of you require your counſell and adviſe,
               
               
                  What I ſhall doe mine enterpriſe t'achiue,
                  And bring to paſſe the thing I ſo deſire?
                  Speake Lady deare doe thou my heart 
                        •
                     eviue,
                  And for thy ſake jle venter through the fire.
                  That don. I meane with preſent ſpeed to make
                  Returne to Greece, and thee with me to take.
               
               
                  
                  Where thou ſhalt liue in princely dignitie,
                  And thereof be thou not in any doubt.
                  Thither I ſay ſhalt thou conducted be,
                  After I haue my conqueſt brought about.
                  Tellthen with ſpeed this worke, how that I may
                  Bring to effect before that it be day.
               
               
                  To whom ſhe ſpake and ſaid as you ſhall heare,
                  
                     Iaſon my loue and only hearts delight,
                  Perſwade thy ſelfe thou art to me more deare
                  Then tongue can ſpeake, or pen deviſe to write,
                  And therefore will I bend both wit and skill,
                  To teach thee how thou ſhalt obtaine thy will.
               
               
                  And bring to paſſe the conqueſt of the Ram,
                  
                  By ſhewing thee the dangers of the Iſle,
                  And how t'avoid the perill of the ſame,
                  Therefore abide and ſtay a little while,
                  And find thou ſhalt my words and deeds t'agree
                  In all and euery thing I vowe to thee.
               
               
                  And therewithall out of her bed ſhe roſe,
                  And in a coſtly coffer went to looke,
                  Where as ſhe vſd her treaſure to incloſe,
                  From whence a ſilver Image forth ſhe tooke,
                  (Which ſhe did bring vnto him in her hand,)
                  That vertue had, and power to withſtand
               
               
                  All Magicke Art, and cunning Sorcerie,
                  And to vndo jnchantments ſtrange and rare,
                  Which was deviſed by Aſtronomy.
                  At ſuch an howre (as thoſe that skilfull are,
                  In ſtarres and planets) know full well to chuſe,
                  (Such Images the ancient Clarks did vſe,
               
               
                  When as they ſought by magicke Art to bring,
                  The ſtrange effect
                        •
                     s of Incantations
                  Vnto an end. As Ptolomy the King
                  Of Egyt land, and other nations
                  We read haue done, and by their learned skill,
                  Effected many wonders at their will.
               
               
                  This Image ſhe did Iaſon will to beare
                  In ſecret wiſe about him, till that hee
                  His enterpriſe had don, and nothing feare,
                  But his deſire ſhould well effected bee.
                  According to th'inſtructions he ſhould haue,
                  Next oyntment pure to him likewiſe ſhe gaue
               
               
                  To keepe him from the force of fier and flame,
                  The which the Buls out of their mouths wold throw
                  (More ſweet then balme) & wild him with the ſame
                  His body to annoint from top to toe.
                  And ſo he need not feare the flames ſo great,
                  Would, ſhould, or could by any wayes him let.
               
               
                  A Ring of gold then vnto him ſhe gaue,
                  Wherein a ſtone of value great was ſet,
                  That vertue had him to preſerue and ſaue
                  From venome, and the force thereof to let.
                  That vgly Serpents breath might not annoy
                  His valiant heart, nor yet the ſame deſtroy.
               
               
                  (Within this ſtone an other vertue rare,
                  And ſtrange was found encloſ▪d therein to lie,
                  For who ſo ere the ſame about him bare,
                  And in his hand did hold it ſecretly,
                  From all mens ſight inviſible ſhould goe,
                  And no man could him ſee, perceiue, nor know
               
               
                  Thoſe ſtones as ancient Authors do declare,
                  Are onely found in Cicile Iſ
                        •
                     e to be:
                  And Uirgill writes that Uenus hauing care
                  To ſaue her Son Aeneas, when as he
                  By Sea vnto the Iſle of Carthage went,
                  One of thoſe precious ſtones vnto him ſent,
               
               
                  And then againe to Iaſon ſhe betooke,
                  A writing that to him ſhould much availe,
                  Which foulded was in manner of a booke.
                  And willed him to ſee he did not faile,
                  If he deſired happely to ſpeed,
                  With great devotion all the ſame to read
               
               
                  Ere he the Ram did touch, in any wiſe,
                  With further charge he ſhould not vndertake,
                  Nor venter to effect his enterpriſe,
                  Before he did his Supplication make,
                  And on his knees with humble heart and will,
                  Beſeech the Gods his prayer to fulfill
               
               
                  (Therein containd.) And lowly of them craue
                  To pittie his eſtate, and from diſtreſſe
                  And danger great his body then to ſaue,
                  And further loue vnto him to expreſle,
                  And for his beſt and ſureſt remedy,
                  To ſaue and keepe him in extreamity.
               
               
                  A Viall full of liquor forth ſhe brought,
                  The whith all feare of danger ſet aſide,
                  She willed him when with the Bulles he fought,
                  As oft as with their jawes they gaped wide,
                  He ſhould it caſt into their mouthes with ſpeed,
                  That done, to ſtand in feare he ſhould not need
               
               
                  That they could hurt or harme him any way,
                  For that their jawes together faſt would cleaue,
                  So as of force they muſt to him obay,
                  Then might he them of power cleane bereaue,
                  And do with them what ever that him liſt,
                  For by that meanes they could him not reſiſt.
               
               
                  
                  This ſaid when ſhe had ſhew'd all her intent,
                  In every thing how that he ſhould proceed
                  To ſcape the dangers that were incident,
                  It in th'effect he would but take good heed,
                  They did agree and hold it for the beſt,
                  To part as then ere men out of their reſt
               
               
                  Awaked were, (for then it waxed day,)
                  And beautifull Aurora gan t'ariſe.
                  And ſhew her pleaſant face in morning gray)
                  And that no man ſhould any thing ſurmiſe,
                  Or of them haue the leaſt ſuſpiſion,
                  In twilight ere the Sun on earth had ſhon,
               
               
                  They tooke their leaues & parted each from other,
                  (With kiſſes ſweet as lovers vſe to doe
                  When as in ſecret wiſe they meet together.)
                  And he out of the chamber ſtraight did goe,
                  And left her ſtill in bed, whereas ſhe lay,
                  In hope to find her there an other day.
               
               
                  And being gon from her without delay,
                  No longer time to ſpend nor to neglect,
                  Withall the ſpeed he could he went that day
                  Vnto the King, his conqueſt to effect,
                  And bring the thing to paſſe for which he came,
                  And in this ſort he did effect the ſame.
               
               
                  When as the clowds with crimſon coloure red,
                  At ryſing of the Sun began t'appeare,
                  And early in the Eaſt themſelues did ſpread.
                  And when the Larke with glad and joyfull cheare,
                  And pleaſant notes ſalutes in morning gray
                  
                     Anrora faire, all th'opening of the day:
               
               
                  (Which orderly fore riſing of the ſunne,
                  Is wont t'enchaſe the clowdy darkſome night)
                  When faire Diana bright her courſe had runne.
                  And Titan with the comfort of his light,
                  And brightnes of his beames ore covered had,
                  Each verdant hill and valey, and had made
               
               
                  The fragrant flowers with comfortable ſhow,
                  To ſpread their leaues and lift their heads on hie.
                  
                     Iaſon with all his company did goe
                  Vnto the King, (who in great maieſtie)
                  As then in councell ſat accompanied
                  With many Lords, and Knights on cuery ſide.
               
               
                  And when that he into his preſence came,
                  with courage bold his Maieſtie he praid
                  To graunt to him the conqueſt of the Ram,
                  As he before had promiſed: and ſaid,
                  Sith that his comming thither purpoſely
                  Was that he might that ſtrange adventure trie.
               
               
                  He would as then his vow performe, and all
                  That there vnto belongd without delay
                  By him ſhould be fulfild, what ere ſhould fall,
                  Yea though it were his ruine and decay.
                  Proteſting that death neare ſhould dant his hart,
                  Nor moue him once to play a cowards part.
               
               
                  Nor any way to doe his honor wrong.
                  And therefore prayd the King in humble wiſe,
                  The time therein no longer to prolong,
                  To grant to him that valiant enterpriſe,
                  That in the ſame he might his fortune trie,
                  To win it, or couragiouſly to die.
               
               
                  When Iaſon thus had ſpoken to the King,
                  And he the while attentiuely gaue eare,
                  And did in mind confider every rhing,
                  And all the words and arguments that were
                  Aledg'd by him. And ſaw no feare could daunt
                  His hautie heart, he was content to graunt
               
               
                  To his requeſt, though much againſt his will▪
                  
                  And ſayd, ſith that he ſaw he neads would ſtand
                  Vnto his vow, he would his mind fulfill,
                  And preſently without delay command
                  That his deſire ſhould ſtraight performed bee.
                  And yet he ſayd, I am abaſht to ſee
               
               
                  That thou w
                        •
                     th ſo great wilfulneſſe wilt run
                  Vnto thy death, and be the onely cauſe
                  Of thy decay, when as thou maiſt it ſhun,
                  (The which thou oughſt to doe by natures lawes)
                  For men will put the blame in me and ſay,
                  That I by Princely power and force might ſtay
               
               
                  Thy courſe, and ſo by wrong opinion,
                  And populer report would lay on mee
                  The onely cauſe of thy deſtruction,
                  Which God forbid ſhould ever hap to thee.
                  My counſell therefore is thou ſhouldſt aduiſe
                  Thy ſelfe heerein, and doe it not diſpiſe.
               
               
                  For better tis thine honor to retaine,
                  And ſafely and ſecurely to retire
                  Therewith into thy natiue ſoyle againe,
                  Then with vaine hope and over fond deſire,
                  So wilfully to ſeeke to take in hand,
                  An enterpriſe which no man can withſtand▪
                  
               
               
                  This is my doome, my counſell, and adviſe,
                  Be ruld thereby, and ſhun thy cruell fate,
                  Refuſe it not I ſay if thou beeſt wiſe,
                  Leaſt thou repent when as it is too late.
                  But if thou doſt perſiſt and wilt not bend
                  Thine eares to mine adviſe. The God
                        •
                      defend,
               
               
                  
                  And ſaue and keepe thy life what ere befall,
                  And vnto them Ile pray with great deſire,
                  To be thy guide and ſhield from dangers all,
                  That thou maiſt from that enterprize retire,
                  In ſafety vnto thy land againe,
                  Without whoſe aid be ſure thou ſhalt be ſlaine.
               
               
                  And ſo (though grieud) to ſee, I cannot ſtay
                  Thy youthfull fond deſires from th'enterprize,
                  Ile hold my tongue for more I cannot ſay,
                  But wiſh thou hadſt been ruld by mine adviſe,
                  And to the Gods thy enterprize commend,
                  Beſeeching them good fortune to thee ſend.
               
               
                  When as the King to Iaſon had thus ſaid,
                  And by no manner reaſons he did vſe,
                  Could draw him from his courſe, not once diſmaid,
                  He did his counſell vtterly refuſe.
                  And humbly kneeling downe vpon his knee,
                  With Knightly grace did thanke his maieſtie,
               
               
                  That he vouchſaft to haue ſuch ſpeciall care
                  Of him, and ſo to pitie his eſtate,
                  And therewithall ſuch favor to him bare,
                  That fearing he ſhould proue vnfortunate,
                  And end his daies in that ſtrange enterprize,
                  To keepe him from't had giuen him that adviſe.
               
               
                  But yet (ſaid he) your grace ſhall vnderſtand,
                  For th'enterprſe which I now vndertake,
                  And mind by force of armes and valiant hand
                  T'effect the ſame, I will it not forſake▪
                  
                  For no mans counſell nor perſwaſion,
                  Shall turne me from my reſolution.
               
               
                  But as the law and ſtatute hath decreed,
                  Which in this caſe is made to be obſerud,
                  I will therein couragiouſly proceed,
                  If that my life from danger be preſerud:
                  But whatſoere befalls Ile take th'adventer,
                  And firſt (ſaid he) before that I do enter
               
               
                  Into the ſame, herein this Princely place,
                  And preſence of his noble audience,
                  I do proteſt vnto your royall grace
                  That no man can againſt you take offence,
                  If that I die in this mine enterprize,
                  Becauſe I do refuſe your good adviſe.
               
               
                  And of my ſelfe doe onely tak't in hand,
                  Reiecting any counſell whatſoere,
                  And therefore doe proteſt thereto to ſtand,
                  And without dread or any manner feare,
                  Vnto the Gods my ſelfe I doe commit,
                  (Hap life or death) and what they ſhall thinke fit
               
               
                  T'ordaine for me, I will accept the ſame
                  And take it in good part what ere it be,
                  And neither them nor you therefore will blame,
                  But willingly will beare th'extremitie,
                  And thereof I my full account do make,
                  And ſo as now (ſayd he) my leaue I take,
               
               
                  Firſt of your grace, as dutie doth me bind,
                  And then of all this noble audience,
                  And ſo with louing countenance and kind,
                  Farewell vnto them all, he went from thence,
                  And downe vnto the water ſide did go,
                  T'effect his charge as I to you well ſho.
               
               
                  When Titan with the fervor of his heate,
                  And brightnes of his beanes had driuen away,
                  The Roſeat deaw that flowers and hearbs did weat,
                  About the howre of nine a clocke that day.
                  
                     Iaſon put on a coſtly armour bright,
                  And joyfully like to a valiant Knight,
               
               
                  Vnto the water ſide did take his way,
                  And there alone into a boate did go,
                  Which purpoſely prepard for him there lay,
                  And with the ſame vnto the I ſle did row,
                  Whereas the Bulls the golden Ram did keepe,
                  And preſently vpon the ſhoare did leape.
               
               
                  And making faſt the boat vnto the ſtrand,
                  Withall the ſpeed he could the next path-way
                  That he did find, marcht vp into the land,
                  Till wearied for a while and for to ſtay:
                  Downe on the graſſe he ſate, and there he thought
                  Vpon the courſe Medea had him taught,
               
               
                  To hold, when he ſhould enter into fight
                  Againſt the braſen Bulls and Dragon fell,
                  And when like to a wiſe and valiant Knight,
                  He had a while thereon conſidered well,
                  He roſe againe and went ſo long till hee
                  Came to the place where he the Bulls might ſee.
               
               
                  But there I muſt digreſſe and to you tell,
                  That when he firſt the enterprize began,
                  
                     Medea grieu'd, into ſuch paſſion fell,
                  That her faire face became both pale and wan,
                  And with a grieued countenance and ſad,
                  She ſat and wept and ſuch great ſorrow made,
               
               
                  That all her face and clothes bedewed were
                  With teares, that from her chriſtall eies did fall,
                  Which onely did proceed of griefe and feare
                  By her conceiu'd, when ſhe to mind did call,
                  What danger he might caſt himſelfe into,
                  If careleſly he ſhould forget to do
               
               
                  
                  As ſhe had ſayd, and taught him ere he went,
                  And for that cauſe ſhe was ſo grieud in mind,
                  That nothing could her pleaſe nor giue content
                  Vnto her heart, the which no reſt could find,
                  For ſobbing, and for ſighthing till in th'end,
                  Into a Terret hie ſhe did aſſend.
               
               
                  On top whereof there ſtood a pinacle,
                  From whence (the aue being cleare and faire,) ſhe might
                  Without all let or any obſtacle
                  Behold and ſee her deare and loving Knight:
                  And there with teares whichout her eies then ran,
                  To ſpeake vnto her ſelfe ſhe thus began.
               
               
                  My deareſt friend ſweet Iaſon thou that art
                  To me ſo great a comfort and delight,
                  And th'onely joy and pleaſure of my hart,
                  If that it were within thy power and might,
                  To know what griefe for thee as now I feele,
                  Thou wouldſt to me continue true as ſteele.
               
               
                  Meanewhile withall my heart I wiſh and pray
                  The gods to make thy enterpriſe to thee,
                  So fortunate and proſperous this day,
                  That thou therein a conquerer maiſt be.
                  And ſafe and ſound returne with euery member
                  To me againe. And that thou maiſt remember
               
               
                  To do as I thee taught in each reſpect,
                  And to obſerue it orderly and well,
                  And nothing therein any wiſe neglect.
                  That ſo thine honor (which doth now excell)
                  May more and more encreaſe. Which vnto me
                  The greateſt joy that ere I had would be.
               
               
                  For if to thee ought happen ſhould amiſſe,
                  Then might I ſay fare well my hearts delight,
                  Farewell my health, farewell my worldly bliſſe,
                  Farewell my mirth, farewell my loving Knight,
                  Farewell my fortune and mine onely joy,
                  And welcome grefe, diſpleaſure, and annoy.
               
               
                  And in this ſort ſhe ſtood, and their ſhe ſtaid,
                  While Iaſon fought againſt the Monſters fell,
                  Who comming to the place was halfe afraid,
                  To ſee the Bulls caſt fire like fiends of hell
                  Out of their mouths. But to withſtand the power,
                  And force thereof, his body was allore
               
               
                  Annointed with an oyntment precious,
                  That able was to keepe him from the flame
                  And fury of that fier dangerous:
                  Which from their mouthes ſo furiouſly then came,
                  Which otherwiſe had been impoſſible,
                  (For that it was exceeding terrible.)
               
               
                  Or to eſcape the huge and monſtrous ſmoake
                  Within the aire, did riſe ſo thicke and darke,
                  That it was able any man to choake.
                  Had not Medea taught him how to warke,
                  And how to ſhon each danger whatſoere,
                  By vertue of the Image he did beare,
               
               
                  For by the ſame his courage ſo ſurpaſt,
                  That when the Bulls with open throat did gape,
                  And fier out of their mouthes moſt fierce caſt,
                  He did their furie eaſily eſcape,
                  And And all th'infection of the troubled aire.
                  Soone cleanſd & made it ſhow both bright & faire.
               
               
                  For gainſt the fowle and ſtinking ſmoake and fume
                  Which round about the aire ſo thicke did flie,
                  And able was mans body to conſume,
                  The Image was a perfect remedy.
                  And more to keepe his mind from feare & dread,
                  He often times within his booke did read.
               
               
                  For that the prayer ſo great of vertue was,
                  That it could ſaue him from all wretchedneſſe,
                  Yet for a further ſuretie in that caſe,
                  And to preſerue his life from all diſtreſſe,
                  The liquor he into the mouthes did caſt
                  Of both the Bulls, which cloſd their throts ful faſt.
               
               
                  And by the vertue thereof had ſo glu'd
                  And ſhut them vp, that preſently he ſtaid
                  The filthy ſmoake, and it ſo well eſchu'd,
                  That all the thicke and foggy clowds decayd
                  And vaniſhed away, the chriſtall skie,
                  Began t'appeare with faire and chrimſon die.
               
               
                  Which don he boldly ventured to take
                  And draw the Bulls forth by their hornes full ſone,
                  Who then gainſt him durſt no reſiſtance make.
                  Which he no ſooner had performd and done,
                  But ſtraight he yoakt, & to the plow thē bound,
                  And draue them forth to eare and til the ground,
               
               
                  Wherein they wrought ſo well, and were ſo tame,
                  That what he would, they did, and neuer ſtaid,
                  And as he was enioyned to the ſome,
                  They plowd the ground, and it in furrowes laid,
                  In ſuch good ſort, and made it ſmoth & plaine,
                  That ready t'was t'receaue each kind of graine.
               
               
                  Then like a Champion boldly he did goe,
                  Vnto the Dragon fierce and monſtrous,
                  Which was a beaſt moſt huge in ſhape and ſhoe:
                  Fowle, Horrible, and deadly venemous,
                  With ſcales as hard, and ſtrong as any ſteele,
                  That dint of ſword, or ſpeare 
                        ••
                      could not feele.
               
               
                  
                  Whoſe breath then plague was more contagious,
                  T'effect therewith the cleare and pleaſant skie:
                  And his ſtrong poyſon ſo outragious,
                  That whoſoere it toucht, was ſure to die.
                  And from his mouth ſuch flames of fier did flow,
                  That like a burning furnace it did ſhow,
               
               
                  Or like the ſtreames of lightning which from Eaſt
                  Into the Weſt do reach, in time of heate:
                  So from the mouth of that moſt vgly beaſt
                  The flames of fier did come, and were ſo great,
                  And in young Iaſons face made ſuch a blaze,
                  That at the firſt it ſtroke him in a maze.
               
               
                  (But thinking on his Ring it was ſtraight gone,
                  And he of feare and danger out of care,
                  For in the ſame there was a precious ſtone
                  Of great eſteeme and vertue paſſing rare,
                  Which Iſydore doth write is onely found
                  Within the rich and fertile Indian ground.
               
               
                  And further ſaith it muſt he kept f
                        •
                     ll cloſe
                  About a man, or woman pure and cleane,
                  Or elſe it will the vertue wholy loſe.
                  Of colour t'was a paſſing orient greene,
                  And power had all venom to deſtroy,
                  That it could not the bearer ought annoy.
               
               
                  Nor Serpent, Dragon, Adder, nor yet Snake,
                  Can hurt or harme by venom any way,
                  If that the ſame within your hand you take,
                  And it directly gainſt their eye-ſight ſtay.
                  For preſently they cannot will nor chooſe,
                  But all their force and poyſon they muſt looſe.
               
               
                  And in this ſort the vertue hauing wrought,
                  It preſently doth burſt in peeces ſmall,
                  In Cicile whence this ſtone is like wiſe brought,
                  There is a worme (which they do B
                           •
                        ſ
                           •
                        
                      call)
                  Moſt venomous, which when ſo ere they will
                  Make tame, or els ſeeke to deſtroy or kill,
               
               
                  They take a cane, at th'end whereof they bind
                  The precious ſtone and hold it to the ſa
                        •
                     e
                  Of that ſmall beaſt, and preſently by kind
                  She doth no ſooner ſee't, but in that place
                  The bowels burſting forth, it there doth die,
                  Such force is found in that rich ſtone 
                        •
                     olie.
               
               
                  For nature that all things on earth doth frame,
                  And whoſe decree no mortall wight can moue,
                  Doth ſecretly direct and rule the ſame,
                  And by his power receaued from aboue,
                  Such force hath giuen to hearbs, to g
                        •
                     aſſe, to ſtone,
                  The cauſes why none knowes, but ſhe alone.)
               
               
                  By vertue of this Ring and precious ſtone,
                  He boldly fought againſt the Dragon fell,
                  (In whome as then reſiſtance there was none,
                  Although to fore it did in force excell)
                  And ſoone had him bereaued of his life,
                  And preſently did end his cruell ſtrife
               
               
                  With that great beaſt. Whereof exceeding glad,
                  With ſword in hand he gaue him many a ſtroke,
                  And chopt his ſcales that on his backe he had,
                  As if he ſhould haue hewd and feld an Oke,
                  And then cut of his head, and with all ſpeed,
                  Tooke out his teeth, and vſed them for ſeed,
               
               
                  And preſently without delay did ſow
                  Them in the ground, the which he did conſtraine,
                  The fierce and cruell Bulls before to plow.
                  From which ſo rare and ſtrange a kind of graine,
                  A fruite more ſtrange did preſently proceed,
                  For as the Gods by power divine decreed,
               
               
                  A company of armed Knights aroſe
                  Out of the ground, who ſought without delay,
                  Each other as moſt ſterne and cruell foes,
                  By dint of ſword to murther, kill, and ſlay.
                  And their moſt furious combat neuer left,
                  Till each his foe of life had cleane bereft.
               
               
                  For by the Law it ſo ordained was,
                  That each his brother preſently ſhould kill,
                  And that not one of them aliue ſhould paſſe
                  Out of that place, nor yet ſhould worke his will
                  By force of armes, the victory t'obtaine
                  Againſt his foe, but all ſhould dead remaine
               
               
                  Within the field. Such was the deſteny
                  Of that ſtrange race, which was no ſooner don,
                  But Iaſon ſtraight to take the Ram did trie,
                  And with a courage bold laid hand thereon.
                  (Wherein as then reſiſtance none was found)
                  And by the hornes he puld it to the ground.
               
               
                  Then did he kill and ſheare the golden fleece
                  Of from the backe, (for valor ſo much deem'd
                  That all the treaſure in the Land of Greece,
                  
                  To halfe the worth thereof was not eſteem'd)
                  And with his prize he did not time delay,
                  But ſtraight vnto the boate he tooke his way.
               
               
                  And rowed therein vnto the other Iſle
                  Not farre from thence, whereas vpon the ſhore
                  Prince Hercules attended all the while,
                  Accompanied with many Grecians more,
                  Till that he had his conqueſt brought to paſſe,
                  And when that he mongſt them arived was.
               
               
                  
                  For ioy they lept and to their Gods did call,
                  And yeilded thanks for his moſt happy chance,
                  That he had ſo preſerved been from thrall,
                  And to ſuch honor did him then advance,
                  By Knight-hood great to win the golden Ram,
                  Out of the midſt of burning fier and flame.
               
               
                  And fore Apollo fully had run out,
                  And compaſſed the earthly globe ſo faire,
                  Or from the Eaſt to weſt had gon about,
                  (For ſtill he was perceaved in the aire)
                  Although with ſpeed he did as then decline,
                  And on the Seas full watriſhly did ſhine.
               
               
                  
                     Iaſon withall his grecian Knights did goe
                  Vnto the King, with glad and chearefull face,
                  And vnto him the golden ſleece did ſhoe,
                  The which to wim the Gods had gin him grace.
                  Whereat the King did ſeeme much to reioyce
                  In outward ſhow, and with diſſembling voyce.
               
               
                  Did welcome him vnto his Court againe,
                  Glad (as he ſaid) that he ſo well had ſped:
                  And more his outward joy therein t'explaine,
                  Into the Pallace by the hand him him led,
                  And entertained him with royall chere,
                  As if that no diſlike in him there were.
               
               
                  And ſhewed pleaſant countenance and face,
                  (As hipocrites can do when as they faine
                  And thinke on craft, and rather ſeeke diſgrace
                  To him, whom flatteringly they intertaine
                  With outward ſmiling and diſſembling ſhow,
                  When inwardly they wiſh his overthrow.)
               
               
                  So at that time King Octes entertaind
                  Prince Iaſon with a friendly countenance,
                  And ſhow of ioy that he ſo well had gaind
                  The golden fleece, his honor to aduance.
                  Although from heart his ioy did not proceed,
                  For inwardly with griefe it ſeemd to bleed.
               
               
                  That of the Ram he was diſpoyled ſo
                  To his great loſſe, and whole confuſion:
                  And that he muſt the golden fleece forgo,
                  Which in him bred a great diviſion.
                  Twixt outward ſhow, and his interior mind,
                  As oft we ſee and by experience find,
               
               
                  That many men of double heart and mind.
                  And of meere malice hid in their deſire,
                  With ſmothed face ſuch ſubtill ſhifts can find,
                  To take and couer cloſely vp the fire
                  Of envie, with the aſhes of deceit,
                  That no man can their wicked purpoſe let.
               
               
                  But well were he that could their craft eſpie,
                  And know their meaning falſe and fraudulent,
                  Wherein nought elſe but trecherie doth lie,
                  For to betray the ſimple innocent.
                  And ſuch as by no villany are led,
                  Nor in the paths of ſubtilty haue tread.
               
               
                  But when a man a ſmiling face doth make,
                  With outward ſhow of loue, and ſpeaketh kind,
                  They do his words and all his geſtures take
                  To be th'effects of his interior mind.
                  So Iaſon held himſelfe full well apaid,
                  Withall the King then did to him or ſayd,
               
               
                  Svppoſing that no grudge to him he bare.
                  And doubtles though the King was griued ſore,
                  And had his heart poſſeſt with thought and care,
                  Cauſe he ſhould looſe the Ram for evermore.
                  It had more folly been for him to fret,
                  When as the ſame by no meanes he could let.
               
               
                  And for as then he could not will nor choſe,
                  (Such and ſo great was his extremitie).
                  But that of force he muſt his treaſure loſe
                  He made a vertue of neceſſitie.
                  And gainſt his will his mind he wholy bent
                  To welcome him, though t'were with diſcontent.
               
               
                  And with all kind of common curteſie,
                  From day to day to ſhow his gentleneſſe,
                  He feaſted Iaſon and his company,
                  And not one ſigne of grutging did expreſſe,
                  Vntill the time that he did ſteale away,
                  And ſecretly his daughter thence convay.
               
               
                  Meane while the people ran In flockes apace,
                  From all and euerie part of Colchos Iſle,
                  Vpon the golden Ram to ſtarre and gaſe:
                  Which ſome admir'd, ſome others ſeme'd to ſmile,
                  Each one his verdit and his Iudgment gaue,
                  But to the ſame men no reſpect ſhould haue.
               
               
                  For they are ſo vnconſtant in their mind,
                  That with each blaſt they varry like a phane,
                  And as the mone (according to hir kind)
                  To day th'encreaſe, to morow they do wane▪
                  
                  So much they are of nature flexible,
                  And altogether light and variable.
               
               
                  Some did reioyce that Iaſon ſpead ſo well,
                  And ſome admir'd his great and paſſing might:
                  And ſaid he did in valor much excell,
                  That gainſt the Bulls, and Dragon ſo could fight,
                  And conquering thē returnd thence ſafe & ſonnd,
                  Which to effect till then none could be found.
               
               
                  
                  Some grieu'd thereat, diſlike it ve
                        •
                     erly,
                  And wholy did repine, that ſo it was:
                  Some others ſaid t'was done by Sorcery.
                  Thus each caſt forth his verdict in that caſe:
                  One ſaying this, an other praring that,
                  And every one of Iaſon ſeem'd to chat.
               
               
                  At laſt, as though ſhe knew not of the chance,
                  
                     Medea from her chamber did deſcend,
                  Glad at her heart, although in countenance,
                  A ſad and heavy cheare ſhe did pretend.
                  That no man might her ſecret joy conceaue,
                  Nor of her mind the leaſt pretence perceaue.
               
               
                  And by her wiſe and good diſcretion,
                  Not any one a miſſe of her could deeme,
                  Whereby ſhe did avoid ſuſpition,
                  And euery one of her did well eſteeme.
                  Her port, and cheare nought els did ſignifie,
                  But ſignes of griefe, although full ſecretlie
               
               
                  She ſmild to thinke how well her loue had ſped.
                  Then cloſely vnto Iaſon ſhe drew neare,
                  And that of them ſuſpiſion none might breed,
                  With voice full low, ſhe whiſpred in his eare▪
                  
                  And willed him in any wiſe to ſee
                  He did not faile with her at night to bee.
               
               
                  For that ſhe ſayd ſhe would with him confer
                  Of matters that concernd them very neere,
                  Which at that time of force ſhe muſt defer
                  To let him know, till that he met her there.
                  Which he ſuſpecting, when as night came on.
                  Vnto his chamber went, where all alone
               
               
                  He found her ſitting there, but not aſleepe.
                  But wiſhing with her heart (as I do geſſe)
                  By her ſtraight watch which ſhe as then did keepe,
                  With him to parle in great holineſſe,
                  Of matters of deepe contemplation,
                  For ſhe was moued with devotion.
               
               
                  To celebrate Dame Venus memory▪
                  
                  And for her ſake a Requiem to ſay
                  With him alone in her oratory.
                  (And not as fooliſh hipocrits doe pray
                  In open ſtreets, that men may them commend,)
                  The time they did not paſſe, nor vainely ſpend,
               
               
                  For glory of the world, nor any laud
                  Of mortall wights, but cloſely all alone
                  Betweene themſelues, not thinking any fraud,
                  And without any light of Sunne or Moone.
                  That longſome night they paſt and did not reſt,
                  For ſure they thoutht for them it was not beſt
               
               
                  To thinke on ſleepe, 
                        ••
                     ll morning was in prime.
                  And ſo the night together they did ſpend▪
                  
                  With great delight, not looſing any time,
                  But in what ſort I cannot comprehend:
                  Nor their religious obſeruations ſhow,
                  But leaue that vnto them that better know.
               
               
                  Suppoſe what t'was, you get no more of me,
                  Let him that hath good skill and knowes the Art:
                  Or is acquainted with the facultie.
                  The miſteries thereof to you impart,
                  And bid me not that am a ſimple ſwaine,
                  Snch ſecret obſeruations to explaine,
               
               
                  Or to diſcourſe of that I do not know.
                  If that in ſpeculation I were ſeene▪
                  
                  Or had by practiſe skill the ſame to ſhow,
                  It had for me an eaſie matter beene.
                  But ſith aboue my skill it is ſo farre,
                  Ile leaue it vnto you. And now declare
               
               
                  How Iaſon and Medea did agree,
                  And how it was their purpoſe and pretence,
                  That ſhe ſhould into Greece conducted bee.
                  And in ſo ſecret wiſe convaied thence
                  By him, that Faher, friend, nor any wight,
                  Should know, or once ſuſpect her ſudden flight.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  I How Iaſon after the conqueſt of the Golden-fle
                        ••••
                     , taking Medea ſecretly with him, returned againe into Theſſalie.
                  
               
               
                  WHen Iaſou had his dangerous cōqueſt wo
                        •
                     ,
                  And brauely feaſted was like his degree,
                  With all the honor could to him be don,
                  He did deuiſe when oppertunitie
                  Should ſerue his turne, to ſayle away by night,
                  And take Medea with him if he might.
               
               
                  And ſo when as a month had paſſed ore,
                  He cloſely cauſed all things t'ready make,
                  And as he fully purpoſed before.
                  
                     Medea with him ſecrretly did take,
                  Withall the treaſure that he could convay,
                  And hoyſing ſayles from Colchos ſtale away.
               
               
                  
                  Alas Medea, why waſt thou in haſt
                  So perillous a iourney then to make,
                  And why waſt thou ſo ſlow before to caſt
                  The dangers thou as then didſt vndertake:
                  Didſt thou not proue him faithleſſe and vnkind,
                  For all to thee by oath thou didſt him bind?
               
               
                  To ſhow he caſt thee off and cleane forſooke,
                  Conſtraining thee to weepe and mourne in woe,
                  And how that he another louer tooke,
                  And for his wife would thee by no meanes know:
                  And cauſed thee thy golden lockes to rend,
                  And wofully thy dolefull life to end.
               
               
                  It were in vaine the ſame now to recite,
                  (Sith it is paſt) or ſhow what did befall
                  To Iaſon in reward of his deſpight,
                  Who likewiſe fell into no little thrall:
                  And loſt his life (for his vnnaturalnes)
                  In bloudy warre with griefe and great diſtreſſe.
               
               
                  This ſhall ſuffice th'vnfortunate eſtate
                  Of louers twaine, to ſet before your eye,
                  And t'ſhow they loſt their liues by cruell fate,
                  Becauſe they ſet their minds on vanity:
                  For of beginning that's not vertuous,
                  The end for certaine proues but dangerous.
               
               
                  If they at firſt the perill had forecaſt,
                  And not ſo raſhly run into the fire
                  Of burning luſt, they had not at the laſt
                  Reapt iuſt reward of their ſo fond deſire:
                  But he that's careleſſe miſchiefe to foreſee,
                  Will ſurely fall into extreamitie.
               
               
                  For as a medcine miniſtred to man,
                  When that his bodie's mortifide and dead;
                  By no meanes helpe nor ought auaile him can.
                  And as the ſtomacke weake, or wounded head,
                  Cannot be eas'd by any potion,
                  Hearbe, ſtone, receit, ſalue, or confection,
               
               
                  That any Surgeon what ſo ere doth know,
                  Or learned Doctor in the world can giue,
                  When as the bodie's laid in earth full low.
                  Or what auaileth it to ſtriue t'relieue▪
                  
                  A beaſt whoſe carrion corps lies dead on ground,
                  And all together cold and ſencles found.
               
               
                  In my conceit and ſimple fantaſie,
                  Twere vaine, as dame Experience doth vs teach,
                  For nought as then can helpe or remedy
                  Health to procure, or dolour to impeach:
                  For that which im perform'd in time and date,
                  More vertue hath then that which comes to late.
               
               
                  Right ſo it is (and ſure it is no fable)
                  He that thinkes not on danger till it fall,
                  But truſteth vnto worldly hopes vnſtable,
                  In ſtead of ſuger ſweet taſts bitter gall
                  Mixt with deceit, and doth at laſt repent
                  His careleſnes, and life ſo negligent.
               
               
                  That he the ſame could not in time forecaſt,
                  Nor in his mind reſolue it to preuent▪
                  
                  Till in the ſnare he's caught and holden faſt,
                  And cannot ſhun the perill eminent.
                  Which ſhows that luſt (not reaſon) did obtaine,
                  The higheſt ſeat within his head ſo vaine.
               
               
                  As Iaſon and Medea well did proue.
                  But how ſo euer Iaſon ſped thereby,
                  The ſtory ſaith (through fond and fooliſh loue)
                  
                     Medea onely felt th'extreamity
                  Of danger, woe, perplexity, and griefe,
                  And dyed at the laſt without reliefe.
               
               
                  Becauſe ſhe did not warily forecaſt
                  What might fall out, ere ſhe her iourney tooke
                  With Iaſon: for which cauſe ſhe made ſuch haſt,
                  That Father, friends, and Country ſhe forſooke.
                  But ſith that it was done of wilfulneſſe,
                  Without good counſell or aduiſedneſſe,
               
               
                  Meere folly t'were her miſeries to waile,
                  Or grieue at her ſo hard and luckleſſe fate,
                  Sith that as now full little t'would availe:
                  But ſure ſhe choſe an hower vnfortunate,
                  When as the Moone by conſtellation,
                  With ſome bad planet had coniunction.
               
               
                  Let it ſuffice that ſecretly alone,
                  To beare her deare friend Iaſon company,
                  To ſhip ſhe went, and th'Iſle of Colchos ſoone
                  She did forſake, to ſaile to Theſſalie:
                  
                  And in the night full cloſely ſtole away,
                  With as much treaſure as ſhe could conuay.
               
               
                  And hauing wind at will with gladſome cheare,
                  They put to ſea and paſſed many an jſle,
                  Where leaſt the voyage tedious ſhould appeare
                  Vnto Medea, Iaſon all the while
                  With Hercules, ſtill held her company,
                  With fained ſhow of loue and courteſie.
               
               
                  And with diſſembling face ſeem'd for her ſake,
                  Much to reioyce, (as louers oft can do)
                  And thereof vſe an exerciſe to make,
                  Till that they haue their loſts attain'd vnto▪
                  
                  As Iaſon did Medea ſoone deceaue,
                  And her of her virginitie bereaue.
               
               
                  
                  Forſaking her when leaſt 
                        ••
                     e did ſuſpect,
                  He would haue playd ſo treacherous a part,
                  In ſo vild ſort, and her ſo ſoone reiect,
                  With ſuch a cruell, hard, and ſtony heart,
                  And left her in great miſerie and woe.
                  But here of her I meane no more to thoe,
               
               
                  For that mine Author more to write doth ſpare.
                  But if at large the ſtorie you will ſee,
                  
                     Onid
                           ••
                        s Naſo plainly doth declare,
                  The miſerie and great extreamitie
                  Wherein ſhe fell, and with what great diſtreſſe,
                  She loſt her life by Iaſons wickednes.
               
               
                  And how that ſhe by him two ſons did beare,
                  The which ſhe kild (although gainſt natures kind)
                  Becauſe that they like to their Father were,
                  And for that Iaſon falſely chang'd his mind,
                  And caſt his loue vpon another Dame,
                  Whome Ouid ſaith Ceruſa had to name.
               
               
                  And cleane forſooke Medea his true wife,
                  She falling in a rage and extreame griefe,
                  In cruell in wiſe, bereft her ſelfe of life,
                  And died diſtraught, diſpairing of reliefe.
                  Of this her end if more you ſeeke to know,
                  Read Ouid, who the ſame at large doth ſhow.
               
               
                  And now will I my ſtile directly turne,
                  To let you know what was by Iaſon done,
                  When he in Greece arriu'd. Whoſe heart did burne,
                  With rage and anger gainſt Laomedon:
                  
                  Till he could find a meane how to requight
                  The wrong receau'd from him, with like deſpight.
               
               
                  When Iaſon with his traine all landed were,
                  Vpon the pleaſant coaſt of Theſſalie,
                  
                  And that King Peleus knew his being there,
                  Accompanied with all his chiualry:
                  He went out of his Court with him to meet,
                  And did him in moſt friendly manner greet.
               
               
                  But yet with outward ſhow and countenance
                  Of fained loue, as ſeeming very glad,
                  That his ſo great good fortune was t'aduance
                  His honour and his houſe, and that he had
                  By Knightly force ſo much extold his name,
                  And home retourne with victory and fame,
               
               
                  From Calchos Iſle. Yet gladder had he beene,
                  (Although in outward ſhow he did explaine
                  The contrary) that he had neuer ſeene
                  His ſafe returne to Theſſalie againe:
                  A nd yet to play a right diſſemblers part,
                  He welcomd him, although againſt his heart.
               
               
                  Admiring how he could ſo ſoone obtaine,
                  (By that aduenture ſtrange and perillous)
                  The fleece of Gold, and 
                        •
                     ome roturne againe,
                  In ſo ſhort time, and ſo victorious:
                  But couertly his treacherie to hide,
                  Without delay all ſcuſes ſet aſide.
               
               
                  To Iaſon he reſigned preſently
                  His Kingdome, which to him belong'd of right,
                  With Scepter, Crowne, and 
                        ••
                     ga
                        ••
                      dignity,
                  And all his Soueraignty and might.
                  (His promiſe to obſerue, which when he went,
                  He made to him, though otherwiſe he ment)
               
               
                  Suppoſing that he nere ſhould come againe.
                  (But he that for another digs a p
                        ••
                     ,
                  May faile in his imagination vaine,
                  And be the firſt himſelfe that falls in it:
                  As Peleus did which ſought his nephews end
                  With deadly hate, yet ſeemd his louing frend)
               
               
                  Which Iaſon did accept without delay,
                  And thanking him with louing face and cheare,
                  Beſought him to giue eare what he would ſay:
                  And his requeſt indifferently to heare,
                  Concerning Tooyans wrongs done as he went
                  To him and his, when he no hu
                        •
                     t them ment.
               
               
                  And ſaid, my Lord, when as we ſailed by
                  The coaſt of Troye, a tempeſt in the aire
                  Began to riſe, with ſuch extreamity,
                  That we of life were wholy in deſpaire:
                  And in that care, neceſſity, and griefe,
                  We forced were to land there for reliefe.
               
               
                  Not minding any iniury or wrong,
                  Vnto the King in any wiſe to doe:
                  But t'eaſe our ſelues, and then to paſſe along,
                  To Colchos Iſle where firſt we ment to goe:
                  But Laomedon not therewith content,
                  A meſſenger in haſt vnto vs ſent.
               
               
                  (Pretending of meere malice vs to grieue)
                  And churliſhly bad vs depart from thence,
                  Or elſe he ſaid by force he would vs driue
                  Off from his coaſt, as taking great offence:
                  That we would ſeeme to enter in his land,
                  So ſodainly with ſueh a warlike band.
               
               
                  When we nought els but peace & friendſhip ment,
                  As glad to be relieu'd in our diſtreſſe,
                  Not hauing any kind of bad intent
                  That ſhould him moue to ſeeke vs to oppreſſe.
                  Now then my Lord, ſith he did ſo abuſe
                  Both me and mine, and ſeem'd vs to refuſe
               
               
                  
                  A place of reſt, from danger vs to ſaue,
                  Againſt the lawes of common courteſie,
                  I humbly you beſeech that we may haue
                  Your aid of men and mony, both to trie
                  By force of armes if that we can requite
                  The Troyan King for his ſo great deſpight.
               
               
                  For truth to ſay, my mind and will is bent,
                  To ſaile to Troye with all the ſpeed I may.
                  And to deſtroy the Land is mineintent,
                  And cruelly Laomedon to ſlay:
                  According to the vow that I did make,
                  When I was forſt the Troyan ſoile forſake!
               
               
                  Iſ that it pleaſe your Grace to giue conſent
                  To my requeſt, and lend your helping hand,
                  And doubt not ere that many months are ſpent,
                  But maugre Troye, and Troyans, all wee'll land
                  With all our power of Graecian chiualrie,
                  And ſoone requite the Troyans crueltie.
               
               
                  When Peleus did Prince Iaſons mind perceaue,
                  Without delay he ſaid it ſhould be ſo,
                  A
                        •
                     luring him he did ſo well conceaue
                  Of his intent that he himſelfe would go
                  With him, and all his company to Troye,
                  
                  By force of armes that Country to deſtroye.
               
               
                  Whereto his whole Nobility agreed,
                  And none of them vnto the King ſaid nay,
                  But promiſed their aid with preſent ſpeed,
                  Preparing for the ſame without delay:
                  Of which their Iourney chiefe Solicitor
                  Was Hercules the worthie Conqueror.
               
               
                  Who in all haſt his forces to prepare
                  In readines, to Sparta ſtraightway went,
                  (Which is an Iſle from Theſſalie not farre,
                  And ſubiect to the Graecian gouernment,
                  Wherein as then two Princes great did raigne,
                  King Caſtor, and King Pollux, brethren twaine.
               
               
                  Whome Poets in their Hiſtories do ſet,
                  Brethren to be 
                        ••
                      
                     Helena the faire,
                  Whome Iupiter on Led
                           •
                        
                      did beget,
                  Whoſe beauty was eſteem'd to be ſo 
                        •
                     are▪
                  
                  Which Helena (they write) conceaued was
                  In Tyn
                           •••••
                        
                      an Iſle, which as men paſſe
               
               
                  Along the ſe
                        •
                     s, 
                        •••
                     s by Sic
                           ••••
                        
                      Land,
                  And that her name Tyn
                           •••••
                        
                      of that Iſle▪
                  
                  Was alſo cald
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      longer ile not ſtand
                  Their pedigree to tell, but ſpeake a while
                  Of Hercules, to ſhow how he did craue
                  The aid of thoſe two Kings as then to haue,
               
               
                  To goe with him vnto the Towne of Troye,
                  
                  With all the power they had, whereby he ment,
                  The ſame by force and valor to deſtroye.
                  To whoſe requeſt they ſtraight did giue conſent:
                  And promiſed in readines to lie,
                  Till he to them the time ſhould certifie,
               
               
                  When he would put to Sea. Wherewith content:
                  He thanked them, and did no longer ſtay,
                  But ſtraight his courſe vnto Meſſena bent,
                  And there arriu'd about the breake of day:
                  And to the King cald Telamon did goe,
                  The cauſe of his repaire to him to ſhoe.
               
               
                  Whoſe comming when he knew, he was full glad
                  To ſee him, and in braue and Princely wiſe
                  Receaued him. To whome when as he had
                  Such honour done, as he could well deuiſe
                        •
                     
                  
                  He promiſed to aid him with all ſpeed,
                  With mony and with men what he ſhould need,
               
               
                  And perſonally himſelfe with him to goe.
                  Which Hercules accepting in good part,
                  Did take his leaue (his Princely mind to ſhoe)
                  And yeelded thanks to him with all his heart.
                  And entring Ship, returnd to Theſſalie
                  
                  To tell King Peleus, and to cer
                        ••••
                     
                  
               
               
                  How he had ſped. Beſeeching him to write
                  To all the Lords and Barrons in his Land,
                  And them command with all the haſt they might▪
                  
                  In readines to make a warlike band▪
                  
                  And to prouide a counſell wi
                        •
                     e and graue,
                  Which he that goes to warre, he ſaid muſt haue▪
                  
               
               
                  For that the wit of him thats growne in age,
                  Is more then ſtrength without experience,
                  But when as force is ioynd with counſell ſage.
                  It is a bulwarke ſtrong for our defence,
                  And he that long a trauailer hath beene,
                  And by experience many things hath ſeene,
               
               
                  Is meet in peace and war to rule and guide.
                  For vnto age, experience great
                        •
                      and 
                        •••
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  Belongs of right 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      doth 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  That ſtrength and courage youth ſhould beſt 
                        〈◊〉
                     :
                  And when both youth and age with one conſent▪
                  
                  To worke and ioyne together are content.
               
               
                  In any cauſe of equity and right,
                  Men need not feare with gliſtering ſword & ſhield,
                  (By helpe of God the giuer of all might)
                  Againſt their foes to 
                        〈◊〉
                      in the field.
                  For neither fame of Knight-hood, not the glory,
                  Not yet the conqueſt, nor the victory
               
               
                  
                  Of warre, are got or woone by multitude,
                  But as experience ſaith of right belong
                  To counſell, wiſedome, and to fortitude,
                  Therefore (ſaid he) let vs revenge our wrong
                  With courage bold, ſith that our cauſe is good,
                  And for our honours ſpend our deareſt blood,
               
               
                  And that we may our valours brauelie ſhew,
                  We will avoid the multitude of number,
                  And of our warlike Knights chooſe but a few,
                  Wherewith we ſhall our foes much more incomber,
                  Then if we had an armie huge and great,
                  For many in a field each other let.
               
               
                  This good aduiſe King Peleus did allow,
                  And whatſoeuer Hercules had ſaid,
                  T'effect the ſame did make a ſolemne vow.
                  Then Hercules to haue and get more aid,
                  To Pilon went, wherein a Duke of fame
                  As then did rule, that Neſtor had to name.
               
               
                  A Prince for wit and valour magnified,
                  (Yet of a haſtie, fierce, and angrie mood)
                  And in ſome ſort to Hercules allied:
                  Whoſe comming when he once had vnderſtood,
                  He was contented for his Nephews ſake,
                  The Troyan warre with him to vndertake.
               
               
                  (So Hercules the day and time would ſet)
                  And perſonally himſelfe therein to be.
                  Then Hercules no further time to let,
                  With preſent ſpeed returnd to Theſſalie,
                  
                  Whereas the Graecians Navie then did ſtay,
                  Attending time from thence to ſaile away.
               
               
                  Where after counſell tane they did agree,
                  That Peleus ſhould be generall of the field,
                  And that each Lord and Prince of high degree,
                  While that their Troian warre did laſt ſhould yeeld
                  To his command, as Soueraigne of them all,
                  And ſo they ſtayd till wind did them befall.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  ¶ How Iaſon, Hercules, and the Graecian Princes, aſſembled to make warre againſt the Towne of Troy, to reuenge the diſcurteſie done to them by Laomedon King of Troye, when they ſailed to Colchos.
                  
               
               
                  WHen as the temperate dewes of Aperill,
                  With many a ſweet & comfortable ſhower,
                  Into the ground full deepely do diſtill,
                  To raiſe the graſſe and beauty of each flower:
                  And Phoebus mounting the celeſtiall ſpheare,
                  In Aries doth place his beames moſt cleare.
               
               
                  And in the ſpring which yerely doth befall,
                  When as the calends of the month of May,
                  Do celebrate the Equinoctiall,
                  And make an equall length of night and day.
                  And euery branch and tree to ſpring are ſeen,
                  And after vading hew ſhew freſh and greene.
               
               
                  When Snow that on the mountaine tops doth lie,
                  By heat of Phoebus beames diſſolues away,
                  And when a vapery balme aſcends on hie,
                  Out from the pleaſant flower at prime of day:
                  And that the root by Winter cold kept in,
                  Recouering ſap to ſpring forth doth begin.
               
               
                  And mount into each flower, hearbe, and tree,
                  And by the force of Sols moſt burning heat,
                  Infuſeth in each branch humidity,
                  Aſſiſted by ſome ſhowers of raine moſt ſweet.
                  When ſiluer ſprings caſt forth their currant ſtream
                  Into the Riuers gliſtring gainſt Sonne beames.
               
               
                  And ere the Son new greene had ſent againe,
                  Vnto each hearbe and graſſe vpon the ground,
                  When as the pleaſant Nightingale t'explaine
                  Her ioy within the ſhadie woods is found,
                  With ſweet and amorous noats a loud to ſing,
                  And makes the eire with ſound thereof to ring.
               
               
                  To welcome in the faire and pleaſant ſpring,
                  Which doth delight all creatures that are
                  Vpon the earth, and comforts euery thing,
                  Which Winter hard ore-whelmd with cold & care:
                  And when the winds did leſſen, calme, & ſwage
                  The Seas, that by cold Winters ſtorms did rage.
               
               
                  At that ſame time the Graecians did begin
                  To enter Ship, and towards Troye to ſaile,
                  Well rigged, man'd, & furniſht with each thing,
                  That for the wars might them as then availe,
                  And when the weather ſerued them to goe,
                  They put to Sea with braue and warlike ſhoe.
               
               
                  And made ſuch haſt by aid Neptune them lent,
                  That in few daies they ſaild vnto the Towne
                  Of Troye, (whereto their courſe as then was bent)
                  At euening when the Sun was almoſt downe,
                  And there caſt anker, thinking it the beſt,
                  Within their Ships that night to take their reſt.
               
               
                  
                  And when the Larke did in the morning ſing,
                  With pleaſant noats to welcome Phebus bright,
                  
                     
                        •
                     o ſet their men on land they did begin,
                  And mark't their ground and rais'd their tents vpright
                  Before the Towne of Troy ere they it wiſt:
                  (For that they might as then do what they liſt.
               
               
                  And ſet a watch meane time in euery place
                  To guard their Campe, vntill the Sun moſt bright
                  Had in the morning ſhew'd his gliſtring face,
                  And on the tents had caſt his crimſon light:
                  And then they all agreed with one conſent,
                  To make repaire vnto King Peleus tent.
               
               
                  And being there as then together met,
                  King Peleus cauſing ſilence to be made,
                  When euery one in his degree was ſet)
                  With courage bold vnto them ſpake, and ſaid,
                  Moſt worthy Graecian Princes high and low,
                  Whoſe Knightly force the world throghout doth know,
               
               
                  Reported is as far as ſhines the Sun
                  In any place, it neuer yet was ſeen,
                  That Graecians haue an enterpriſe begun,
                  Which by them hath not well effected been:
                  And they victoriouſly with Lawrell crownd,
                  As in the ancient Hiſtories is found.
               
               
                  Then valiant Lords and Princes of renowne,
                  Thinke on the wrong that vnto you was wrought,
                  By this diſcourteou
                        •
                      King Laomedon,
                  
                  When as no 
                        •
                     urt to him by you was thought:
                  Which to requight ſith now you do pretend,
                  See that your ſelues you valiantly defend.
               
               
                  And let vs now with all the ſpeed we may,
                  Prepare our battailes in a readines,
                  And ſetting on them ſtraight without delay,
                  Shew forth our valours and our worthines:
                  But let me firſt three things to you declare,
                  Which at this time for vs moſt needfull are.
               
               
                  One is, that by diſcretion and aduiſe,
                  Our battailes we in ſuch ſort doe ordaine,
                  That no diſorder may amongſt vs riſe,
                  That by the ſame aduantage none be tane
                  Againſt vs by our foes, to our diſgrace,
                  And we thereby conſtrain'd to leaue the place.
               
               
                  The ſecond is, that we our valours ſhow,
                  And let no manner feare poſſeſſe our heart,
                  But ſtoutly let vs gainſt our enemies goe,
                  And ſee we play the valiant ſouldiers part▪
                  
                  Couragiouſly in battaile to endure,
                  And to our foes eternall ſhame procure.
               
               
                  The third and laſt is, that we ſtriue to gaine,
                  The fame and name our Anceſtors haue held,
                  And valiantly the victory obtaine
                  Againſt our foes, and driue them out the field:
                  For if by Knighthood through our hardines,
                  We vanquiſh them and put them to diſtreſſe,
               
               
                  We win not only praiſe and high renowne,
                  (Which to a valiant mind is chiefeſt bliſſe)
                  But if we once may enter in the Towne,
                  Of treaſure great we ſurely cannot miſſe:
                  Which in the ſame is now there to be found,
                  For certaine 'tis it doth therein abound.
               
               
                  Which maugre all our foes we will conuay
                  Into our ſhips, and ſo with ioyfull cheare,
                  When wind and weather ſerues without delay,
                  The ſame with vs into our Countries beare:
                  Therefore in hope this treaſure now to win,
                  With courage bold t'aſſaile them lets begin.
               
               
                  Whereto moſt valiant Hercules reply'd,
                  And did King Peleus counſell much commend,
                  And ſaid 'tis truth, and cannot be deny'd,
                  That of beginning wiſe proues happy end:
                  But now to bring our purpoſe to effect,
                  My counſell is that we do not neglect,
               
               
                  (Before that it appeareth to be day)
                  To muſter all our men vpon this plaine,
                  And being arm'd with all the ſpeed we may,
                  Our forces to diuide in battailes twaine,
                  Whereof the one King Peleus the graue,
                  The other ſtout King Telamon ſhall haue.
               
               
                  And I my ſelfe and Iaſon ſecretly,
                  With one third part of our approoued bands,
                  Will cloſely mongſt the vines and buſhes lie:
                  For when as Laomedon vnderſtands,
                  That we prepared are to giue battaile,
                  To iſſue forth of Troye he will not faile.
               
               
                  T'encounter vs with all his power and might,
                  Suppoſing gainſt our forces for to preuaile,
                  And when with vs he commeth downe to fight,
                  Duke Neſtor with the firſt wing ſhall aſſaile
                  And ſet on him, and Caſtor next ſhall go,
                  To aid them when occaſion ſerues thereto.
               
               
                  And with the third King Peleus ſtill ſhall lie,
                  To aid them both, and while he's occupied,
                  And little doth ſuſpect our pollicie,
                  Ere we by him or his ſhall be eſpyed,
                  
                     Iaſon and I will cloſely wheeele about,
                  And take the Towne of Troye, I do not doubt.
               
               
                  
                  At vnawares: whereof we cannot faile,
                  If that we worke with good aduiſe and skill,
                  And gainſt our foes ſhall preſently preuaile
                  With little loſſe, and ſoone obtaine our will.
                  This is the counſell I can giue (ſaith he)
                  And 'tis the beſt if you will credite me.
               
               
                  Whereto they all agreed, and euery one
                  With ſpeed did arme themſelues, & all that night
                  Did reſt, till that the Sun in morning ſhone,
                  And then with courage bold ſet forth to fight
                  The battaile with the Troians in ſuch wiſe,
                  As Hercules did them before aduiſe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  ¶ Of the battaile fought by Hercules and the Graecians, againſt Laomedon King of Troye, wherein Laomedon was ſlaine, and the Towne of Troye taken, ſacked, and vtterly raſed to the ground.
               
               
                  THe newes to King Laomedon once ſent,
                  That all the Graecians power were come on land,
                  And marched in great haſt with full intent,
                  T'aſſaile and giue him battaile out of hand,
                  And to ſubdue, and vtterly deſtroy
                  Himſelfe, his Country, & the Towne of Troy.
                  
               
               
                  He nothing fearing them nor all their might,
                  Made no delay but preſently went out,
                  Accompani'd with many a noble Knight,
                  And all the power that he could make throughout
                  The Land of Troye, and being entered,
                  Into the field whereas he muſtered
               
               
                  His men, and them in ſundry battels plaſt,
                  (As he for that time thought convenient)
                  Straight marched forth, and with his army paſt,
                  In order gainſt the Graecians: fully bent,
                  With all his force couragiouſly to fight,
                  And driue them thence againe if that he might.
               
               
                  (Cleane voyd of feare, nor yet in any doubt,
                  That Hercules an ambuſh cloſely layd,
                  And ſecretly with it had marcht about
                  Behind the Towne, and purpoſely there ſtayd:
                  T'aſſault it when Laomedon was gone
                  With all his power, againſt the Greeks, and none
               
               
                  Or very few left in't to keepe the ſame.)
                  And had not gone farre forward but he ſpied,
                  The Graecian hoaſt that brauely gainſt him came,
                  At t'head whereof Duke Neſtor firſt did ride,
                  And fiercely on the Troyans force, ſet.
                  Where when on either ſide the battails met,
               
               
                  And with their ſwords and ſpeares together ran:
                  Th'encounter at the firſt ſo hot was found,
                  That t'was the loſſe and end of many a man
                  On either ſide, that gaſping on the ground
                  Among the trampling horſes feet did lie,
                  And there did end their daies in miſerie.
               
               
                  At which time all the field throughout did ſound,
                  With noyſe of drums and furious ſtroaks that w
                        •••
                     
                  
                  With ſwords and Lances giuen, and all the ground
                  Did ſhake with horſes feet, that fiercely beare
                  Their maſters on their backs, ſome deadly hurt,
                  Some trailing them ſore bleeding throgh the d
                        ••
                     
                  
               
               
                  In great diſtreſſe: and then you might haue ſeen
                  The faire greene fields dyed into crimſon red,
                  With ſtreams of bloud, the which that day had been
                  Betweene the Greekes and Troians fiercely ſhed.
                  For many a valiant Knight then loſt his life,
                  And certainly in that ſame mortall ſtrife,
               
               
                  The Graecians had been all diſcomfited,
                  They were that time purſued ſo furiouſly,
                  If Caſtor with his Knights which he then led,
                  Had not come in to helpe them ſpeedily:
                  And at that time ſo valiantly aſſaild
                  The Troyans, and ſo much gainſt them preuaild▪
                  
               
               
                  That many a worthy Troyan Knight was ſlaine,
                  And ſuch was then the fight, that where before,
                  The Troians victors were, the Greekes againe,
                  Recouered ground and beat them backe ſo ſore
                  That they were forſt diſpight their harts to 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  If Laomedon had not ſpedily,
               
               
                  Relieued them and furiouſlie aſſaild,
                  The Greekes and made ſuch way on euerie ſide,
                  And in ſhortſpace ſo much gainſt them preua
                        ••
                     d
                  That they before him fled and durſt not byde
                  His ſtrockes, that were ſo terrible and ſtrong:
                  For who ſoere he hit was laid along,
               
               
                  Vpon the ground: and riding to and fro,
                  He made away before him like a lane,
                  And mongſt the thickeſt of the preaſe did go,
                  And neuer left vntill that he had ſlane,
                  So many Greekes that by his valiantnes
                  He put them once againe to ſuch diſtres,
               
               
                  
                  That they to ſhun his ſword away did flie,
                  And likely had at that time loſt the field,
                  If Peleus had not come and valiantly,
                  With trenchant blade which in his hand he held,
                  Aſſailed, wounded, and vnhorſt, and kild
                  The Troyans ſo, that all the plaine was fild
               
               
                  With them that he alone had ouercome.
                  And in ſuch furious wiſe road too and fro
                  From place to place, that glad to make him roome,
                  The Troyans gan t'recoile and durſt not ſhow
                  Themſelues to him, nor come within his ſight▪
                  
                  And at that time he ſhewd ſuch paſſing might,
               
               
                  That cleving ſheilds, heads, arms, & legs in ſunder,
                  He made ſuch havocke mongſt the Troyan bands,
                  That to behold him every man did woonder,
                  And glad was he that could eſcape his hands,
                  He put them to ſo great extreamitie.
                  But when King Laomedon ſaw them flie
               
               
                  Before King Peleus ſword, it did him grieue,
                  And riding backe amongſt his troops did pray
                  Them turne againe and he would them relieue,
                  And they content at his requeſt did ſtay:
                  And where before they had begun to flie,
                  He made the Greeks recoyle ſo furiouſly,
               
               
                  That in deſpight of all their power and force,
                  The Troyans had the vpperhand and ſlew
                  Great ſtore of Greekes, and many did vnhorſe,
                  And made them fight on foot, till Neſtor knew,
                  
                     Laomedon that fought ſo valiantly,
                  To be the King of Troye, and preſently
               
               
                  Road towards him, and when the King did ſee
                  Him come ſo faſt, he turnd his horſe about,
                  And ſpurd it in ſuch haſt ſo might lie,
                  That euery pricke he gaue the bloud guſht out
                  The horſes ſides, and when with him he met,
                  His puiſſant Launce into his breſt he ſet,
               
               
                  And ran at him with ſuch a mighty force,
                  That with the blow his Launce in pieces brake,
                  Yet hurt him not, nor moou'd him off his horſe,
                  Wherewith Duke Neſtor ſtept a little backe,
                  And to requite Laomedon therefore,
                  Did with his Launce which in his hand he bore,
               
               
                  Giue him throgh ſheild & breſt a mighty wound,
                  Suppoſing that therewith he had him ſlaine,
                  Becauſe as then he fell vpon the ground,
                  But he no whit abaſht roſe vp againe:
                  And drew his ſword, and like a valiant Knight,
                  Advanſt himſelfe againſt his foe to fight.
               
               
                  Yet raging fore that he ſo dangerouſly
                  Muſt fight do 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and in ſuch ſort did ſtay,
                  Till that a yong and 
                        〈◊〉
                      Knightpaſt by
                  Cald Cedar, (newly knighted that ſame day)
                  Who ſeeing King Laomedon to fight
                  On foot in danger great, with all his might
               
               
                  At Neſtor 
                     
                        •
                     an, and valiantly by force,
                  While he with King Laomedon did fight
                  Vpon a ſodaine 
                        〈◊〉
                      him off his horſe,
                  But he roſe vp againe with great deſpight:
                  And did himſelfe in furious wiſe defend
                  Againſt the King, that many a blow did ſpend
               
               
                  On him, and he the like on him againe,
                  For on each other cruelly they ſmot,
                  And long twixt them the fight did ſo remaine,
                  Till that the King at laſt advantage got:
                  And ſuch a blow on Neſtors Bever ſtroke,
                  That there with all in pieces ſmall he broke
               
               
                  A circle all with Pearle richly ſet,
                  Which he that time about his Helmet ware,
                  And then a ſecond blow at him he ſet,
                  And with the ſame his creſt in ſunder care,
                  And ſmote it off, whereby Duke Neſtor ſtood
                  Before the King his face all bath'd with blood.
               
               
                  And ſurely had (no doubt) been ſlaine as then,
                  By th'ands of King Laomedon at laſt,
                  Had not the Greekes with many thouſand men,
                  Come thither to relieue him in great haſt:
                  For he was ſtricken downe vnto the ground,
                  Among the horſes feet where they him found.
               
               
                  At which their comming Caſtor furiouſly,
                  A mighty Launce into his hand did take,
                  And vnto Cedar road couragiouſly,
                  To be reveng'd on him for Neſtors ſake:
                  But ere he could get to him in the way,
                  
                     Segnerides a Troyan Knight did ſtay
               
               
                  His courſe, and of his purpoſe did him let,
                  And with a Launce ſmote Caſtor ſuch a ſtroke,
                  (Which with a great carriere he did ſet)
                  That it there with in many peeces broke:
                  And Caſtor to requite him for his paine,
                  Did with his Launce giue him the like against.
               
               
                  But in ſuch ſort that with the ſame he gaue
                  Him in the breaſt a deepe and deadly wound,
                  Wherewith yong Cedar gan ſuch griefe to ha
                        ••
                     ;
                  When as he ſaw him fall vnto the ground:
                  That in deſpight of all that him behe
                        ••
                     ,
                  He did by force from Caſtor take his 
                        ••
                     rie
                        •
                     d.
               
               
                  
                  And with hisſword a mighty blow him ſt
                        •
                     ake
                  Vpon the face, and vounded him full deepe,
                  And then his horſe from him likewiſe did take,
                  And to his Squier deliuered it to keepe:
                  Whereby as then he was in ſuch a caſe,
                  That he was taken priſoner in that place.
               
               
                  The which when Pollux did perceiue and knew,
                  The Troyans had his Brother Caſtor tane,
                  He did them with a valiant purſue,
                  And after he great ſtore of them had ſlaine,
                  Deſpight of them, he reſoued him by force,
                  And made him mount againe vpon his horſe.
               
               
                  And in that angry, fierce, and raging ire,
                  Vpon the Troyans furiouſly did ſet,
                  (For with revenge his heart did burne like fire)
                  And as with furious moode by chance he met,
                  The braue and valiant Knight Eliatus,
                  
                  (Of ſtature meane, yet ſtour and valorous.
               
               
                  And yet as then but of a tender age,
                  Nephew vnto the King Laomedon,
                  
                  And Son vnto the King of great Carthage)
                  With all his force he hath him overthrowne;
                  And with his Launce in pieces twaine did cleaue
                  His heart, and ſo did him of life bereaue.
               
               
                  Whoſe fall when King Laomedon did ſpie,
                  With inward griefe his heart began to bleed,
                  And when his death he could not remedy,
                  He ſwore he would revenge that cruell deed:
                  And ſtraight he caus'd a horne full lowd to ſound,
                  Which being heard, there did encloſe him round
               
               
                  Seven thouſand Troyan Knights in rich array,
                  All making ſolemne vowes reveng'd to be
                  For that Knights death, and ſtraight without delay
                  Vpon the Greekes with extreame cruelty
                  Moſt furiouſly did ſet, and made them flie,
                  And cauſed many dead and wounded lie
               
               
                  Within the field, ſo that the Greeks at laſt,
                  Not able to reſiſt the Troyans might,
                  Were forced to retire from thence as faſt,
                  As at the firſt they haſty were to fight:
                  And certainly the victory had loſt.
                  But that there came a meſſenger in poſt
               
               
                  Vnto the King with ſad and wofull cheare,
                  The news to tell, how that the Greekes by force
                  Had woone the towne of Troye, and entred were,
                  And yong and old had ſlaine without remorſe:
                  Whereat he gan moſt pittiouſly to weepe,
                  And from his heart did fetch a ſigth moſt deepe.
               
               
                  For that as then before him he did ſee
                  The Grecians ſtrong and readie to aſſaile
                  Him once againe with all extreamitie,
                  And in the towne (his courage more to quaile)
                  Another hoaſt to ſet on him behind,
                  Which made him ſo perplexed in his mind,
               
               
                  And put him to ſo great extreamitie,
                  To thinke vpon his hard and ſodaine chance,
                  That faine he would haue 
                        •
                     ound the means to flie,
                  But as aſide his eies he chanc'ſt to glance,
                  From out the towne the Grecians he be held
                  Come marching gainſt him proudly in the field
               
               
                  And in great haſt the Gyant Hercules,
                  
                  Like raging Tygar wild and furious,
                  Entring amongſt the thick'ſt of all the preaſe,
                  With courage bold and heart moſt valorous:
                  Of new began the Troyans to aſſaile,
                  And with his ſword to hew both plate & male.
               
               
                  His blowes they were ſo terrible and ſtrong,
                  That nothing could withſtand his paſſing might,
                  Whereby he laid full many a Knight along
                  Dead on the ground (for Troyans with the fight,
                  Which they againſt the Greekes all day had held,
                  So wearied were, that ſcarcely they could weld
               
               
                  Their weapons to defend themſelues withall)
                  For as he road amongſt them here and there,
                  You might behold here ten there twenty fall
                  Downe at his feet, that ſoone they forced were
                  To breake their rankes, and every man to flie
                  To ſaue themſelue from his great crueltie.
               
               
                  And ſo diſperſt, for feare they ſhun'd the place,
                  Abandoning their King vnfortunate,
                  Who being left in that diſtreſſed caſe,
                  Could not withſtand his hard and cruell fate:
                  For when as he with fierce and furious looke
                  
                     Laomedon eſpied, his Launce he tooke:
               
               
                  And ſetting ſpurres vnto his horſe in haſt,
                  He ran at him as hard as ere he might,
                  And with a blow vnto the ground him caſt:
                  Which done, with ſpeed downe from his horſe he light▪
                  
                  And with one ſtroke ſmote of his head in haſt,
                  Which ſcornefully vnto the ground he caſt,
               
               
                  Among the horſes feet in cruell wiſe.
                  Then in a rage he tooke his horſe againe,
                  And ſtaring with moſt fierce and fiery eies,
                  Like Lyon fell he ran vpon the plaine,
                  And killed all that met him in the way,
                  And brought full many Troyans to decay.
               
               
                  
                  That like to ſheepe amazed and in feare,
                  (As deſtitute of governor or guide)
                  Not able his great cruelty to beare,
                  Did run to ſaue their liues on every ſide:
                  The Grecians likewiſe in great multitude,
                  In every place ſo fiercely them purſude,
               
               
                  That ſcarce a man aliue of them remaind,
                  But all were ſlaine or elſe did ſlip aſide
                  To ſaue themſelues. Thus victorie obtaind,
                  The Grecians ſtraight vnto the towne did ride:
                  Which preſently they razed to the ground,
                  And al
                        •
                      the treaſure which therein they found,
               
               
                  They tooke and bare't into their ſhips in haſt,
                  Diſpoyling Temples with great violence,
                  And to the ground their Pagan Gods did caſt,
                  (For no man durſt againſt them make defence)
                  And mercileſſe (great pittie to behold)
                  With bloudy ſwords they kild both yong & old.
               
               
                  The tender child that mothers breſt did ſucke,
                  Eſcaped not their extreame cruelty,
                  For from the mothers arms they did them plucke,
                  And violently cauſed them to die:
                  Their maidens faire they did reſerue for priſe,
                  And with them did their beaſtly luſts ſuffice,
               
               
                  Regarding neither beautie, birth, nor name.
                  And when the houſes all deſtroyed were,
                  They raz'd the wals, and quite defaſt the ſame,
                  And Laomedons onlie daughter deare,
                  Faire Exion, whoſe beautie did excell,
                  To go with them by force they did compell;
               
               
                  Who by them all was giuen to Telamon,
                  
                  For his reward, (by Hercules his conſent)
                  Becauſe that he firſt enterd in the towne,
                  Wherewith he ſeemd to be as well conten
                        ••
                     
                  
                  As if that all the treaſure they had got
                  Within the towne had fallen to his lot.
               
               
                  And yet he did himſelfe therein abuſe,
                  For being home returnd from victory,
                  To take her for his wife he did refuſe,
                  But with her as his concubine did lie:
                  Regarding neither ſtate nor high degree,
                  Nor her deſcent from Princely majeſtie.
               
               
                  For if he had her tane to be his ſpouſe,
                  He could not haue diſparag'd his eſtate,
                  Conſidering that ſhe was of Princely houſe,
                  And royall bloud, although vnfortunate
                  Vpon his word and curteſie t'relie,
                  That kept her but his luſt to ſatisfie.
               
               
                  But Telamon therin thou waſt to blame,
                  To do a Princeſſe faire ſo great deſpight,
                  And make her to the world anopen ſhame,
                  When as thou ſhouldſt haue ſhew'd thy ſelfe her knight
                  And rather in defence of her to die,
                  Then that ſhe ſhould haue ſuffred villanie.
               
               
                  For through thy bad and fooliſh government,
                  So hote a ſparke of envie did ariſe
                  In Troyans hearts (which to revenge were bent)
                  That nothing could to quench the ſame ſuffice,
                  For envie old once rooted in the heart,
                  Doth ſieldome, or elſe never thence depart.
               
               
                  And if it burne within and flames not out,
                  Nor maketh ſhew of fume nor ſmoke at all,
                  The greater cauſe men haue thereof to doubt,
                  And where it lights t'will haue the greater fall.
                  Which you within this Hiſtory may ſee
                  At large in every point ſet downe to bee.
               
               
                  When that the towne was burnt & laid full low,
                  And all the wals vnto the ground was caſt,
                  And nothing thereof left to make a ſhow,
                  But it was ſpoyld and vtterly defaſt:
                  The Grecians did no longer time delay,
                  Vnto their ſhips their treaſure to convay.
               
               
                  But being richly laden with great ſtore
                  Of ſiluer, gold, and coſtly jewels rare,
                  (That not the meaneſt man of them was poore)
                  When wind did ſerue and weather waxed faire,
                  They 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     iles returne againe to make
                  To Theſſa
                           •••
                        
                      and with them then did take
               
               
                  Faire 
                        
                           ••
                        on, and many a proper maide,
                  And ſa
                        ••
                     ing forth with proſperous wind and good,
                  It was not long (through gentle Neptunes aide)
                  But they 
                        〈◊〉
                      with glad and merry mood
                  At their d
                        ••
                     ſired port, where on the ſand,
                  Great multitudes of people then did ſtand
               
               
                  To welcome them, with glad and ioyfull cheare,
                  Reioycing at their victory obtain'd,
                  With loſſe of ſo few men as did appeare:
                  And cauſe they had ſuch ſtore of treaſure gain'd,
                  Their Country to enrich for evermore,
                  They gaue great thanks vnto their Gods therefore.
               
               
                  Thus happily with triumph and renowne,
                  They being home returnd did liue in peace,
                  And throughout every City, land, and towne,
                  Their honor and their fame did ſtill encreaſe:
                  So that the compaſſe of the world throughout,
                  Each Nation to offend them ſtood in doubt:
               
               
                  
                  And feared them. For certaine tis they had
                  A multitude of men within their land
                  And wealth & treaſure great, the which they made
                  (When ſ'ever they tooke any thing in hand)
                  As common to them all, whereby they were
                  A terror to all Nations farre and nere.
               
               
                  Till fortune chanſt to whirle her wheele about,
                  And turnd their peace into ſuch bloudie warre,
                  As after in few yeares it did fall out,
                  When they and Troyans once againe did jarre:
                  Which at this time I meane not to declare,
                  Deſiring that herein you will meſpare:
               
               
                  And giue me leaue to reſt a little while,
                  For herewith I do meane to end this Booke,
                  And at another time direct my ſtile,
                  To perfect that which firſt I vndertooke:
                  Which in the next t'accompliſh I intend,
                  If life and leiſure God to me will lend.
               
               
                  Meane time if that by rudeneſſe I offend,
                  The gentle readers pardon I will craue,
                  With promiſe any fault I make t'amend,
                  If that the leaſt inſtruction I may haue:
                  And ſo in hope your favours you'le extend
                  To me herein: my firſt Booke thus ſhall end.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR.
            THE SECOND BOOKE.
            
               The Preface. CHAP. I.
               
                  
                     THe envious vaine which fortune flattering,
                  Doth vſe in this vncertaine ſtate of life,
                  Where all things fickle are and wavering,
                  Addicted is ſo much to warre and ſtrife:
                  That whatſoever courſe a man doth run,
                  The ſparkes thereof by no meanes he can ſhun.
               
               
                  For ſhe is ſtill ſo falſe and mutable,
                  That he which on her wheele doth higheſt clime,
                  And thinketh his eſtate ſecure and ſtable,
                  (At ſome vncertaine hower, day, or time,
                  When leaſt he doth ſuſpect a change of ſtate,)
                  She caſts him downe, and makes vnfortunate.
               
               
                  And with a ſmooth and double flattering face,
                  Makes ſhew of loue when leaſt ſhe is to truſt,
                  That well were he that had the power and grace,
                  To ſee and find her frauds and wiles vniuſt:
                  And all her engins and her ſnares well knew,
                  Which daily doe encreaſe and ſtill renew.
               
               
                  The which in truth full well affirme I can,
                  So many and ſo diuers are of kind,
                  That hetherto not any mortall man
                  Could euer them avoid, that I can find:
                  For though vnequall ballance ſhe doth beare,
                  With counterfeit & falſe diſſembling cheare,
               
               
                  And looke moſt ſmooth & full of flatterie,
                  She can man ſoone beguile and cleane bereaue
                  Of all his bliſſe in twinckling of an eie,
                  Her nature is ſo readie to deceaue:
                  And when ſhe changeth high to low eſtate,
                  With fleering looke ſhe ſtands & laughs thereat.
               
               
                  And yet oft times ſhe ſeemeth to be true,
                  For vnto ſome a while ſhe's favorable,
                  And then when as ſhe liſt to change her hew,
                  To otherſome ſhe is deceauable.
                  Such skill ſhe hath in tranſmutation,
                  That one ſheele raiſe, & other throweth downe.
               
               
                  To ſome ſhe giues renowne and victory,
                  And doth exalt their honor and their fame.
                  And ſome ſhe cauſeth moſt deceitfully,
                  (Though vndeſeru'd) t'incurre perpetuall ſhame.
                  To otherſome ſhe's gentle and bening,
                  And giues them lucke in all and every thing.
               
               
                  On ſome ſhe frownes, and hath them in diſdaine,
                  And by her power imbaſeth them full low.
                  And for to ſhow that earthly hope is vaine,
                  She can the ſtate of Princes overthrow:
                  And make them ſtoop for all their great renowne,
                  And high and mighty Emperors caſt downe,
               
               
                  From off the mount of high felicity,
                  (To make them feele her rankor and diſdaine,)
                  Into the vale of great adverſity.
                  The rich ſhe maketh poore, and then againe
                  Of poore makes rich, and as it is her kind,
                  Sets one before, another caſts behind.
               
               
                  Some one ſhe maketh run, another halt,
                  The third ſhe plungeth in extreamity,
                  The fourth ſhe doth to honor great exalt,
                  So that in her there's no ſecurity.
                  In ſome mans mouth ſweet Nectar ſhe diſti
                        •
                     th▪
                  
                  Anothers throat with bitter ga
                        ••
                      ſhe fil'th.
               
               
                  
                  And thus this wilfull Lady as we find,
                  Within her power great ſtore of potions hath,
                  And every one of ſtrange and ſeverall kind.
                  For ſhe to ſome with falſe and fained faith
                  Giues pleaſant wine, but when the ſweet is paſt,
                  (As tis her vſe) ſhe giveth them a taſt
               
               
                  Of Aloes, and of bitter wormewood drinke,
                  And corfiues which do fret and pierce moſt deepe
                  Into mens hearts, when as they little thinke
                  That fortune them beguiles and luls a ſleepe.
                  And thus if in this Queene of Variance
                  (Whoſe ioy doth ever end with ſome miſchāce.)
               
               
                  Men put their truſt, let them beſure at laſt,
                  Of what eſtate ſo euer that they be,
                  Sheele overthrow them with ſome ſodaine blaſt,
                  And cleane bereaue of all felicitie.
                  As by example of Laomedon,
                  
                  We may perceiue brought to confuſion
               
               
                  For little cauſe, or truth to ſay, for nought,
                  Wherefore let euery man by him take heed,
                  A quarrell to begin where none is ſought,
                  Leaſt that like him deſtruction be their meed.
                  For little fire with aſhes covered,
                  When men ſuppoſe it quencht and wholly dead,
               
               
                  May chance breake out, and on a ſodaine burne,
                  And when as men the ſame do ſeeke to ceaſe,
                  Full often in their faces it doth turne,
                  But he that medleth leaſt, liues moſt at eaſe:
                  Therefore let Kings and Princes every one,
                  A mirror make of King Laomedon.
                  
               
               
                  And ſee they vſe no kind of violence,
                  Nor ſuffer any one to offer wrong
                  To ſtrangers, when they giue them none offence:
                  For though their power & force be great & ſtrong
                  Within their land, when leaſt they thinke on it,
                  (As he was ſeru'd) they may their rigor quit,
               
               
                  And yeeld the like to them in other place,
                  When as perchance (vnto their overthrow)
                  They ſhall of them receiue but little grace.
                  Wherefore I wiſh when as they heare or know,
                  That ſtrangers in their Countries are arriu'd,
                  Let them with loue and honor be receau'd.
               
               
                  And wiſely thinke and hold it to be true,
                  That to a ſtranger courteſie to ſhow,
                  Vnto a noble mind belongs of due;
                  For ſure it is, as every man doth know,
                  That nothing doth their honors more augment,
                  Then when their only care and will is bent
               
               
                  For to relieue, to cheriſh, and to comfort,
                  With all the loue and honor that they may,
                  Such ſtrangers as vnto their Courts reſort,
                  That they of them may well report and ſay:
                  The contrary whereof much ſtrife hath wrought,
                  As in this preſent Hiſtory is taught.
               
               
                  The towne of Troy that firſt was built, thus ſpoil'd,
                  The people ſlaine, and many forſt to fly▪
                  
                  The remnant with great woe and ſorrow toil'd,
                  Int'exile led, liue in captiuity:
                  And Exion, as you haue heard me tell,
                  Went into Greece with Telamon to dwell.
               
               
                  For whom there roſe ſuch bloudy warre & ſtrife,
                  And ſo great vengeance tane for it in th'end
                  On either ſide, that thouſands loſt their life:
                  Which to declare I purpoſely intend,
                  If you vouchſafe it patiently to heare,
                  And for your good the ſame in mind will beare.
               
               
                  So hard and fatall is our deſtiny,
                  That no eſtate can permanently ſtand,
                  For every man ordained is to die,
                  And alterations chance in every Land:
                  And through the world where ever that we be,
                  We heare of nought but warre and treacherie.
               
               
                  Which ſerues to put vs in rememberance,
                  That many warres & battailes great are fought,
                  And many woes and miſeries do chance,
                  And mooued are for little cauſe or nought:
                  And diuers things for matters ſmall, or none,
                  At firſt begun, breed much confuſion.
               
               
                  Each one doth ſeeke another to deſtroy,
                  And bloudy minds are greatly to be fear'd,
                  Man careth not his brother to annoy,
                  And all becauſe we take no better heed:
                  But envie raignes ſo much in euery age,
                  That nought but bloud & death can it aſſwsge.
               
               
                  By it, although the cauſes were but ſmall,
                  If truth were knowne, on th'ancient towne of Troy,
                  
                  Both old and new ſuch miſeries did fall,
                  That at the laſt it did them both deſtroy:
                  Where during their ſo long & bloudy ſtrife,
                  Full many a valiant Knight did looſe his life.
               
               
                  And Kings and Princes died by dint of ſword,
                  Which to recount my hand doth ſhake for feare,
                  Leaſt that my barren wit ſhould not afford,
                  Fit tearmes & phraſes the truth for to declare,
                  Vnto my moſt renownd and ſoueraigne Liege,
                  Of all that paſt in that long ten yeres ſiege.
               
               
                  
                  Which if that he with patience pleaſe to heare,
                  And not diſdaine my rude and ſimple verſe,
                  And in his ſacred wiſedome with it beare,
                  While I this wofull Hiſtorie rehearſe:
                  (Whereof no doubt I haue, ſith that of grace,
                  Sweet mercy in his heart he doth embrace▪
                  
               
               
                  And that he is a Prince of Maieſtie,
                  Whoſe vertues are ſo excellent and rare,
                  That to addict his mind to pietie
                  It is his onely ſtudy and his care.)
                  With his ſupport I will here vndertake,
                  A true diſcourſe vnto you now to make.
               
               
                  What did befall vnto the towne of Troy,
                  
                  (That newly was erected once againe,)
                  When Greeks did it the ſecond time deſtroy,
                  As Guydo doth the ſame at large explaine.
                  And if my verſe for want of skill ſeeme lame,
                  Let me intreat you to correct the ſame.
               
               
                  But blame me not, ſith that the fault's not mine,
                  For as you know the Engliſh tongue is harſh,
                  And wanteth words to make vp perfect rime,
                  Where it in many places is too ſcarce.
                  And truth to ſay, my wit will not aſpire
                  To follow Guydoes phraſe as I deſire.
               
               
                  Who in his Latine verſe doth ſo exceed
                  In Rethoricke, that my tranſlation
                  Requires a farre more fine and ſubtill head,
                  To follow him in like conſtruction.
                  Verbatim as a learned Gramarian,
                  Or as a skilfull Rethoritian,
               
               
                  I only take vpon me to declare
                  The Hiſtorie according to the ſence,
                  And truth thereof, which is my chiefeſt care,
                  Leaſt I thereby to ſome might breed offence.
                  And truth of verſe I likewiſe ſet aſide,
                  As wanting one therein to be my guide.
               
               
                  And to correct and mend them that are wrong.
                  My onely ſeeking is truth to declare,
                  Regarding neither verſes ſhort nor long,
                  For curiouſneſſe therein I doe not care.
                  Pretending not in any thing to varry,
                  Nor yet my Author Guido to contrary.
               
               
                  Nor from him diſagree in truth of ſence,
                  But to conclude our meanings all in one
                  And to agree therein, for Eloquence
                  Or Rethoricke, I you aſſure there's none
                  In me, your heads with phraſes fine to fill,
                  Nor yet haue I in painting any skill.
               
               
                  With colours freſh and gay to pleaſe the ere,
                  I nought can vſe, but ſad and mournfull blacke,
                  And therewithall my ſelfe will ſatisfie,
                  Which in good part I you beſeech to take.
                  And ſo in hope your favors I ſhall win,
                  I will proceed the ſtory to begin.
               
               
                  WHen as the noble King Laomedon
                  
                  Was ſlaine in field by cruell Hereules,
                  
                  When as the Greekes did firſt deſtroy the towne,
                  He had a ſonne and heire as Guido ſa
                        •
                     es,
                  Cald Priamus, a Prince of courage ſtout,
                  Whoſe fortune was at that time to be out
               
               
                  With Hecuba his wife, and did aſſault
                  A Caſtle ſtrong, wherein a Lord did lie,
                  Which at that time did ſtubbornly revolt,
                  And long before had warred cruelly
                  Againſt the towne of Troy with force and might,
                  (Yet ſubiect was vnto the ſame by right.)
               
               
                  Where Priam and his ſonnes in campe did lie,
                  Accompanied with many a worthy Knight,
                  (Their power and force againſt their foes to trie,)
                  And it beſieged round both day and night.
                  With vow the ſame by fierce aſſault to win,
                  And to deſtroy them all that were within.
               
               
                  (For he as then was ſtrong and valorous,
                  Young, luſty, and of fierce and hawtie heart,
                  And therewithall ſo ſtout and ventrous,
                  That feare of death could neuer make him ſtart.)
                  And to be firſt that in the field did enter
                  Againſt his foes, his life therein to venter.
               
               
                  Whereby hewan great honour and renowne,
                  And for his time was held a worthy Knight.
                  Till Fortune from her wheele did caſt him downe;
                  And in his fall did ſhow her power and might:
                  To change and alter things as ſhe thinks good,
                  Reſpecting neither poore nor Princely blood.
               
               
                  This Priamus by Hecuba his wife
                  Eight goodly, faire, and Princely children had,
                  (Which all were ſlaine and died in the ſtrife
                  And bloody warre that Grecions gainſt him made:
                  Whereof there were fiue ſons, & daughters three,
                  Which I will name each one in his degree.
               
               
                  The firſt and eldeſt Hector had to name,
                  Whoſe worthineſſe as farre abroad doth flie;
                  (And is extold by Trumpe of Lady Fame.)
                  As Phoebus doth r
                        •
                     n compaſſe 
                        •
                     out the skie
                  In one daies ſpace, for authors certifie,
                  And ſay, be was th
                        ••
                     oo
                        •
                      of chival
                        •
                     ie.
               
               
                  
                  Of Knight-hood true the onely Soveraigne,
                  And Mirror bright and cleare of Nobleneſſe,
                  And did therein vnto ſuch hight attaine,
                  That no man can ſufficiently expreſſe
                  The great and valiant acts he did archiue,
                  Surpaſſing all that ever yet did liue:
               
               
                  And therewithall he was moſt vertuous,
                  Diſcreet, and wiſe, and friendly to each one.
                  Of whom the deeds and proweſſe marvelous,
                  Reported are, and haue been long agone
                  By many ancient Authors fore our dayes,
                  That write of him to his eternall praiſe.
               
               
                  The ſecond Sonne by birth and Dignitie
                  Was Parris cald, who did exceed ſo farre
                  In perſon, beautie, ſhape, dexteritie,
                  And was eſteem'd therein, to be ſo rare,
                  That in his time as farre as I can heare,
                  Vpon the earth there neuer liu'd his peere.
               
               
                  Who likewiſe was a ſtout and worthy Knight,
                  And in a bow had ſuch delight and skill,
                  (Wherewith he vſed commonly to fight,)
                  That where he aim'd, he would be ſure to kill.
                  None ever did ſurpaſſe him in the ſame,
                  And Alexander was his other name.
               
               
                  
                     Deiphobus was the third Sonne by degree,
                  A Knight of worthy ſame and great renowne,
                  Strong, hardy, and of courage franke and free,
                  Exceeding wiſe, and of great diſcretion,
                  A counſellor in peace and warre moſt graue,
                  And in the field a Champion bold and braue.
               
               
                  The fourth of them was Hele
                           •••
                        
                      by name,
                  Who onely gaue his minds vnto his booke,
                  And was ſo much addicted to the ſame,
                  That pleaſure in no other thing he tooke.
                  Whereby ſo wiſe and learned he became,
                  That all men did admire him for the ſame.
               
               
                  The Fiſt Sonne was a hardie valiant Knight,
                  Although the laſt and yongeſt of them all,
                  And puiſſantly againſt his 
                        •
                     oes did fight,
                  Whom Troy
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        s the hiſtorie doth call:
                  And for his valiant heart and courage braue,
                  The name of ſecond Hector men him gaue.
               
               
                  So many valiant acts hy him were don,
                  While that the Grecian warre continued,
                  Whereby ſo much renowne therein he won,
                  That after Hectors death he was ſo feared,
                  And did the Greekes ſo cruelly aſſaile,
                  That nought againſt the Towne they could prevaile.
               
               
                  Yet Uirgill in his Booke of Troyan warre,
                  (By him cald his En
                           •
                        idos) ſaith thus,
                  That Hecuba vnto King Pryam bare
                  Two younger Sonnes, the one Polidorus,
                  
                  Whom (when the Grecians firſt did take in ha
                        •
                     d
                  Their bloody warre, and entred in his land
               
               
                  As then but young) he ſtraight did ſend away
                  Vnto a King that was his truſty friend,
                  With ſtore of treaſure great, with him to ſtay
                  Till he might ſee what jſſue and what end
                  The warre would haue, as then but new begon
                  Betweene the Greekes and him, before the towne.
               
               
                  But he in whom he did repoſe his truſt,
                  When as he vnderſtood King Pryams ſtate,
                  (Deſirous of the gold which makes men thurſt)
                  Did cauſe the Troian Prince vnfortunate,
                  To be bereav'd of life moſt cruelly,
                  And buried in a place full ſecretly,
               
               
                  Hard by the Sea, ſo deepe within the ground,
                  That no man could his treaſon great eſpie,
                  Nor never afterward his body found.
                  And ſo the Proverbe old did verefie,
                  (Who ſo on gold doth ſet his onely care,
                  To win the ſame no miſchiefe he will ſpare.)
               
               
                  The ſecond of thoſe two cald Ganimed,
                  
                  Vpon a time did hunt for his diſport,
                  And ſtraying in a wood by fortune led,
                  God Iupiter (as Uirgill doth report,)
                  Vp to the skies did ſodainely him take,
                  And there for ever Butler did him make.
               
               
                  The eldeſt of King Priams daughters three,
                  
                     Ceruſa nam'd, the ſtory doth declare,
                  Was married to a Lord of high degree,
                  
                     Aeneas cal'd, a man of beauty rare:
                  (Whoſe Father was a Duke of noble fame,
                  And Uirgill ſaith, Anchiſes had to name,
               
               
                  And on the Goddeſſe Uenus him begot.)
                  For this Aeneas honor and his fame,
                  
                     Uirgill compild a Booke wherein he wrot
                  His travells all at large, and doth the ſame
                  From his departure out of Troy begin,
                  And ſhowes how he all Italie did win.
               
               
                  (Long after that the great and famous Towne
                  Of Troy deſtroyd, and cleane defaced was)
                  And what great conqueſts were archieu'd and d
                        •
                     n
                  By him, as he along the Seas did paſſe.
                  And how that firſt at Carthage he did ſtay,
                  Ere that he further forth went on his way,
               
               
                  
                  Whereas Queene Dido pierſt with Cupids dart,
                  Of him became ſo much enamored,
                  That for becauſe from thence he did depart,
                  For loue of him her ſelfe ſhe murthered.
                  All which and more in Virgill you may ſee
                  In Latine verſe, at large declard to bee.
               
               
                  King Priams ſecond daughter had to name
                  
                     Caſſandra, as the ancient ſtories ſaies,
                  Who by her wit attaind ſo loftie fame,
                  That ſhe was holden for a Prophetes:
                  Her skill in Arts of all kinds was ſo much,
                  That like to her there nere was any ſuch.
               
               
                  For future things ſhe could declare and ſhow,
                  And what was done within the world ſo round,
                  Before it came to paſſe ſhe did it know,
                  Her learning was ſo deepe and ſo profound.
                  Her manner was religiouſly to liue,
                  And onely to the ſame her mind did giue.
               
               
                  The third and youngeſt daughter Policene,
                  
                  For ſhape and beautie paſt her ſiſters twaine,
                  Who liued all her daies a Virgin cleane,
                  Till ſhe by Pirrhus cruelty was ſlaine
                  In preſence of her Mother, to fulfill
                  And ſatisfie his fierce and bloody will.
               
               
                  And Priamus as you likewiſe may read
                  Had thirty valiant baſtard children,
                  All ſonnes which did ſo much in armes exceed,
                  That in their times they proved valiant men.
                  Whoſe names to ſhow as now ile overpaſſe,
                  Till that occaſion ſerues in other place.
               
               
                  WHile Priam ſo the caſtle did incloſe
                  To win the ſame by force, & dayly ſought
                  All meanes he could to ouercome his foes:
                  The wofull newes vnto him there was brought,
                  How that the Greekes the towne of Troy had won,
                  And kild his father King Laomedon.
                  
               
               
                  The walles and howſes thereof cleane caſt downe,
                  The people all ſlaine with great cruelty,
                  And left nought ſtanding vpright in the towne,
                  But all on ground did flat and euen lie.
                  And Exion made to Thelamon a prey,
                  Who had her captiue led with him away.
               
               
                  He was in mind ſo much aſtoniſhed,
                  And ſodaine woe his ſences ſo did ſtraine,
                  That for a while he ſeem'd as one were dead,
                  And inwardly did feele ſuch mortall paine;
                  That he did thinke his heart within his breſt
                  Would cleaue in twaine, ſo much he was oppreſt
               
               
                  With ſorrow, griefe, perplexitie, and woe,
                  And therewithall the teares did faſt diſtill
                  Out from his eies, downe to the earth ſo low;
                  That ſure if that he might haue had his will,
                  He rather would haue choſen there to die,
                  Then to haue felt ſo great extremitie.
               
               
                  (Wherewith he did on fortune much exclaime;
                  That ſhe to him was ſo deceaueable,
                  To worke him ſuch diſgrace and open ſhame,
                  And ſhew'd her ſelfe to be ſo mutable,
                  With moſt deſpightfull, ſterne, and cruell face,
                  As one cleane void of mercy, and of grace.
               
               
                  For ſhe of envious heart and ſpightfull thought,
                  In cruell wiſe did ſhew her fell intent,
                  And all at once her malice on him wrought,
                  As vnto his deſtruction fully bent.
                  (So wauering and vnconſtant is her mind.
                  Wherein her greateſt pleaſure ſhe doth find.)
               
               
                  For which forthwith he made no more delay,
                  But with a heavy heart, and face full pale,
                  He did put off his faire and rich array,
                  And never ceaſt his fortune to bewaile
                  With mournfull cheare, ſtill caſting downe his head,
                  And in that ſort a dolefull life he led.
               
               
                  Apparelling himſelfe in mournfull blacke,
                  And minding there no longer to abide,
                  In all the haſt he could the 
                        •
                     iedge vp brake,
                  And preſently to Troy ward forth did ride
                  With all his hoaſt, who likewiſe were full ſad,
                  And for his loſſe and theirs, great ſorrow made.
               
               
                  And when the towne ſo much defaſt he found,
                  And that the walles that were ſo huge and ſtrong,
                  So plaine and even beaten were to ground,
                  And nothing ſtood, but all was laid along.
                  The towers that reacht allmoſt vp to the skie,
                  And builded were ſo faire and ſumptuouſly,
               
               
                  Cleane overthrowne with great confuſedneſſe,
                  His people ſlaine, and Siſter led away,
                  And all made waſt like to a wilderneſſe,
                  For griefe, and woe, he wiſt not what to ſay:
                  Such and ſo great was his extremitie,
                  But at that time he could't not remedie.
               
               
                  Which made him moſt extreamly ſob and weepe▪
                  
                  For nothing could his ſorrow great aſſwage,
                  And from his breſt to fetch great ſighes and deepe▪
                  
                  And in that wofull plight and furious rage,
                  His men and he a mournfull life did lead,
                  And in the ſame three daies continued.
               
               
                  
                  Till at the laſt when clowdes of ſorrow backe
                  Began to cleare, and ſtormes of woe to ceaſe,
                  And that their mourning ſomewhat ſeem'd to ſlack
                  And cauſd them in their minds to find ſome eaſe.
                  For when the floood of warre is gone and paſt,
                  An ebbe of ioy doth follow it in haſt,
               
               
                  Still to lament and mourne doth not amend,
                  But more impaire, and though we vſe to waile
                  And weepe for friends, our ſorrow once muſt end,
                  For after death teares will then nought availe.)
                  King Priamus abandoning all care,
                  Deviſing how he might the towne repaire.
               
               
                  Determin'd in that great extremitie,
                  To ſhow himſelfe a Prince of courage braue,
                  And making vertue of neceſſitie,
                  Couragiouſly his credit then to ſaue.
                  (When as his ſorrowes great orepaſſed were,)
                  And that the aire began ſomewhat to cleare,
               
               
                  And void the miſts of his adverſitie,
                  And that the prime of woe and heauineſſe,
                  Night paſt and gone, was forſt away to flie,
                  By ſonne-ſhine of ſome new found joyfulneſſe.
                  For that the friend of woe and miſerie
                  Is joy, when men haue paſt extremitie.
               
               
                  When he had grieu'd in mind a little ſpace,
                  And long indured ſorrow, woe, and ſmart,
                  (And that his care did ſomewhat overpaſſe)
                  He rouſ'd himſelfe, and plucking vp his heart,
                  More ioyfull to his ſouldiers did appeare,
                  And ſo hegan to worke as you ſhall heare.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  ¶ How King Priam Sonne to Laomedon butl
                        •
                      the Cutie of Troy againe, much ſtronger, greater, and fairer then euer it was before.
               
               
                  KIng Priams ſorrow great, and griefe ore-paſt,
                  As vnto you before I did declare.)
                  He purpoſed vpon the ground made waſt,
                  Where as the ancient monuments firſt were:
                  To build a towne much ſtronger then it was,
                  Which to effect he did no time let paſſe.
               
               
                  But ſtraight ſent forth into each Countrey,
                  For certaine men or wit ingenious,
                  And skilfull worke: men in Geometrie,
                  That could invent workes fine and curious:
                  As Maſons, Cervers, Carpenters, and all
                  That skilfull were in Arts mecannicall.
               
               
                  (And whereſoere he could once know or heare
                  Of any expert workemen of that kind,
                  He would not ſpare to ſend both farre and neare,
                  Nor never ceaſt vntill he did them find.)
                  For ſuch as could deviſe a ſtately wall,
                  With battlements, and rauelings great & ſmall.
               
               
                  For men that were of fine and ſubtill head,
                  The Marble ſtone to polliſh with the graine,
                  And Alablaſter white, and Purphier read,
                  To hew, and cut and make them ſmoth and plaine,
                  For gravers of all kind of Images,
                  And ſuch as Art of painting did profeſſe,
               
               
                  And cunning were their works to beautifie
                  With colours freſh, that long time would indure.
                  And that could make an Image with an eye,
                  As if it were a liuely creature.
                  And counterfeit in mettall, wood, and ſtone,
                  As curious worke as ere Pignalion
                  
               
               
                  Deviſed, or as Hiſtories doe tell
                  
                     Apollo could invent, for he did frame
                  
                     Darius Tombe, the which did ſo excell
                  For wormanſhip, that none ere paſt the ſame.
                  Which th'emperor commanded him to raiſe,
                  That men thereby his worthy fame might praiſe.
               
               
                  He ſent likewiſe for ioyners that had skill
                  In Cedar, Cipreſſe, and in Walnut-tree,
                  To worke and with imboſſed flowers to fill
                  The creaſts that round about the walles ſhould bee.
                  And whoſoere in building was erpert,
                  And praiſe deſerued therein by deſert,
               
               
                  Or had the name in workeman-ſhip 
                        •
                     excell,
                  The King would his direction therein haue,
                  How farre or wide ſoever he did dwell,
                  Or what ſoever wages he would craue.
                  No coſt he ſpard in any kind of thing,
                  That he his worke vnto effect might bring.
               
               
                  Intending ſuch a ſumptuous Towne to frame,
                  That it ſhould paſſe all others whatſoere,
                  And in moſt ſpacious wiſe to build the ſame,
                  For widenes, breadth, & length, that it ſhould beare.
                  And with ſo high, ſo thicke, and ſtrong a wall,
                  That when ſoever warre ſhould him befall,
               
               
                  
                  The enemy by no meanes might it take.
                  And to begin he made them dig the ground,
                  (Whereas the walles ſhould ſtand that he wold make
                  To compaſſe and encloſe the Citie round.)
                  Within the ſelfe ſame ruind place, whereas
                  The ancient towne of Troy firſt builded was.
               
               
                  Inlarging them much more then firſt they were,
                  By many miles, for that the towne new made
                  He purpoſed ſhould greater compaſſe beare,
                  Then th'ancient Towne in circuit euer had.
                  And in ſo holſome aire the ſame did place,
                  That it vnto all men delightfull was.
               
               
                  The compaſſe of the walles ſo ſhaped out,
                  The workemen did begin to build the ſame,
                  Which being raiſd and ſet vp round about,
                  They markt the ſtreets, and did the howſes frame
                  Of great and goodly ſtones, both ſquare & roſid
                  The like whereof was no where to be found.
               
               
                  In all the world, (for buiding paſſing faire,)
                  If that the ſame throghout you ſhold haue ſought.
                  The workeman-ſhip ſo curious was and rare,
                  That for to beautifi't it wanted nought.
                  I am too ſimple witted to define,
                  Aud tell how they did worke by rule and line.
               
               
                  Or to diſcribe the ſame in every part,
                  But well I dare affirme and witneſſe beare,
                  It was ſo fram'd by cunning and by Art,
                  That of the like I nere did read nor heare.
                  And that it might haue great proſperity,
                  High honor, fame, and much felicity.
               
               
                  As ſoone as it was made he did it name
                  As it before was cald the towne of Troy,
                  
                  And ſole
                        •
                     ly did dedicate the ſame
                  To Neptune, with great triumphe, feats, and ioy,
                  (On whom the Troians chiefely did depend,
                  And therefore hope't he would the ſame defend
               
               
                  The length which in the walles it did include,
                  Right forth was three daies iourney and no leſſe,
                  As much likewiſe in had in Latitude,
                  Which both compar'd the compaſſe doe expreſſe,
                  And ſhow to be iuſt nine daies fully out,
                  Ere that a man could travell in about.
               
               
                  The like to it was never mentioned
                  Nor ſpoken off in any Hiſtory,
                  Before or after to be edified,
                  Wherin ſo great a length and breadth did lie.
                  Nor yet ſo faire and beautif
                        •
                     ll to ſee
                  As Guido doth report the ſame to bee.
               
               
                  The walles in hight three hundred Cubits were,
                  Imbatled and bul warked for fight:
                  And in their thickneſſe ſuch proportion bare,
                  That Cannon ſho
                        •••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      them had no might.
                  And all the walles and howſes in the towne
                  Were Marble mi
                        ••
                      with Alablaſter ſtone.
               
               
                  Which made it ſhow ſo faire and delectable,
                  That ſince this earthly globe did firſt begin,
                  No Citie vnto 
                        〈◊〉
                      comparable,
                  That ever mortall man did enter in.
                  And at the end of every wall was plaſt
                  A Crowne of gold, with precious ſtones inchaſt▪
                  
               
               
                  And round about the walles were towers ſet
                  Moſt beautifully and faire of Marble cleare,
                  And Alablaſter fine, and ſhining jet,
                  Which gainſt the ſunne ſo gliſtring did appeare,
                  That as by them men longſt the walles paſt vnder,
                  It ſtroke into their minds no little wonder.
               
               
                  To enter in the towne the ſtory ſayes,
                  Six beautifull and goodly gates there were,
                  Whereof the firſt was cald Dardamides,
                  
                  The ſecond did the name of 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      beare.
                  The third of them was called Helias,
                  
                  The forth it had the name of Cethe
                           ••
                        ,
                  
               
               
                  The fift Troian, the ſixt of them and laſt
                  
                     Antinorides called. And on each ſide
                  At th'entring in of euery gate was plaſt
                  Two towers of ſtone, that were both spuare & wide
                  Before the which great Images did 
                        ••
                     and
                  Like Giants fell, with Pollaxes in hand.
               
               
                  And ſeem'd as if the entry they would let,
                  To euery one that through the gates did paſſe.
                  And on each terret likewiſe there was ſet,
                  The ſhapes of Tigers, Lyons, Beares, and Aſſe,
                  Bores, Bulls, and Harts, (with great and ſpacious
                  Fierce Dragos, Elophāts, & Vnicornes, (hornes)
               
               
                  All made of Copper, Latin, and of Braſſe
                  So finely and ſo cunningly contriu'd,
                  That to behold them pleaſure great it was,
                  For that they ſhew'd as if that they had liu'd▪
                  
                  And ſeemd to threaten, grin at, and menace,
                  Such as did ſtand to looke them in the face.
               
               
                  About the towne for ſafegard and refuge,
                  Were many Bulwarks plaſt aſſaults to beare.
                  And at each gate Portcullices moſt huge
                  Of Iron ſtrong, in warlike wiſe there were.
                  And for more ſtrength the gates of braſſe compoſd
                  The which within with maſſy barres were cloſ'd.
               
               
                  
                  And croſt with ſtakes, deepe pi
                        •
                     cht into the ground,
                  And chained vp for ſafety and defence,
                  So that no way there was, 
                        〈◊〉
                      be found
                  To enter in the 
                        〈◊〉
                      by violence.
                  The gates once ſhut, 
                        •
                     ot it by ſtrength to take,
                  Or forcibly 
                        •
                     battery to make.
               
               
                  The howſes in the 
                        •
                     owne were finely plaſt
                  In even ſtreets, not ſcattered here and there,
                  Not one of them in height the other paſt,
                  But all alike, iuſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  Moſt cunningly deviſd and fram'd each one
                  Of Marble, and of coſtly Burpheir ſtone.
               
               
                  To tell you of the curious Maſonrie,
                  Of grauen kno
                        ••
                     , and Antic
                        •
                     e works moſt braue,
                  Deviſd to pleaſe the fine and curious eye,
                  I know my ſelfe too little wit to haue:
                  And though I would them name in engliſh verſe,
                  Yet would it be too long time to rehearſe.
               
               
                  They are ſo many, ſtrange, and rare to tell,
                  For that betweene the ſtones and morter were,
                  (So much they did in ſu
                        •
                     ptuouſneſſe excell.)
                  Thin plates of Copper gilt thruſt in moſt faire,
                  To make them ioyne by level and by line, (ſhine.
                  Which mongſt the Marble ſtones moſt cleare did
               
               
                  Againſt the Sunne, when as his Orient light
                  With radiant beames did from the chriſtall skie
                  Smite on the gold, and made it gliſter bright,
                  And giue a ſhow moſt beautifull to th'eie.
                  The ſtreets likewiſe were ſet ſo large and wide,
                  With iuſt and equall diſtance on each ſide,
               
               
                  (By workemen worthy praiſe for rare deviſe,)
                  That no infectio
                        •
                     s aire once them annoyd▪
                  
                  Within the towne, nor any miſts did riſe,
                  But preſently againe did ſoone avoid.
                  Becauſe there was ſo great and wide a ſpace
                  Within the ſtreets, the ſame away to chaſe
               
               
                  By wind, whoſe blaſts moſt ſweet and comfortable,
                  Did yeild ſo pleaſant aire within the towne,
                  Which to the Troians was ſo delectable,
                  As in the ſtreets they paſſed vp and downe:
                  That vnto them it was a great comfort,
                  When as they walks abroad to play and ſport.
               
               
                  And through the towne in every ſtreet was made
                  Long galleries, that ſtood on pillars ſtrong
                  Of Marble ſtone, (which ſuch douiſes had
                  Of Pinacles, and arches wide and long,
                  That they moſt faire and beautifull did ſhow,)
                  Deuiſed 
                        •
                     rie 
                        ••
                     e head for men to go.
               
               
                  When as it chanſt to raine, 
                        ••
                     d haile, or ſnow,
                  As alſo vnder them to ſit and walke,
                  When ſtormes of wind in bolſhous wiſe did b
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  And therein to conferre, conſult▪ and talke,
                  As marchants vſe in townes for common we
                        •
                     e,
                  To meet about their marchandize to deale.
               
               
                  The howſes covered were cleane ouer head,
                  (As being flat aboue that men might go
                  Thereon,) with plancks, and over that with lead,
                  With ſpouts full
                        •
                     ong the water forth to throw
                  Into the ſtreets, from whence it paſt away
                  Through grates, which did the ſame from thēce cō
                     
                        •
                     ay
               
               
                  The ſtreets were ſmothly pau'd in chequer wiſe,
                  With polliſht ſtories of colourred and white.
                  And any Trade whatſoere man could deviſe,
                  King Priam vſd and ſought all meanes he might
                  To bring't into the towne, where men did ſee
                  Each ſeverall Art in ſeverall ſtreets to bee.
               
               
                  That ſo they might for more commoditie,
                  And better meanes to ſell and vent their ware,
                  Worke by themſelues at their one libertie,
                  As goldſmith rich that ſe
                        •
                     lles the jewels rare.
                  Th'imbroderer, and weauers of each kind.
                  The Mercers in whoſe coſtly ſhops men find
               
               
                  Rich cloth of Gold, of Arras, Tapiſtrie,
                  Of ſendall, and of Taffetie moſt faire,
                  And every other ſtuffe which vſually
                  The weauers make, and commonly men were.
                  Smiths alſo, that could make and forge full well
                  Darts, Daggers, ſwords, & ſpeares of perfect ſteele
               
               
                  Pollaxes, billes, and kniues moſt ſharpely ground,
                  And arrowe heads, with other weapons more
                  That in the fields are vſd, were therein found.
                  Of Bowyers, and of fletchers eke great ſtore.
                  And ſuch as make coat armors faire and braue,
                  And enſignes which in field men vſe to haue.
               
               
                  And euery other kind of furniture
                  For Marſhall men, which commonly we ſee
                  Worne in the warre, and dayly put in vre.
                  And euery other Art that nam'd may bee
                  Was in that towne moſt plentifully found,
                  So much it did in every thing abound.
               
               
                  And through the towne a Riuer ſwift and cleare
                  Did paſſe along, deviding it in twaine,
                  Which on each ſide great ſtore of Milles did beare
                  In time of need to grind each kind of graine:
                  The name whereof was Xa
                           •
                        tas as I find,
                  Which did abound with fiſh of euery kind.
               
               
                  
                  Which River was ſo cunningly conuaid,
                  That in the arches built vpon the ſame,
                  Great ſtore of pipes of lead were cloſely layd,
                  Whereby into the houſes water came,
                  And ſerued many Conduits in the towne,
                  And ſcowr'd the filth away as it ran downe
               
               
                  In channels which did run cleane vnder ground,
                  Whereby they were waſht and ſcowred cleane:
                  That neither filth nor durt was to be found,
                  Nor in the towne could any way be ſeene▪
                  
                  And was convaied thence ſo ſecretly,
                  That no man could the paſſage thereof ſpie:
               
               
                  Wherby you might haue gon throughout the ſtreet,
                  And neither durt, nor dunghill once haue ſeene,
                  Which made the Towne ſo pleaſant and ſo ſweet,
                  Becauſe that it was kept ſo faire and cleane,
                  That it was void of all corruption,
                  Peſtiferous aire and fowle jnfection.
               
               
                  Which often by their force and violence
                  Doe breed continuall fowle and noyſome ſmels,
                  And are the onely cauſe of peſtilence.
                  A River like to this (as Virgill tells)
                  Within the towne of Roome deviſed was,
                  Cald Tiber, which through the midſt therof doth paſſe.
               
               
                  To people this ſo great and famous towne,
                  The Troyans being but in number ſmall:
                  King Priam ſent to each place vp and downe,
                  In countreys farre and neere, to moue and call
                  All men to come and to jnhabite there,
                  Reſpecting not from whence they came, or were▪
                  
               
               
                  And made them free to trafficke and to deale
                  Within the Towne, as natiue Countrey-men.
                  By that meanes to enrich the common-weale
                  Of his new Towne. Which being done, and when
                  It did begin with people to increaſe,
                  And that they liu'd in pleaſure, wealth, & peace;
               
               
                  King Priam moued with gseat affection
                  Which vnto Mars the God of warre he had,
                  Determined of pure devotion,
                  In honour of his name, there ſhould be made
                  A yeerely Iuſts, where valiantly on horſe
                  Each Knight ſhould ſhew his power, ſtrength, & force.
               
               
                  Within the towne, to win renowne and fame,
                  And to that end a place he did ordaine
                  All raild about, of purpoſe for the ſame,
                  Which halfe a mile in circuit did containe.
                  To wraſtle in, and at the Barriers fight,
                  With playes in the Iſle of Greet of ancient right.
               
               
                  Were long ſince found, and onely dedicate
                  To Mars their God, for they did then beleeue
                  By doing ſo he would preſerue their ſtate,
                  And in their need would aid them and releeue,
                  The like did noble Priamus fur
                        •
                     iſe,
                  And to that end-thoſe triumphs did deviſe.
               
               
                  Men ſayd within this towne was firſt found out
                  The game of Cheſts, ſo ſubtill and ſo wiſe,
                  Which who ſo plaies (beleeue it without dout,)
                  Muſt driue out of his head all fantaſies:
                  It is ſo full of ſhifts, and ſubtiltie,
                  And more and more a man may ſtill deviſe.
               
               
                  Whereby if men ſhould ſtudy all their daies,
                  To learne the skill of this ſo curious game;
                  He neuer could remember halfe the plaies,
                  That are and may be vſed in the ſame.
                  It doth conſiſt of ſuch diuerſitie,
                  Of wards found out by skill and ſubtiltie.
               
               
                  Of Troians as mine Author teſtifies.
                  Which his ſuppoſed meere oppinion,
                  
                     Iacobus de Vitriaco denies,
                  And in his Booke for truth makes mention
                  How that a graue Philoſopher and wiſe,
                  Cald Philometer, firſt did it deviſe.
               
               
                  In Caldea with pollicy he wrought
                  To ſtay a tyrants fierce and furious mind.
                  And though frō thence it into Greece was brought.
                  They ſay likewiſe the Troians firſt did find
                  The playes of dice and tables dayly vſd,
                  Which ſince that time had been ſo much abuſd.
               
               
                  For that in them there is ſo great deceit
                  By falſe and couſning dice, and wrangling play,
                  Which many vſe the ſimple ſort to cheat▪
                  
                  That much debate ariſeth night and day,
                  Mongſt ihoſe that dayly excerciſe doe make
                  Of play and game, and pleaſure therein take▪
                  
               
               
                  For if the dice doe favor men a while,
                  And giue them leaue to win by happy chance:
                  An other time againe they 
                        •
                     them beguile,
                  Which makes the players fall at variance.
                  For that when as they thinke to mend their ſtate,
                  By play at dice they proue vnfortunate.
               
               
                  And many that are plunged in diſtreſſe,
                  And by their play made needy poore and bare,
                  By playe ſometime attaine to great riches,
                  And ſome mans joy procures an others care,
                  And by a chance at haſſard or paſſage,
                  Ones glad and laughes, an other he doth rage.
               
               
                  
                  For if one win, another doth contrary,
                  Like as the bones are throwne out of the hand
                  An Hundred times a day, th'are ſeene to varry
                  And no man can his chance at them withſtand.
                  Wherefore I wiſh each man ſuch play to ſhunne,
                  Leaſt that he looſe, and ſo may be vndone.
               
               
                  In Troy likewiſe they vſed comedies,
                  In Theaters for pleaſures and delight:
                  And many ſtrange and ſtately Tragedies,
                  Which vſually were playd both day and night.
                  The difference whereof that you may know,
                  I will in briefe the ſame vnto you ſhow.
               
               
                  A Comedie doth many times begin
                  With actions, that diſlike at firſt doe cauſe,
                  But at the laſt as men proceed therein,
                  They end in joy, with gladneſſe, and applauſe:
                  And onely ſpeakes of men of meane degree,
                  And ſuch as fallen are in povertie.
               
               
                  A Tragedy contrarily doth treate
                  Of matters which doe proſperouſly proceed,
                  And ſhowes the liues and hearts of perſons great,
                  As Princes which in honour doe exceed,
                  But ends with ſorrow, griefe, and miſerie,
                  That happeneth vnto them before they die.
               
               
                  And alſo tells how fortune doth beguile
                  Full nany Kings, and Emperors of fame,
                  Whoſe acts ſhe ſeemes to favor for a while,
                  But at the laſt ſhe brings them vnto ſhame,
                  And turnes their glory into miſerie,
                  To make of them a woefull Tragedie.
               
               
                  The manner how their Tragedies they playd
                  Was in this ſort, whereas they did deviſe,
                  (Within a Theater, as firſt I ſayd,)
                  To ſet an Altar made halfe circle wiſe,
                  Which on the top a loftie pulpit bare,
                  Wherein there ſtood a Poet to declare
               
               
                  With Eloquent and Rethoricion phraſe,
                  The noble deeds of Kings and Princes great,
                  And eke the fame of Conquerors to rayſe,
                  Which in their liues by valor they did get.
                  And how that they with lawrell crowned were
                  For their deſerts, as ſtories witnes beare.
               
               
                  An'd liud in honour great, tell Parchas fell
                  Did end their liues, by ſtroke of Atropos.
                  
                  And afer that in mournefull wiſe did tell,
                  How piteouſly each one the ſame did loſe,
                  And were by Fortune brought vnto their end,
                  Gainſt whom it is but folly to contend.
               
               
                  And how the fine of all their worthines,
                  Their honour, fame, and magnanimitie,
                  Was onely ſorrow, and great heavines:
                  Procur'd by treaſon falſe, or ſubtilty,
                  By murther, poyſon, or by enmity,
                  Wrath, or deſpight, or ſome extremity.
               
               
                  And how their floud of joy was not ſo hie,
                  But that at laſt it had an ebbe as low.
                  And how that Fortune by her ſubtiltie
                  To ſhow her ſpight, had wrought their overthrow.
                  All this with face full pale the Poet ſayd.
                  And while that he within the pulpit ſtaid,
               
               
                  Their jſſued forth out of another place,
                  Men purpoſely diſguiſd and clad, which plaid
                  With gaſtly and with pale and deadly face,
                  By ſignes, all whatſoere the Poet ſaid.
                  Twixt whom no difference was in any thing,
                  For What the Poet ſpake, or loud did ſing,
               
               
                  They on the ground the ſame did repreſent,
                  And ſhew'd by outward geſtures what had hapt
                  To Princes in their liues, and how they ſpent
                  Their daies on earth, till fortune them intrapt.
                  And ſuddenly orewhelming their eſtate,
                  Did end their liues by death vnfortunate.
               
               
                  Theſe ſports they vſed commonly to play
                  When Birds for ioy in woods and buſhes ſing,
                  In pleaſant months of Aprill and of May,
                  To ſee the tree and flower begin to ſpring.
                  Thus haue you heard how Tragedies began,
                  And in what place they firſt were plaid, & whan.
               
               
                  Now will I ſhow how Priam did proceed,
                  (When as the Towne of Troy erected was)
                  To build a ſtately Pallace with all ſpeed,
                  Which did the reſt of all his works ſurpaſſe.
                  And high vpon a rocke did place the ſame
                  In midſt of Troy, and Ilion did it name.
               
               
                  The forme whereof was round as any ball,
                  Well wald about with Marble faire and cleare:
                  And other coſtly ſtones mixt therewithall,
                  And did in hight ſix hundred paces beare,
                  With Towers high and great, that whoſe would
                  Mount vp the ſame, might round about behold
               
               
                  The Countrey farre and neare, as it did lie,
                  And all the walles within, and eke without
                  Imboſt with knots and flowers moſt curiouſly,
                  And richly guilt, and painted thoro
                        •
                     ghout.
                  Whereon when as the Sun ſhines cleare & bright,
                  The gold did caſt a moſt exceeding light.
               
               
                  
                  And in the midſt of this his Pallace faire,
                  A ſumptuous great and ſtately hall there ſtood,
                  (Which did in lēgth & breadth like diſtance beare)
                  All fram'd of Cedar tree and Heban wood,
                  (Which Heban tree they ſay is onely found
                  In Ethiopia, and the India ground.
               
               
                  Which colour hath as blacke as any jet,
                  And beeing cut, and wrought, doth waxe ſo hard,
                  That it will not conſume with any wet.)
                  The pauement vnder foot was marble ſquard,
                  Both white and gray, which chequor wiſe did lie,
                  And made it ſhow moſt beautifull to th'eie.
               
               
                  Within this hall was plaſt a royall throane,
                  Which was King Priams ſeat Maieſticall,
                  All made of Iaſper and of Purphire ſtone,
                  Moſt richly guilt to beautifie't withall.
                  At foot whereof a ſumptuous table ſtood,
                  Halfe Ivory, and halfe of Heban wood,
               
               
                  And on each ſide thereof were diuers chaires,
                  Wherein King Priams counſellors did ſit,
                  There to conſult about his chiefe affaires,
                  As often times they vſed were to meet.
                  Two daynty Tables fram'd of Heban tree,
                  Stood longſt the walles with bords of Iuorie.
                  
               
               
                  And oppoſite againſt the regall chaire,
                  At th'other end an Altar made of braſſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nchaſed, gilt, and grauen paſſing faire,
                  There ſtood, whereon an Image great there was
                  Of maſſie gold which Priam placed there,
                  In honor of his God cald Iupiter.
                  
               
               
                  This Image fifteene Cubits high was made,
                  Beſides the waight, that equall ſubſtance bare,
                  And on the head a Crowne of gold it hath,
                  Wherein were plaſt great ſtore of Iewels rare,
                  As Rubies red, and Saphirs Chriſta
                        •
                     line,
                  With many oryent pearles round and fine.
               
               
                  And mongſt the reſt a Carbuncle moſt bright
                  And paſſing cleare was ſet in midſt of all,
                  Which at all times did caſt ſo great a light,
                  That night and day, that great and ſpacious hall,
                  Did ſhow as bright, as if that ſonne, or moone
                  Within the ſame continually had ſhowne.
               
               
                  Which rich and ſtately Image was ſo well
                  And cunningly compoſd in euery part,
                  That from the head to foot it did excell
                  
                     
                        •
                     n skilfull worke, deuiſd by curious Art.
                  Who therein did not once ſeeme to deny,
                  His aid and helpe the ſame to beautifie.
               
               
                  And framed thus, it was to repreſent
                  Great Iupiter one of the Planets ſeaven,
                  (The which as Poets fainedly invent,
                  The Pagans thought to be a God in heauen.)
                  Which Priam held to be of power ſo great,
                  That he in him his whole a
                        ••
                     iance ſet.
               
               
                  To him he prayd in his neceſſitie,
                  And had in him ſo firme affection,
                  That onely to his fained Deiti
                        •
                     ,
                  He did addict his whole devotion.
                  Suppoſing by his vertue, power and might,
                  To be preſeru'd from harmes both day & night.
               
               
                  And onely vnto him he did commend
                  The care of his eſtate and dignitie,
                  Beleeuing that he would him ſtill defend
                  In all diſtreſſe, and with proſperitie
                  Vphold his throane by his protection,
                  Such was his fond and vaine opinion.
               
               
                  This Image and this Pallace Ilyon,
                  Thus being made, and fully finiſhed,
                  And every thing brought to perfection,
                  Which Priam had forecaſt and purpoſed
                  Full many yeares in his new towne of Troy:
                  
                  He raignd in peace, in honor, and in joy.
               
               
                  And long might haue poſſeſt this happy ſtate,
                  If fortune had not chang'd her ſmiling cheare,
                  (As all things ſubiect are to curſed 
                        •
                     ate)
                  And brought him to decay, as you ſhall heare
                  By ſequell of the ſtory, where is ſhowne
                  how he and his in 
                        •
                     ine were overthrowne.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  ¶ How King Priam ſent Anthenor into Greece, to haue his Sister Exion restored home againe.
               
               
                  OH curſed fiend which lurkeſt in the breſt
                  Of man, inflam'd with thy moſt furious fier:
                  And never ſuffreſt him to liue in reſt,
                  Till that thou haſt jncenced him with ire
                  To take reuenge for wrong, wherein thou ioy'ſt,
                  Not caring though all other thou annoy'ſt.
               
               
                  
                  Thou ſeed of ſtrife and root of all offence,
                  Why cauſeſt thou old ſores againe to ſmart
                  With rancor, and through fowle jmpatience,
                  When thou once creepſt into an envious hart,
                  Provoking it no time nor houre to ceaſe
                  From hatefull thoughts, nor ſeeking any peace?
               
               
                  What needeſt thou thy malice to vnfold,
                  The aſhes of diſcord againe to ſift,
                  And cauſing a new debate to riſe of old,
                  And halfe forgotten enuie? But thy drift
                  Is onely to procure the woe and fine,
                  Of thoſe that to thy nature doe incline.
               
               
                  Why haſt thou wak't King Priam from his reſt,
                  And with thy poyſon fowle incenſt his braine,
                  That he in mind and heart ſhould ſo deteſt
                  A quiet life, and through perſwaſions vaine,
                  Procured him to ſeeke revenge in haſt,
                  Vpon the Greekes for harmes ſo long forepaſt?
               
               
                  For where as he in peace did rule and raigne
                  With honour great, and no man him annoyd;
                  The Serpent Enuie entring in his braine,
                  By no meanes would from thence againe avoyd:
                  But with ſuch deepe impreſſion there did reſt,
                  And did ſo much inflame his furious breſt
               
               
                  With his inveterate malice new reviu'd,
                  That by no meanes he could the ſame forget:
                  Whereby for ever after while he liu'd,
                  He brought on him and his ſuch trouble great,
                  That wheretofore h'enioy'd a happy life,
                  His bliſſe was turn'd to bloody warre and ſtrife.
               
               
                  For Priam in his riches glorying,
                  (Wherein as then he tooke no ſmall delight,)
                  Imagining his ſtate ſo flouriſhing,
                  His Towne of ſo great puiſſance and might,
                  His war-like Knights ſo many and ſo ſtrong,
                  That no man could, no
                        •
                      durſt him offer wrong.
               
               
                  Was ſo poſſeſt with Enuie, and with Pride,
                  That hap what would he had in heart forecaſt,
                  To take no reſt vntill that he had tride,
                  How he might be reuengd for wrongs forepaſt.
                  Which to effect with full intent and mind,
                  He did a time and fit occaſion find
               
               
                  To ſummon all his Lords and Knights each one
                  To make repaire, (all ſcuſes ſet aſide)
                  Vpon a day perfixt at Ilion.
                  
                  Which his command not any one denide,
                  But there with ſpeed did preſently appeare,
                  Where all his ſonnes likewiſe aſſembled were,
               
               
                  But Hector. Who from Troy as then was gon
                  Into the Province of Panomie,
                  
                  Which Priam held in his ſubiection,
                  A new rebellion there to pacifie.
                  The which not long before was raiſ'd among
                  The Countrey people there for certaine wrong.
               
               
                  But Hector well adviſ'd and patient,
                  Loth to reuenge, where mercie might take place,
                  With curteſie ſo wanne them to content,
                  That he appeaſed them, and offring grace
                  And pardon vnto all that did repent,
                  Each one with ſatisfaction home he ſent.
               
               
                  Such was the great and noble princely mind
                  Of that moſt braue renown'd and valiant Knight,
                  Alwaies vnto his ſubiects iuſt and kind,
                  And rather did in mercie more delight,
                  Then vſe the force and rigor of the law,
                  When as in them no great offence he ſaw.
               
               
                  Meane while the King that held an open court,
                  With entertainment great and Princely cheare
                  Did wellcome all that thither did reſort,
                  Which being done, and they aſſembled were
                  In open hall, he did with courage bold
                  And words moſt graue, his mind began t'vnfold
               
               
                  And ſayd, my Lords aſſembled heere as now,
                  Whoſe loyalty I haue no cauſe to doubt,
                  I am aſſurd not any one of you
                  But well doth know what vnto vs fell out,
                  When as the Grecians cauſeles did inuade
                  Our Towne, and what a ſpoile therof they made.
               
               
                  And how with extreame barbrous crueltie,
                  They murthered our Subiects every one:
                  The memory whereof cannot but lie
                  As freſh within your thoughts, as it were done
                  But th'other day, for't may not out your mind,
                  If to your Countrey you be kind.
               
               
                  For ſure in my oppinion I ſuppoſe,
                  Nought can you moue vnto forgetfulneſſe
                  Of harmes forepaſt, by your moſt deadly foes,
                  Nor can you be without great heavines
                  To thinke thereon, for I muſt plainely tell,
                  Out of my heart I can it not expell.
               
               
                  For yet me thinks I ſee it with mine eie,
                  So freſh it is and yet doth ſtill remaine
                  within my breſt, and ever there ſhall lie.
                  (The which) I hope you likewiſe doe retaine,
                  To thinke how they haue ſlaine our Anceſtors
                  (If while they liu'd were valiant warriors.)
               
               
                  
                  Our Cittie burnt, and brought vnto decay,
                  And left it waſt like to a wildernes,
                  And borne and taken forcibly away,
                  All that they found, our goods, and our riches.
                  And ſlayne my Father King Laomedon,
                  
                  Without all cauſe or juſt occaſion.
               
               
                  Amends whereof we lawfully may craue,
                  And both with reaſon, and with conſcience,
                  Which all the Gods, I truſt will let vs haue,
                  Sith that by vs was offered none offence.
                  But mongſt all their ſo extreame crueltie,
                  One thing there is which chiefly grieueth me,
               
               
                  When as I call to mind their villany
                  In offering ſuch wrong to Exion,
                  
                  With whom, as with his concubine doth lie
                  The proud and hautie Grecian Telamon,
                  
                  Abuſing her with great diſhoneſtie,
                  Not caring for her ſtate nor high degree.
               
               
                  Nor if ſhe was the daughter of a King,
                  Which vnto me can be no little ſcorne.
                  But they as ſeemes, reſpect not any thing,
                  Iudge then if ſhe that is ſo highly borne
                  Be vſed ſo, with what extreamitie
                  Poore wiues and mayds, of them abuſ'd ſhall be,
               
               
                  With others of your friends and your alies,
                  Within their hands as captiues then did fall,
                  Aſſure your ſelues what wrongs they can deviſe
                  To doe to them, to vex you therewithall,
                  They will not ſpate to vſe them in their luſt,
                  For in the Greekes there is no truth nor truſt.
               
               
                  For neither bewtie, age, ne high eſtate
                  Doe they reſpect, but all like ſlaues doe liue,
                  So that in heart I cannot chuſe but hate
                  Their curſed race, and you likewiſe muſt grieue
                  As well as I, for you as well as me
                  It doth concerne. Therefore reueng'd to be
               
               
                  Should be your care, and bend your onely thought
                  To find the meanes your wrongs for to redreſſe,
                  For long ere now the ſame we ſhould haue ſought,
                  And haue relieu'd our friends from their diſtreſſe.
                  Let vs therefore joyne all with one conſent,
                  And in our hearts jmprint a firme jntent
               
               
                  Of all their malice, rapes, and crueltie,
                  To be reuenged, for if that we vnite
                  Our minds in one, it cannot chuſe but be
                  A doubling of our ſtrength, and we ſhall fight
                  With courage bold, for vengeance doth belong,
                  As reaſon is, to him that offereth worng.
               
               
                  And though till now wee haue deferred it,
                  Yet doubt I not but wee a time ſhall find,
                  To yeeld to them ſuch meaſure as they mete,
                  And vſe both them and their in ſelfe ſame kind.
                  And all the Gods I hope will vs aſſiſt
                  In our juſt cauſe, and the in wrong reſiſt.
               
               
                  You know our Towne is ſtrong, and walld about
                  With high and mightie Towers for the warre,
                  The like whereof in all the world throughout,
                  Is not to find that with it may compare.
                  So that we may be well aſſur'd therein,
                  That th'enemy by force ſhall never win.
               
               
                  Of men and valiant Knights we haue no want,
                  For all you know what number we can make:
                  Our ſtore of victualls alſo is not ſcant,
                  And whenſoeuer we ſhall vndertake
                  To enter warre we need not be afraid,
                  But we ſhall likewiſe find ſome forren aid
               
               
                  To help vs to revenge our open wrong.
                  Wherefore I thinke that now the time is fit,
                  (Sith that we know our ſelues to be ſo ſtrong)
                  To 
                        •
                     et on them, and not ſtill jdle ſit,
                  For valor bids vs make no more delay
                  To be revengd, hap what ſo ever may.
               
               
                  The Proverb ſaith, delay may danger breed,
                  For by delay men often times are croſt,
                  And to take time when time doth fall with ſpeed,
                  I never heard by it that men haue loſt.
                  And ſith we nothing want, why ſhould we pau
                        ••
                     
                  
                  And ſtay revenge in our ſo iuſt a cauſe?
               
               
                  But leaſt we might too haſty be eſteem'd,
                  And wilfull thought to runne ſo careleſly
                  Vnto the warre, which alwaies hath been deem'd
                  A doubtfull thing. We will not doggedly
                  Bite ere we barke, but firſt to Greece weele ſend,
                  To know if that they will our wrongs amend.
               
               
                  Which if they ſeeme vnto vs to refuſe,
                  And obſtinately will deny the ſame,
                  Then may we iuſtly force and power vſe,
                  And no man for it can, nor may vs blame.
                  But firſt we will, with curteſie aſſay,
                  To ſee if we can win them by that way.
               
               
                  But if that they refuſe with gentleneſſe
                  To hrare vs ſpeake, when as we are content
                  To aske amends, with peace and quietneſſe,
                  I hope in th'end they ſhall the ſame repent:
                  For better tis by peace to haue redreſſe,
                  Then ſeeke for warre with vnadviſedneſſe.
               
               
                  
                  Therefore let vs with patience yet indure
                  Our wrongs; and our great iniuries ſuſtaine
                  In humble wiſe, vntill we may procure,
                  That they to vs an anſwere ſend againe▪
                  
                  For though it be my whole and full deſire,
                  And that our iuſt occaſion doth require,
               
               
                  In furious ſort of them to take vengeance,
                  I will as t'were in meere forgetfulneſſe,
                  Put all their wrongs out of remembrance,
                  And cleane expell all griefe and heavineſſe
                  Out of my heart, and of them aske no more,
                  But that they will againe to me reſtore
               
               
                  My Siſter that vnto me is ſo deare.
                  There by to ſtint all bloody warre and ſtrife,
                  And for the reſt we ſhall with patience beare,
                  And never cal't in queſtion during life.
                  Which to fulfill 
                        •
                      purpoſely am bent,
                  If you thereto will giue your full conſent.
               
               
                  Speake then my Lords, are you content to ſtay
                  Till that they anſwere make to our requeſt,
                  Say all with one conſent, your yea or nay,
                  And what for vs to do you thinke is beſt.
                  For I do meane Anthenor ſtraight ſhall goe
                  Vnto the Greeks, our mind herein to ſhow.
               
               
                  Of whoſe diſcretion, courage, and adviſe,
                  You need not once to doubt, for I haue knowne,
                  And found him by experience to be wiſe,
                  When he of other meſſages hath gone.
                  And therefore I of him my choyſe doe make,
                  And thinke him fit that charge to vndertake.
               
               
                  The King thus hauing ſpoken as you heare,
                  The Lords and all the Nobles did agree,
                  That Lord Anthenor ſhould the meſſage beare
                  From them vnto the Greeks, and ſtraight ſhould be
                  Diſpatcht, and with inſtructions ſent away,
                  With charge he ſhould no longer time delay,
               
               
                  But wind and weather ſerving ſtraight ſet ſayle,
                  Who hauing his inſtruction, and at large
                  Informd therein, as carefull not to fayle
                  In any point that ſhould concerne his charge:
                  Did preſently take ſhip for Theſſalie,
                  
                  Where being landed with his companie,
               
               
                  He went to ſeeke the King cald Peleus,
                  
                  Who at that time the ſtory ſaith, remaind
                  Within a Citie named Monoſius,
                  
                  Of whom he was at firſt well entertaind.
                  But when that he the cauſe did partly know
                  Wherefore he came, he willed him to ſhow
               
               
                  Th'effect of his Embaſſage and his charge,
                  And with a frowning looke and viſage fell,
                  Sat ſtill till that Anthenor did at large
                  With courage bold the ſame vnto him cell,
                  With words moſt graue, and ſuch as fitting were
                  For time and place, & ſpake as you ſhall heare.
               
               
                  
                     Priam the moſt renowned King of Troy,
                  
                  My Soveraigne Lord, his Princely Maieſtie
                  Wiſhing to your grace proſperitie and ioy,
                  In friendly wiſe ſaluteth you by me.
                  A meſſenger expreſly by him ſent,
                  To ſhew to you his will and his intent.
               
               
                  If you vouchſafe to giue me audience,
                  Wherein if that in ought I ſhall offend,
                  I you beſeech to heer't with patience,
                  And let the law of armes my guilt defend.
                  For as you know Embaſſadors are free,
                  To tell their meſſage what ſoere it bee.
               
               
                  Your Grace I thinke doth yet remember well,
                  What wrongs of late by you and yours were done,
                  In Troian Land when ye with hearts moſt fell
                  And cruell minds the ſame did overcome,
                  And how without cauſe or occaſion,
                  You brought them all vnto deſtruction,
               
               
                  The Citie burnt, and vtterly throwne downe,
                  Their riches by you tane and borne away,
                  How that the noble King Laomedon
                  
                  As then was ſlaine, and would your rage not ſtay,
                  But in your fury, Children, Wiues, and men,
                  Were all deſtroyd, and murthered as then.
               
               
                  Some Mayds except, which to fulfill your luſt
                  You led with you into captiuitie.
                  Which iniuries ſo great and moſt vniuſt,
                  (Deſerving name of barbarous crueltie)
                  You may ſuppoſe cannot forgotten bee,
                  And yet mongſt all this great indignitie,
               
               
                  One thing there is, which doth King Priam grieue
                  M
                        •
                     re then the reſt, which is that Exion
                  
                  His ſiſter Captiue here in Greece doth liue,
                  And held a Concubine by Telamon
                  
                  Diſhoneſtly, not like a noble Knight,
                  Whoſe care ſhould be with all his power & might
               
               
                  To ſaue and keepe poore Ladies in diſtreſſe:
                  But regarding nought her high degree,
                  By no meanes will this open wrong redreſſe,
                  But he ſtill perſiſteth in his villanie.
                  Which his ſo great and fowle an overſight
                  (Moſt noble King) belongs to you of right
               
               
                  
                  To looke into; and with a Princely care,
                  Seeke to reſtraine as much as in you lies,
                  Such foule miſdeeds, and as a friend you are
                  To Telamon, ſee how you may deuiſe
                  T'amend and to redreſſe the iniurie,
                  Wherein conſiſteth true Nobility.
               
               
                  This thing hath caus'd King Priam now to moue
                  Your Grace with this embaſſage by me brought,
                  For to intreat in friendſhip and in loue,
                  That by your mediation may be wrought
                  The meanes, that Exion may deliuered be,
                  Out of her thraldome and captiuitie.
               
               
                  Which recompence ſo ſmall he doth requeſt,
                  For all the wrongs that vnto him were done
                  By you and yours, ſo much he doth deteſt
                  To liue in warre and ſtrife, which for to ſhun
                  He is content all quarrells to ſurceaſe,
                  Deſiring onely her returne with peace.
               
               
                  Which his requeſt ſo lawfull, if you will
                  Procure King Telamon to grant with ſpeed,
                  He you aſſures his promiſe to fulfill,
                  Or elſe he muſt by force of armes proceed:
                  Which by this meanes he doth deſire to ſtay,
                  And this my Lord is all I haue to ſay.
               
               
                  When Peleus had Anthenors meſſage heard,
                  His heart was ſo poſſeſt with wrath and ire,
                  That on him with a furious looke he ſtar'd,
                  With eies enfiam'd as red as any fire:
                  And with diſpightfull and incenſed heart,
                  Vpon his feet did ſodainlie vp ſtart.
               
               
                  Diſdainfullie reiecting the requeſt
                  By Priam made, and ſetting him at nought,
                  Said, that both him and his he did deteſt,
                  Euen from his verie ſoule and inward thought:
                  Commanding Lord Anthenor not to ſtay,
                  But preſentlie to get him thence away,
               
               
                  On perill that thereafter might befall▪
                  
                  Which he in haſt did preſentlie obay,
                  And vnto him his companie did call,
                  With whome he made no longer time of ſtay:
                  But thence did ſaile directlie to a 
                        •
                     owne
                  
                     Salerne nam'd, which long'd to Telamon.
                  
               
               
                  Whereas the King and all his Lords then were,
                  And to the Court Anthe
                           •
                        or ſtraight did hie,
                  Where when he did before the King appeare,
                  At firſt he entertaind him courteouſlie:
                  And without ſeeming once to take offence,
                  With preſent ſpeed did grant him audience
               
               
                  For Exions ſake, who then ſtood by his ſide,
                  For otherwiſe in heart he ſore abhord
                  All Troyans, and by no meanes could abide
                  To ſee or heare of them, nor yet afford
                  A friendly thought of them, ſuch was his rage
                  Gainſt thē conceau
                        •
                     d, that nothing could't aſſwage.
               
               
                  This nere the leſſe, he was content to heare
                  
                     Anthenor ſpeake, and patientlie to ſtay,
                  Till that he had with words that ſee mely were,
                  Declared what as then he had to ſay:
                  Who hauing to the King his reuerence made,
                  With courage bold vnto him ſpake, and ſaid,
               
               
                  Moſt noble Prince ſith that it pleaſes your Grace,
                  To heare the meſſage which as now I bring
                  With patience, and t'afford me time and ſpace,
                  For to declare the ſame, and euery thing
                  That's giuen me in charge, I will not ſtay,
                  But tell it you as briefly as I may.
               
               
                  Know then great King (without offence be't done)
                  That Priam King of Troye my ſoueraigne Lord,
                  Deſirous ſtrife and bloudie warre to ſhun,
                  Intreateth you in friendly wiſe t'afford
                  This fauour vnto him, to be content,
                  And thereto giue your full and free conſent:
               
               
                  That Exion may her libertie obtaine,
                  And be deliuered from Captiuitie,
                  Whome you do hold as I muſt tell you plaine,
                  In ſlauiſh wiſe not like to her degree,
                  And to her great diſhonour and her ſhame.
                  For which, although he may you iuſtlie blame,
               
               
                  Yet he content all wrongs to pacifie,
                  And peace and loue with you and yours to hold,
                  Deſireth that you will him not denie
                  This his requeſt, and that vouchſafe you would,
                  For to reſtore her vnto him with ſpeed,
                  Which doing you ſhall act a Princely deed.
               
               
                  And ſaue your honor now imblemiſhed,
                  By wronging her whome you ſo much abuſe,
                  Wherein you haue ſo long time been miſled,
                  That truth to ſay, you can it not excuſe:
                  Yet he's content to lay this wrong aſide,
                  And many more, ſo that you will prouide
               
               
                  To ſend her vnto Troye without delay,
                  And this is all the ſum and full effect,
                  Of that I had in charge to you to ſay,
                  The which if that you ſeeme now to reiect:
                  It will old hate and enmitie reuiue,
                  Speake now my Lord what anſwere you will giue.
               
               
                  
                  When Telamon had heard Anthenor ſpeake,
                  And knew King Priams will and his deſire,
                  He did into ſuch extreame chollor breake,
                  That both his eyes did ſhine like flaming fire,
                  And in his face was not a drop of blood,
                  So that with cheeks moſt pale and angry mood
               
               
                  He lookt aſide, and turning vp the white
                  Of both his eies, with moſt diſdainfull ſmile,
                  Gnaſht all his teeth, and ſeemd his tong to bite,
                  And after hauing paws'd a little while,
                  With furious voyce ſhewd forth the mortall hate,
                  That burnt within his heart moſt obſtinate.
               
               
                  Saying, my friend what euer that thou be,
                  I muſe in heart what ſtrange and ſodaine thing
                  Hath mooued Priam thus to ſend to me,
                  And that thou darſt ſo proud a meſſage bring:
                  I thinke thee but a foole or elſe ſtarke mad,
                  That of thy ſelfe ſo little care haſt had,
               
               
                  To put thy life in danger for his ſake,
                  With whom I neuer had nor haue to deale,
                  Nor he with me, and this account do make
                  Neuer will haue, and ſo thou mayſt him tell:
                  And as we haue acquaintance very ſmall,
                  He may be well aſſured, I neither ſhall,
               
               
                  Nor will do any thing at his requeſt,
                  For that it wholy is againſt my mind
                  With him to deale, and let that be his reſt,
                  Which by experience plainly he ſhall find,
                  If ſo he liſt to try if that he may,
                  Fetch her by force of armes from me away.
               
               
                  This well I wot that but a while agoe,
                  I croſt the ſeas with many Grecians more,
                  And ſaild to Troye, and if that thou wilt know
                  The cauſe? it was, for that not long before,
                  
                     Laomedon had vs a treſpaſſe done,
                  And for the ſame the Towne by force we wonne,
               
               
                  And ſlew the King, and all that with him held,
                  Not cowardly, as you perchance ſuppoſe,
                  But Knightly meeting him in open field.
                  And for I entred firſt vpon our foes
                  Into the Towne, by full conſent of all
                  The Grecian Lords, vnto my ſhare did fall
               
               
                  This faire and Princely Lady Exion,
                  
                  Of whome I preſently was there poſſeſt,
                  And ſince that time haue held her for mine owne,
                  And euerwill, let Priam doe his beſt
                  To fetch her hence, and therefore 'tis in vaine
                  For thee to ſend for her, I tell thee plaine.
               
               
                  For be aſſur'd, and truſt me if thou wilt,
                  Thou getſt her not from me if that I may,
                  And rather ſhall my deareſt blood be ſpilt,
                  And many thouſands more, before that day
                  Shall ere be ſeen that I will her forſake,
                  Though all the world her quarrell vndertake.
               
               
                  Thinkſt thou I will ſo eaſly let her goe,
                  Whome for to win much of my blood was loſt,
                  And for her did receaue ſo many a blow,
                  No ſure, for that full deare ſhe hath me coſt:
                  And in good faith ile let her if I can,
                  From going from me to another man.
               
               
                  So deare her perſon and her ſeemly grace,
                  Her beautie, bounty, and her comlineſſe,
                  Her faire and paſſing amiable face,
                  And all her Princely gifts I muſt confeſſe
                  Are printed in the cloſet of my heart,
                  That while I liue from thēce they ſhall not part.
               
               
                  Let Priam therefore doe the vttermoſt
                  That he can do, he ſhall but looſe his paine,
                  For neuer did a thing ſo dearely coſt,
                  As ſhe ſhall do ere he haue her againe:
                  For nought can her redeeme but ſword & ſpeare,
                  And deepe and gaſtly wounds that mortall are.
               
               
                  For there ſhall ſure be raiſed ſuch a ſtrife
                  And deadly warre ere ſhe reſtored be,
                  That it will coſt full many a man his life.
                  This is the anſwere that thou getſt of me,
                  And bid thy Maſter when he liſt begin,
                  But I ſuppoſe he will but little win.
               
               
                  And for thy ſelfe, as firſt to thee I told,
                  I thinke thee mad, and more preſumptuous
                  Then thou ſhouldſt be, that dareſt be ſo bold
                  To bring this meſſage ſo audacious,
                  The noble Grecians therewith to offend.
                  But let him thee no more vnto me ſend
               
               
                  On perill of thy life, that may betide
                  To thee for thy reward, and now get hence
                  With ſpeed I thee command, for if thou bide
                  Here longer in my ſight to breed offence,
                  Thou knowſt the price (who euer ſayeth nay)
                  Therefore be gone, and ſee thou make no ſtay.
               
               
                  
                     Anthenor hearing this, without delay
                  Straight entred ſhip, and put to Sea in haſt,
                  And ſailed to an Iſland nam'd Achay,
                  
                  Where when that he on ſhore had anchor caſt,
                  He heard that both the Kings as then abode
                  Within the Iſle, and preſently he road
               
               
                  
                  Vnto their Court, which was not very far,
                  And there he found thē both, to whom with ſpeed
                  He ſhewd the cauſe that made him to repaire
                  To them as then, and ſo gan to proceed
                  With words moſt graue and courage bold & ſtout,
                  To tell his mind without all feare or doubt.
               
               
                  And ſaid, my Lords, whoſe power here extends
                  For to command, may't pleaſe your Graces both
                  To know, that Priam King of Troye me ſends
                  To you in Princely wiſe (as being loth
                  To giue offence) your ayd and helpe to haue,
                  T'obtaine a ſuite that he would gladly craue
               
               
                  Of Telamon, who gainſt all equity
                  Doth hold his Siſter Princeſſe Exion
                  
                  As Concubine, with great indignity,
                  Whoſe liberty and reſtitution
                  To him againe, is onely his deſire,
                  Which to effect he humbly doth require
               
               
                  You would vouchſafe your ayd therein t'afford,
                  Not doubting but as y'are diſcreet and wiſe,
                  That by your mediation and good word,
                  King Telamon will follow your aduiſe:
                  And Exion ſhall to him reſtored be,
                  Out of her long and hard captiuity.
               
               
                  Which his requeſt he praies you not deny,
                  As you are Kings, for valour, high renownd,
                  Diſcreet, and wiſe, and of great maieſty.
                  And he ſhall thinke himſelfe to you much bound,
                  And all his former wrong he will ſuſpend,
                  For that to liue in peace he doth intend.
               
               
                  As he that is right prudent and diſcreet,
                  Forecaſting what may after come to paſſe,
                  And ſeeth what perills and what dangers great
                  Doe follow warre, which neuer is nor was
                  Without confuſion, miſery and woe,
                  As Hiſtories vnto vs plainly ſhoe:
               
               
                  Which to eſchew he thinketh it the beſt
                  And wiſeſt way, for euery man t'auoid
                  The hatefull path of ſtrife, and it deteſt,
                  For by it many a Country is deſtroid:
                  Which by this meanes he is in hope to ſhun,
                  And that hath made him doe as he hath done:
               
               
                  In peace to craue your aid, that Exion
                  
                  May be with ſpeed ſent home to him againe.
                  And thogh you may ſuppoſe that cauſe ther's none,
                  Why he ſhould you requeſt to take this paine
                  In his behalfe, let this be his excuſe,
                  That Princes ought to puniſh all abuſe.
               
               
                  And by all meanes ſhould ſeeke the ſame to ſtay,
                  He in like caſe deſires your Princely aid,
                  And hopes you will it not to him denay,
                  And he will thinke himſelfe full well apaid:
                  This is the ſumme of his petition,
                  Which he referres to your diſcretion.
               
               
                  When both the Kings, Caſtor, and Polux had
                  Attentiuely heard what Anthenor ſpake;
                  King Castor ſodainlie like one halfe mad,
                  Into ſuch choller and impatience brake,
                  That by no meanes he could his furie ſtay,
                  But in moſt wrathfull wiſe to him did ſay:
               
               
                  I know not friend why thou of vs ſhouldſt craue,
                  To haue amends for treſpaſſe by vs done
                  Vnto the King, to whome we neuer gaue▪
                  
                  Cauſe of offence. But when Laomedon
                  
                  Firſt offring wrong to vs, we did inuade,
                  And of his Towne a noble conqueſt made.
               
               
                  Wherein we did but right and equitie:
                  For had not he firſt offered offence
                  To vs and ours with great indignitie,
                  We nere had ſought for any recompence,
                  Nor he nor his been brought vnto their ends.
                  For which if that thy Maſter aske amends
               
               
                  At our hands, tell him 'tis all too late,
                  For we with him deſire no vnitie,
                  Peace nor accord, but rather mortall hate,
                  Diſſention, ſtrife, and vtter enmitie:
                  Which he may chance hereafter for to feele,
                  If that he dare preſume with vs to deale.
               
               
                  For we ſo little do his friendſhip priſe,
                  That what he ſaith or doth I doe not care,
                  Therefore if that he'le follow our aduiſe,
                  Let him prepare to enter into warre,
                  And it may chance to breed his owne decay,
                  And ſo from vs thou maiſt vnto him ſay.
               
               
                  And for thy ſelfe it ſeemeth vnto me,
                  Thy Lord and Maſter Priam loues thee not,
                  That ſent thee meſſenger to vs to be,
                  And thou thy ſelfe haſt fooliſhly oreſhot,
                  To take on thee ſo perillous a thing,
                  As to the Grecians tydings ſuch to bring,
               
               
                  Whereby thy life thou haſt indangered:
                  But be thou rul'd by me if thou be wiſe,
                  (Vnleſſe thou art cleane voyd of feare and dread)
                  And get thou out my ſight I thee aduiſe:
                  For if thou ſtayſt, mine anger is ſo bent,
                  That thou mayſt chance thy follie to repent.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Anthenor to auoid the Court was glad,
                  And preſentlie with ſpeed from thence did goe,
                  And entring ſhip ſuch haſt from thence he made,
                  That though the wind contrarie then did blow,
                  He put to ſea, and failed proſperouſlie
                  To Pilon, where Duke Neſtor then did lie,
               
               
                  And there did hold a ſumptuous Princelie Court:
                  Of whome he craued leaue ſubmiſſiuelie,
                  To ſhew the cauſe that made him then reſort
                  To him, and there withall to ſignifie
                  King Priams mind as he had gin him charge,
                  From point to point as fullie and as large,
               
               
                  As he had done to other men before,
                  And all to one effect, ſo that in vaine
                  It were for me to ſhow it any more,
                  Or to recite it word for word againe:
                  For his concluſion ended ſtill in one,
                  As you haue heard concerning Exion.
                  
               
               
                  Whereat Duke Neſtor did ſo fret and fume,
                  And in ſo great a choller then did grow,
                  That all the bloud did preſentlie conſume
                  Out of his face, and he as pale did ſhow
                  As aſhes, and ſo grieued was in heart,
                  And therewithall did feele ſuch inwardſmart
               
               
                  Through wrath and ire, that ſo poſſeſt each vaine
                  And ioynt he had, that he did ſeeme to ſhake
                  Like Aſpen leafe, and hardlie could refraine,
                  Vpon Anthenor ſtraight reuenge to take,
                  Like Lyon fell that hunteth after pray,
                  Whoſe furious courſe no man as then can ſtay.
               
               
                  So much his mind from him was alienate,
                  That t'yeeld himſelfe by no meanes then he might,
                  And at his heart he was ſo paſſionate,
                  Which boyled with ſuch ranchor and diſpight,
                  That all that him beheld would iudge him mad,
                  So ſtrange a looke and geſture then he had.
               
               
                  At laſt, in midſt of this perplexitie,
                  Into a ſodaine choler out he brake,
                  And with a voice diſtraind from crueltie,
                  Vnto Anthenor furiouſly he ſpake:
                  With countenance ſo gaſtlie to behold,
                  That ſure to make a man to feare it would.
               
               
                  Saying, thou friend that canſt ſo ſmoothly gloſe,
                  I think thou knowſt not well whom thou haſt told
                  Thy needleſſe tale, nor yet doſt thou ſuppoſe
                  Who that I am, that dareſt be ſo bold
                  Thus to preſume mine eares ſo to offend,
                  Pretending that King Priam did thee ſend
               
               
                  Vnto the Greekes, to aske them in his name,
                  Redreſſe for wrongs that nere by vs was done,
                  And turnſt on vs the merit and the blame,
                  For iniuries wrought by Laomedon
                  
                  To vs and ours, and in preſumptuous wiſe
                  Accuſeſt vs with moſt notorious lies.
               
               
                  Which thy abuſe moſt odious in mine eare,
                  So much doth fret and anger me at heart,
                  That by no meanes I can endure't to heare,
                  And but I know a meſſenger thou art,
                  And that I do mine honour more reſpect
                  Then thee, I would in cruell wiſe correct
               
               
                  And chaſtiſe thy ſo great temerity,
                  For by the rigour of our ancient law,
                  I ſhould put thee vnto th'extreamity
                  By horſes wild throughout the ſtreets to draw
                  Thy bodie vild, and it in pieces teare,
                  To teach thee and all others how to beare
               
               
                  Such friuolous tales to any Prince or Lord,
                  Vnleſſe thou better knowſt the man before.
                  So much by me thy meſſage is abhord,
                  And Priamus thy King in heart much more:
                  In whoſe diſpight this ſhould to thee be done,
                  For iuſt reward of thy preſumption,
               
               
                  If thou wert vs'd as well thou doſt deſerue.
                  And now be gone out of my ſight with ſpeed,
                  If thou thy life from danger wilt preſerue,
                  For that the ſight of thee to me doth breed
                  Both in mines eies and heart ſo great offence,
                  That I can take no reſt till thou goeſt hence.
               
               
                  
                     Anthenor hearing this thought it the beſt
                  For him not to reply, but to be gone.
                  And with all ſpeed he went and did not reſt
                  Till that he entred ſhip and left Pilon,
                  
                  Directly ſayling vnto Troye in haſt,
                  But preſently the clouds gan ouer-caſt,
               
               
                  The Seas to roare and rage in furious wiſe,
                  The wind to blow, and waues moſt high to ſwell,
                  And fearefull lightning flaſht out of the skies,
                  And thunder-claps vpon the ſhip downe fell
                  With ſo great force, that maine maſt gan to cracke,
                  And both the yard and it in ſunder bracke.
               
               
                  
                  The ſhip with billowes toſſing too and fro,
                  In fearefull wiſe now mounting vp moſt hie,
                  And then againe deſcending downe ſo low,
                  As if that vnder water it would lie:
                  So fearfully the heauens then did frowne,
                  That they expected ſtill whē they ſhould drown.
               
               
                  For euery man made full account to die,
                  And to their Gods gan vowes and prayers make,
                  And with deuotion great on them to crie
                  For aid and helpe, with promiſe t'vndertake
                  On pilgrimage to goe in Paynim wiſe,
                  If they eſcapt, to offer ſacrifice.
               
               
                  At laſt the skies as then as darke as night
                  Began to cleare, and Seas did ceaſe to rage,
                  And Phebus with his cleare and ſhining light,
                  Did ſodainly the tempeſt great aſſwage,
                  And not one man within the ſhip did periſh,
                  Wherwith their hearts began againe to cheriſh.
               
               
                  And preſently the Gods ſent them ſuch grace,
                  That hauing well eſcapt their danger great,
                  They did arriue at Troye in little ſpace,
                  And ſafely euery man on ſhore was ſet:
                  For which Anthenor ſtraight without delay,
                  Vnto the Temple went therein to pray.
               
               
                  And thanke his Gods for his deliuerance,
                  The like did all the reſt with humble heart,
                  Reioycing much for their ſo happy chance,
                  Which done, he did with ſpeed from thence depart,
                  And to King Priam preſently did goe,
                  Th'effect of his proceeding there to ſhoe.
               
               
                  Whom he as then found ſitting in his throne,
                  Accompanied with his Nobilitie,
                  To whom he did at full and large make knowne,
                  What he had done, and what extreamitie
                  He had eſcapt amongſt the Grecians fell.
                  And firſt vnto King Priamus did tell,
               
               
                  How Peleus vſd him moſt vncourteouſly,
                  And hardly could endure him in his ſight,
                  And how with viſage fell moſt cruelly,
                  King Telamon in rage and great deſpight
                  Diſdained him, and his requeſt denide,
                  And Priam with moſt threatning words defide.
               
               
                  And how the proud and hawty brethren twaine,
                  
                     Caſtor, and Pollux, in moſt furious wiſe,
                  Commanded him to get him thence againe,
                  And not to ſlander them with falſe ſurmiſe,
                  Of wrongs by them ſuppoſed to be done
                  To Troye & Troyans, when the towne they woon.
               
               
                  And laſtly how Duke Neſtor cruelly,
                  Like to a man out of his wits diſtraught,
                  Did rage and raile at him deſpightfully,
                  And Priam and his meſſage ſet at nought:
                  And in what perill of his life he was,
                  Before that he from euery place could paſſe.
               
               
                  When Priam heard Anthenor thus declare,
                  What ill ſucceſſe amongſt the Greekes he had,
                  His mind was ſo poſſeſſed with deſpaire,
                  That it him wholly out of comfort made:
                  Either by peace or warre then to obtaine,
                  The meanes to get his ſiſter home againe.
               
               
                  For well he ſaith by proofe that t'was in vaine,
                  For him to deale with them by courteſie,
                  And that thereby he neuer ſhould obtaine
                  The thing he ſought, ſo great hoſtilitie
                  He found in them, that more he did intreat,
                  The leſſe they it eſteem'd, or by him ſet.
               
               
                  Which grieued him for that he ſaw no way,
                  But by conſtraint he muſt be forſt to vſe
                  Another courſe (which gladly he would ſtay,
                  If that he might) ſith that they did refuſe
                  His profered peace, and ſtubbornly denie
                  To grant the things, he ſought ſo courteouſly.
               
               
                  And that nought elſe would pleaſe their appetite,
                  But bloudy warre engendred of diſcord
                  And ranchor old, their chiefe and ſole delight.
                  For peace and friendſhip they ſo much abhord,
                  That to giue eare to equitie and right,
                  They would not grant throgh malice & deſpight.
               
               
                  Which did ſo much torment King Priams heart,
                  That fire of enuie kindling in his breaſt,
                  He vow'd from thence it neuer ſhould depart,
                  Nor would he be content nor take no reſt,
                  Till that he were reuenged on his foes,
                  Although that he thereby were ſure to loſe.
               
               
                  And in the warre moſt like a valiant Knight,
                  What ere befell aduentur'd life and lim,
                  For to maintaine his honour and his right,
                  While that one drop of blood remain'd in him:
                  Intending firſt a Nauie forth to ſend,
                  There with by ſea the Grecians to offend.
               
               
                  And boldly to aſſaile them on the land
                  With fire and ſword, their haughty pride t'abate.
                  And whoſoeuer durſt or would withſtand,
                  To kill and to deſtroy. Such was the hate
                  Which he as then conceaued in his mind
                  Gainſt Grecians, that to him were ſo vnkind.
               
               
                  
                  But tell me Priam what hard deſteny,
                  What trouble new, what hatefull influence,
                  What great deſpight, what infelicitie
                  Out of the skies by ſodaine influence,
                  Deſcended is (thy ſorrow to encreaſe)
                  That ſhould be cauſe thou canſt not liue in peace?
               
               
                  What ſodaine chance, what fortune hard & ſharpe,
                  What wilfull luſt, what fooliſh hardineſſe,
                  Hath made thee on the ſtrings of war to harpe?
                  What careleſſe thoughts, what vnaduiſedneſſe,
                  Hath put thy mind out of tranquilitie,
                  To make thee wearie of proſperitie?
               
               
                  Doſt thou in bitter gall more pleaſure take,
                  Then hony ſweet, that wilfull motions
                  Should canſe thee peace and quietneſſe forſake,
                  To yeeld vnto thy hatefull paſſions:
                  Cleane voyd of wit, of reaſon, and of ſence,
                  And wholly without diſcreet prouidence?
               
               
                  What ſhould thee careleſſe make, not to foreſee
                  The things that after might to thee befall,
                  And not to ſhun the great aduerſity,
                  Which through thy follie brought thee into thrall?
                  Sure t'was the miſts of error made thee ſtray,
                  The crooked paths of the ready way.
               
               
                  Where were thy guides, diſcretion, and aduiſe,
                  That ſhould haue kept thee from ſenſualitie,
                  And counſeld thee in time for to be wiſe?
                  But ſure 'tis not in mans abilitie:
                  Nor can he from his wilfulnes refraine,
                  When ſodaine wrath therto doth him conſtraine.
               
               
                  Thou firſt ſhouldſt haue forecaſt thy deſtenie,
                  And by good counſell wiſely haue been led,
                  And not haue wayed thy ſecuritie
                  In ballance that doth hang but by a thred:
                  And rather haue diſſembled all thy woe,
                  And cleane forgotten wrongs done long agoe.
               
               
                  And ſtill haue borne it in thy memory,
                  That dailie by experience we doe ſee,
                  That while men ſeeke reuenge for iniury
                  Done long before, they oft deceaued be:
                  And with a double harme ere th'are aware,
                  Fall ſodainly into another ſnare.
               
               
                  And wrongs that cleane forgotten were and dead,
                  Renewed are by trump of flying fame,
                  Through ſalſe report & rumor that is ſpread,
                  And often hurt mans honor and good name:
                  Eſpecially when he doth raſhly run
                  Vpon reuenge, not carring how 'tis done.
               
               
                  And by his pride and ouer-haſty mood,
                  Doth worke his own deſtruction and decay.
                  Remembring not the prouerbe old and good,
                  (Which vnto men diſcreet and wiſe doth ſay)
                  Let him that's well be ſure to keepe him ſo,
                  Leaſt afterward he doth himſelfe beſhrow.
               
               
                  And he that walkes on plaine and euen ground,
                  Needs not to feare nor doubt a ſtumbling caſt,
                  Vnleſſe of careleſnes (as oft is found)
                  He ouerthrow himſelfe by too much haſt:
                  And wilfullie aduentures t'haue a fall,
                  As hauing of his ſtate no care at all.
               
               
                  So muſt I vnto thee King Priam ſay,
                  That all too retchleſſe thou haſt euer been,
                  The care on fickle fortune ſo to lay
                  Of thy ſecured peace, for it is ſeen:
                  And knowne to be her cuſtome commonly,
                  That when a man truſts moſt aſſuredly
               
               
                  In her that is ſo blind and ſo vnſtable,
                  She will to him then moſt inconſtant be,
                  And as ſhe alwaies was deceaueable,
                  Bereaue him ſoone of regall dignitie:
                  And with a trice downe from her wheele him throw,
                  Her power and force vnto the world to ſhow.
               
               
                  Againſt the which it nought availes to ſtriue.
                  For when a man thinkes his eſtate moſt ſure,
                  And that in peace and welfare he doth liue,
                  She can (when he thinks leaſt) his fall procure:
                  Therefore let no man hope for happy chance
                  At fortunes hand, ſo full of variance.
               
               
                  Nor hazard his eſtate vpon her wheeles,
                  Vnleſſe he cares not how the ſame doth goe,
                  Nor whether well or ill with him ſhe deales,
                  For neuer man did her ſo conſtant know:
                  That he might ſay, he had continued
                  In one eſtate, and neuer varied.
               
               
                  Let Priam King of Troye vnfortunate,
                  Example hereof be, that wilfully
                  Without aduiſe orethrew his owne eſtate,
                  And brought himſelfe into ſuch miſery:
                  That he, his wife, and all his Sons being 
                        •
                     laine,
                  His noble Citie was deſtroyd againe.
               
               
                  And all his Country round about laid waſt,
                  And whollie brought vnto confuſion,
                  The memorie whereof while world doth laſt,
                  From age to age, and by ſucceſſion
                  Shall both in bookes and ſongs recorded be,
                  That men thereby may learne, & plainly ſee
               
               
                  
                  What comes of raſh conceit and wilfulneſſe,
                  When men will run vpon extreamitie,
                  And put their happy ſtate in doubtfulneſſe
                  By warre, wherein there's no ſecuritie?
                  For he that therein ſeemes moſt fortunate,
                  Oft vnawares doth ſoon'ſt receaue the mate.
               
               
                  For harme once done, too late is to amend,
                  And ſieldome doth a wrong of hatred done,
                  Procure to him that doth it happie end.
                  Let men therefore be wiſe, and ſeeke to ſhun
                  King Priams courſe, and ſo their ſteps direct,
                  That they in time their error may correct.
               
               
                  To ſhew how he into this error fell,
                  Which bred his vtter ruine and decay,
                  Then muſt you know that wrath and envie fell,
                  Burnt ſo within his breaſt both night and day:
                  (Vpon the anſwere that Anthenor brought)
                  That he could neuer reſt till he had wrought
               
               
                  The meanes to be reuenged (if he might)
                  Vpon the Greekes, and ſo in haſt he ſent
                  For all his Lords, and many a noble Knight,
                  To ſummon them vnto a Parliament:
                  Commanding them therein to make no ſtay,
                  But with all preſent ſpeed to come away.
               
               
                  Where being come, and all together met,
                  The King with words moſt graue & courage bold,
                  (When euerie man in his degree was ſet)
                  His will and his intent gan to vnfold:
                  What caus'd him that aſſembly there to make,
                  And in this ſort vnto them then he ſpake,
               
               
                  And ſaid: my Lords, I know your minds ſo well,
                  That long diſcourſe at this time ſhall not need,
                  The cauſe of our aſſemblie for to tell,
                  And therefore to the point I will proceed:
                  And vnto you as brieflie as I may,
                  Declare th'effect of that I haue to ſay.
               
               
                  You know full well how that not long agoe,
                  By counſell of you all I ſent to Greece,
                  
                  
                     Anthenor, on embaſſage for to ſhoe,
                  That my deſire was with loue and peace
                  To haue my ſiſter Exion home againe,
                  But all my ſuite and labour was in vaine.
               
               
                  For that the Grecians moſt vncourteouſly,
                  With threatning words and ſpeeches full of dread,
                  Receau'd and vs'd him ſo deſpightfully,
                  That hardlie he eſcaped with his head:
                  Deſying vs moſt proudlie for the ſame,
                  To our no ſmall diſhonour, and our ſhame.
               
               
                  Which dailie more and more will ſtill encreaſe,
                  Vnleſſe that we ſome remedie procure.
                  For whereas we do ſeeke for loue and peace,
                  And all our wrongs would patientlie endure:
                  They offer war and flatlie vs denie
                  A ſmall requeſt to grant or ſatisfie.
               
               
                  And for the harmes that they to vs haue done,
                  They ſay they will no other order take,
                  But for amends our Countrie t'ouer run,
                  And bloudie war on vs and ours to make:
                  Which their deſire increaſeth our deſpight,
                  But would to God their hearts were ſo contrite,
               
               
                  To ceaſe all ſtrife, and friendly to accord,
                  That all the miſchiefe and the crueltie
                  That bloudie wars doth commonlie afford,
                  Might be converted into amitie:
                  But they (alas) are ſo poſſeſt with pride,
                  That they diſdaine all peace, and vs deride.
               
               
                  Still threatning vs in moſt deſpightfull wiſe,
                  But God forbid that all on vs ſhould light,
                  Which they ſuppoſe, and gainſt vs do ſurmiſe:
                  But ſith they ſeeme to ſhew ſo great deſpight,
                  And vnto vs pretend ſuch crueltie,
                  We muſt be forced of neceſſitie,
               
               
                  By helpe of God their furiouſnes to ſtay,
                  And in our owne defence moſt boldlie ſtand,
                  Sith that our cauſe is iuſt; Which that we may
                  The better do, let vs with heart and hand,
                  Ioyn'd all in one moſt firme and full decree,
                  On them with might and maine reueng'd to be:
               
               
                  Which if we do, we doubt not to preuaile.
                  For where mens minds agree not in conſent
                  Of victorie, they ſhall be ſure to faile:
                  But when vnto an vnitie th'are bent,
                  They cannot chooſe but nappilie proceed,
                  And helpe each other when they ſtand in need.
               
               
                  My counſell therefore is, that we agree
                  And ioyne in one conſent for to withſtand
                  The Grecians, and the more aſſur'd to bee,
                  (Before that we begin to take't in hand)
                  I dare affirme our ſtrength and forces far
                  Exceeds the Grecians power, what ere they are.
               
               
                  Our skill in armes is great, as well you know,
                  Our Knights they are moſt valorous and ſtout,
                  Great ſtore of horſe and foot-men we can ſhow
                  Well arm'd for war, and this we need not doubt,
                  But that our towne is moſt invincible,
                  And for our foes to win't impoſſible.
               
               
                  
                  Therefore I do intend (by your conſent)
                  With all the ſpeed I can for to prepare
                  A Navie well appointed, to be ſent
                  Into the Grecian Land, which ſhall not ſpare
                  (In our behalfe, and to defend our right)
                  T'invade the ſame, and with our force & might
               
               
                  To burne their townes, & lay their Country waſt,
                  And vſe them as they well deſerued haue
                  At our hands, for iniuries forepaſt:
                  For by my will they ſhall not one man ſaue,
                  But cruelly put all vnto the ſword,
                  For they the like vnto vs did afford.
               
               
                  And let not their forepaſſed victory,
                  Againſt vs woone, be cauſe to make vs doubt,
                  For they that oft in field are forſt to flie,
                  Do many times with courage bold and ſtout,
                  Couragiouſly turne backe and fight againe,
                  And in the end the victory obtaine.
               
               
                  Such is the chance of warre, wherein there is
                  No certaintie, but oftent mes it's ſeen,
                  That he that this day victory doth miſſe,
                  The ſelfe ſame day the Conqueror hath been:
                  And he that held the field victoriouſly,
                  By him that fled before, been forſt to flie.
               
               
                  For no man may in warre himſelfe aſſure,
                  So fickle and vnconſtant it is found;
                  For Mars this day will to a man procure
                  A conqueſt great, and cauſe his honor ſound
                  By trumpe of Fame throughout the world ſo wide:
                  And when he liſt he can for him prouide
               
               
                  A ſodaine fall, (and like the ſummer flower
                  That vadeth with a blaſt, and is conſum'd,
                  And cleane diſtroyd) in minute of an hower
                  His honor ſtain'd, (which he at firſt preſum'd
                  Could never faile) and cauſe it to decay,
                  And all within the ſpace of one ſhort day.
               
               
                  And where before his name was magnifide,
                  (Even as the ebbe doth follow floud apace,)
                  (As by experience oft it hath been try'd,)
                  Full ſodainly he can't as much abaſe:
                  For though this day the Sun doth ſhine moſt clear,
                  Next day to vs perhaps t'will not appeare.
               
               
                  When thick & miſtie clouds the Sun doth trouble,
                  And for a time obſcure his radiant beames;
                  Even ſo of Mars the chances are moſt double,
                  And mixed with a number of extreames:
                  Now vp, now downe, now low, & then aloft,
                  As fortune will, whoſe mind doth change full oft.
               
               
                  For when ſhe liſt ſhe'll make a man aſcend
                  Vpon her wheele, his honour to advance,
                  And ſodainly ſhe'll cauſe him to deſcend
                  And much againe, by ſome vnhappy chance:
                  This day ſhe will exalt him to the skie,
                  And next abaſe in twinckling of an eye.
               
               
                  Turning her wheelevnſtable like a ball,
                  She ſmiles on ſome, and others ſhe doth flout,
                  And while one mounts another hath a fall:
                  For every man when it doth turne about,
                  Muſt take the chance that ſhe on him will thruſt.
                  (But he that knowes her frauds & wiles vniuſt,
               
               
                  Will ſoone perceiue ſweet hony mixt with gall,
                  In all her actions what ſo ere they be,)
                  For honour and renowne, miſchife and thrall,
                  Peace, bloudy warre, and every dignitie,
                  Are at her will and pleaſure for to grant,
                  Let no man therefore in his fortune vaunt.
               
               
                  For though the Grecians gainſt vs did preuaile,
                  When they my Father ſlue, it may ſo chance,
                  That now they ſhall of their good fortune faile.
                  Therefore let every man himſelfe advance,
                  And as you are renown'd for hardineſſe,
                  Valour and might, ſhew forth your worthines.
               
               
                  And vnto fortune do your ſelues commend,
                  And let no feare your manly hearts poſſeſſe,
                  But boldlie fight your Country to defend,
                  As I perſwaded am you'le do no leſſe:
                  Now let me heare your anſweres herevnto,
                  And what for me and mine you meane to do.
               
               
                  This ſaid, the Nobles all with one conſent,
                  Made anſwere vnto him, and did reply,
                  That they with hearts and minds were fully bent,
                  In his and their iuſt quarrell for to die,
                  And venture goods and all that ere they haue,
                  The honour of their Country for to ſaue.
               
               
                  For which the King did thanke them heartily,
                  And gaue them leaue each one for to be gone,
                  And went into his chamber preſently,
                  Where ſolitarilie and all alone,
                  He ſat ſtill muſing how to bring to paſſe,
                  The thing that wholly his deſire was.
               
               
                  For he thereon did onely ſet his thought,
                  So much his mind vpon revenge did run,
                  That though his own decay thereby were wrought,
                  Yet would he not the danger thereof ſhun:
                  And ſo reſolu'd, made this concluſion,
                  With preſent ſpeed and reſolution,
               
               
                  
                  To ſend for all his Sons legitimate,
                  And thoſe likewiſe that baſely borne were,
                  To take adviſe of them 'bout his eſtate,
                  And none but they alone, that he might heare
                  What counſell they to him as then would giue,
                  His troubled mind with comfort to relieue.
               
               
                  Concerning his pretence of warre to make
                  Vpon the Grecians for their cruelty,
                  Which he did mind in haſt to vndertake.
                  Who being all aſſembled priuately,
                  And every one ſet downe as his degree
                  And age required, the flower of Chiualrie.
               
               
                  Prince Hector (who as then returned was
                  Out of the Prouince of Panomie)
                  Next to the King in order tooke his place,
                  Whome when he did behold with watrie eye
                  And ſighes full ſore and deepe from out his heart,
                  He did vnto them all his mind impart.
               
               
                  But ere that he as then a word would ſpeake,
                  A floud of teares from out his eyes diſtild,
                  Faſt trickling downe vpon his aged cheake,
                  So much his heart with griefe as then was fild:
                  At laſt as't were a man with ſobs diſmaid,
                  With heavy heart theſe words vnto him ſaid,
               
               
                  My deare and louing ſonnes, as I ſuppoſe,
                  You all record and freſhly beare in thought,
                  How that the Greekes our old poſſeſſed foes,
                  In cruell wiſe their furies on vs wrought:
                  Slaying my Father King Laomedon,
                  
                  Burnt euen with the ground his ancient towne,
               
               
                  Put all his ſubiects to the ſword, not one
                  Eſcapt their rage, and in captiuitie
                  Led wiues and maids, and mongſt them Exion
                  
                  My ſiſter deare, who in extreamity
                  Still there remaines, to our no ſmall offence,
                  And your reproch that fetch her not fro thence:
               
               
                  The which to ſhun nature me thinks ſhould moue,
                  And cauſe you in your hearts to feele much griefe,
                  That ſhe whom you cannot all chooſe but loue,
                  Should there remaine ſo long without reliefe:
                  And with moſt great diſhonour of her name,
                  Indure th'abuſe ſhe doth vnto your ſhame.
               
               
                  Alas my Sons, why ſeeke you not the way,
                  To be reueng'd for this great jniurie,
                  Vpon our foes, and that without delay,
                  And her relieue in her extreamitie:
                  In truth me thinks (ſith that you are ſo ſtrong)
                  You are to blame to driue it off ſo long,
               
               
                  And thus from day to day the time deferre,
                  By Knightly force and valor great t'aſſay,
                  With might and maine vpon them to make warre,
                  It grieueth me you ſeeme ſo long to ſtay,
                  To grant to my requeſt, whoſe whole deſire
                  And heart gainſt the doth burne like flaming fire.
               
               
                  With hatred, (as you plainely may behold)
                  Till that I be reueng'd with preſent ſpeed,
                  The which if you regarded as you ſhould,
                  And reſolutely in your hearts decreed,
                  While you haue ſtrength and valor ſo to do,
                  You would not be ſo hardlie drawne thereto.
               
               
                  Remember how t'was I did you beget,
                  And foſtred you with care as tenderly
                  As I could do, and now you are thus great,
                  And held to be the flower of Chiualrie:
                  You ſhould of nature for my ſorrowes grieue,
                  And with all ſpeedy meanes for to relieue
               
               
                  My troubled mind and great aduerſitie,
                  Sith that you ſee it doth torment me ſo,
                  And that the cauſe concernes both you and me,
                  Whom nature bind, to feele one ſelfe ſame woe:
                  And as he ſpake, and thus to them did mourne,
                  His face vnto Prince Hector he did turne,
               
               
                  And ſaid, Hector my Son, my chiefe and only ioy,
                  My truſt, my ſole delight, my eldeſt child,
                  And here ſuceſſiuelie to raigne in Troy,
                  
                  (Of whom my hopes as yet were nere beguild)
                  Thou that art nam'd the root, the ſpring, the well
                  Of Chivalrie, and doſt therein excell
               
               
                  Thy Brethren all, whereby thou doſt obtaine,
                  The ſoveraigntie of high renowne and fame,
                  Eſteeme not I thee pray my words in vaine,
                  But yeeld and giue conſent vnto the ſame:
                  And do the thing for which I long ſo ſore,
                  For in thee is my truſt, and in no more,
               
               
                  This thing t'effect and wholly bring about.
                  And for that cauſe I make thee Generall
                  Of all my force, and herein make no doubt,
                  But that thou wilt go forward therewithall:
                  And yeeld t'accept of this my iuſt requeſt,
                  For in thy valor onely do I reſt.
               
               
                  And vnto thee it chieflie doth belong,
                  As being wiſe, and full of gouerment
                  Flowring in youth, actiue, and paſſing ſtrong,
                  And haſt thy mind to honour onelie bent:
                  Though yong in yeares yet of diſcretion,
                  Belou'd of all, and of moſt high renowne.
               
               
                  
                  And all thy younger Brethren ſhall obay
                  To thee, and at thy will be alwaies preſ
                        •
                     ,
                  With thee to liue and dye, and therefore ſay
                  If that thou wilt conſent to my requeſt:
                  And let me heare thine anſwere herevnto,
                  That with all ſpeed we may prepare thereto.
               
               
                  When Priam thus had ſhewed them his pretence,
                  
                     Hector (the patterne of Nobilitie)
                  Bowing his knee with humble reuerence
                  Vnto the King, (as full of curteſie)
                  His anſwere gaue with ſober countenance,
                  Th'effect whereof was this in full ſubſtance.
               
               
                  My moſt renowned Lord and Father deare,
                  Sith that it is your pleaſure and your will
                  That I ſhould ſpeake, and you are pleas'd to heare
                  Attentiuely, I ſhall your mind fulfill:
                  And ſuch good counſell as my wit affords,
                  Ile giue to you in few and pithy words.
               
               
                  True'tis my Lord, that natures lawes doe bind,
                  And ſtill prouoke mans heart for to aſpire,
                  (And all Gods creatures elſe of ſeuerall kind)
                  With earneſt and moſt reſolute deſire
                  To ſeeke reuenge, for wrongs by them ſuſtaind,
                  And ſpecially ſuch men as haue attaind
               
               
                  Vnto the honour of Nobility,
                  For vnto them t'were great reproach and ſhame,
                  And wholly gainſt their ſtate and dignity,
                  To ſuffer wrongs done to their name and fame:
                  For euery treſpaſſe muſt conſidered be,
                  And wayd according to the qualitie
               
               
                  Of him gainſt whome the jniurie is wrought,
                  (What way or meanes ſoeuer that it be)
                  As alſo of the perſon that it ſought,
                  For tis more griefe to men of high degree
                  To ſuffer hurt or harme by aduenture,
                  Or any wrong vniuſtly to endure:
               
               
                  Then vnto men of meaner quality.
                  And jniury maliciouſly contriu'd,
                  Is more offence to Princelie Majeſty,
                  And men from high Nobility deriu'd:
                  Then vnto ſuch as by their wealth aſpire
                  To worſhip, though the world doth thē admire.
               
               
                  This well conſidered of, much bound are we,
                  To ſeeke by force our honour to increaſe,
                  Sith we deſcend of Royall pedigree,
                  And let vs not from iuſt reuenge ſurceaſe:
                  For beaſts that are by nature voyd of ſence,
                  Deſire the ſame, and ſeeke their owne defence.
               
               
                  And for my part I know aſſuredly,
                  That none of all your Sons was ere more preſt,
                  Vpon the Greekes to be reueng'd then I,
                  And herevpon my faith I doe proteſt:
                  That with deſpight gainſt them I burne like fire,
                  And thirſt their bloud with all my whole deſire.
               
               
                  For as I am your eldeſt by degree,
                  So am I mooued moſt with angry mood,
                  And long by valour and by chiualry,
                  With ſword in hand to ſhed the Grecians bloud:
                  Which they perchāce ſhall feele ere that they ween,
                  When time doth ſerue, as ſhortly ſhall be ſeene.
               
               
                  But firſt I muſt aduiſe you t'haue a care,
                  (Ere you begin t'effect this your intent)
                  And thinke and way how great the dangers are,
                  Which vnto bloudy war are jncident:
                  And long not the beginning for to ſee,
                  But ſtudie on the end what it may bee.
               
               
                  Which if you do you can by no meanes faile,
                  For counſell giuen in my opinion
                  Is little worth, and nothing may availe,
                  Nor yet deſerueth commendation:
                  Which doth not tend t'adviſe men ſeriouſly
                  To thinke vpon future adverſity.
               
               
                  For though that men at pleaſure bring about,
                  The firſt beginning of their tragedies,
                  Yet oftentimes it commonly fals out,
                  That they doe end with great extreamities:
                  And what availes beginning fortunate,
                  That after cauſeth ſtrife and great debate.
               
               
                  I ſay therefore great wiſedome tis to doubt,
                  At th'entring into any enterpriſe;
                  What iſſue may thereof in th'end fall out,
                  Which who ſo doth I hold him to be wiſe:
                  For that beginning is moſt fortunate,
                  Where midſt and end continue in like eſtate.
               
               
                  But when they do not happilie proceed,
                  T'were better wholly from it to abſtaine,
                  Then t'hazard mans eſtate when there's no need,
                  For who ſo doth, aſſured is to gaine
                  Nought elſe but miſchiefe and adverſity,
                  And end his daies in great extreamity.
               
               
                  Let not your Majeſty I yow beſeech,
                  In any wiſe with me diſpleaſed be,
                  Nor yet to take exception at my ſpeech,
                  For there's no ſparke of any thought in me,
                  To giue a cauſe vnto you of offence:
                  For that I ſpeake is onely with pretence,
               
               
                  
                  To counſell you to ſee that wilfully
                  You enterpriſe not that which in the end,
                  By miſadvice may chance vnhappily,
                  And be the cauſe in fine your ſelfe t'offend:
                  Nor of your foes too ſmall account to make,
                  For ſo men oftentimes themſelues miſtake.
               
               
                  But thinke how they hold in ſubiection
                  All Affrica, and Europe, wide and long,
                  With many another warlike Nation,
                  And that they are moſt valiant Knights and ſtrong:
                  Eſteem'd of all the world for worthineſſe,
                  Abounding in great wealth and happineſſe.
               
               
                  So that with your ſupport I dare bebold,
                  T'a
                        ••
                     irme that danger tis them to diſpleaſe;
                  And if our quiet ſtate diſturbe we ſhould,
                  It's to be feard we muſt our ſelues diſeaſe:
                  And ſay that Aſia ſhould vs aid to fight,
                  It is not like vnto the Grecians might.
               
               
                  And though our Aunt the Princeſſe Exion,
                  
                  Againſt all right be held by Telamon;
                  
                  It is not fit for her redemption,
                  To bring vs all vnto deſtruction:
                  My counſel's not to buy her halfe ſo deare,
                  For that perhaps all we that now ſit here,
               
               
                  And many more might alſo for her right,
                  In doubtfull warres looſe both their lire & lim,
                  And after long and many a bloudy 
                        •
                     ight,
                  Perehance ſhall nere get her away from him:
                  Which were no wiſedome as it ſeemes to me.
                  And it may hap ere long time paſſe, that ſhe
               
               
                  Her fatall courſe and daies on earth will end,
                  And then what ſhall we reap for her to ſtriue,
                  And with our Grecian enemies contend?
                  But onely euer after while we liue,
                  Be ſure of mortall warre and enmity,
                  Sorrow and griefe, and all extreamity.
               
               
                  My counſell therefore is, that we endure
                  Our wrongs forepaſt without contention,
                  And not vnto ourſelues more hurt procure,
                  For tis a point of great diſcretion:
                  Think not my Lord I ſpeake thus much for feare
                  Or cowardiſe, but yet I ſay that t'were
               
               
                  Great folly to commit our happineſſe
                  (Sith that we now 
                        •
                     iue in ſecurity)
                  To fortunes hands, ſo full of doublenes,
                  And barre our ſelues of all felicity:
                  This is (ſaid he) all that I did pretend
                  To ſay to you, and ſo his ſpeech did end.
               
               
                  When Hector thus his mind declared had,
                  And with moſt graue concluſion ſo did cloſe,
                  The wiſe diſcourſe which be to them had made:
                  His ſecond brother Paris therewith roſe,
                  And to the King along diſcourſe did make,
                  Which in theſe words with courage bold he ſpake.
               
               
                  And ſaid, my Lord, if't like your Grace to heare,
                  And giue me leaue to ſpeake, then muſt I ſay
                  And will it proue, you haue no cauſe to feare,
                  (Nor would I wiſh you long the time delay)
                  With braue and valiant heart to vndertake,
                  Vpon the Greekes aſodaine warre to make:
               
               
                  Therewith their pride and malice to confound,
                  Sith that you know yourſelfe to be ſo ſtrong
                  Of valiant Knights, and that we do abound
                  With plenty of each thing that doth belong
                  Vnto the warres, and how our towne moſt wide,
                  Is able all their proud aſſaults t'abide.
               
               
                  And which is more, invincible to win.
                  Beſides all this, great Princes many aone
                  (Our friends, ſo were this warre with them begun)
                  Will vs aſſiſt to their deſtruction:
                  Let them therefore be nere ſo bold and ſtout,
                  I ſee no cauſe at all, why we ſhould doubt:
               
               
                  Nor reaſon why we ſhould our ſelues diſmay.
                  Therefore if you my counſell now will take,
                  I thinke it beſt you ſhould no time delay
                  Your Nauie to prepare, and if you'le make
                  Me Generall thereof, I you aſſure,
                  That I will ſuch a ſpeedy meanes procure,
               
               
                  That Exion ſhall recouered be full ſoone,
                  And in ſuch ſort it ſhall by me be wrought,
                  (That I eſteeme it eaſie to be done.)
                  For I deuiſed haue within my thought,
                  By Knightly force with ſtrong and mighty hand,
                  To rauiſh ſome faire Lady in that Land
               
               
                  Of high eſtate, and without tarrying,
                  (Deſpight of them when as I haue her wonne)
                  With all the ſpeed I can, to Troy her bring,
                  That ſo you may haue reſtitution,
                  By change of her whom you long ſo to ſee,
                  And this ſhall ſoone by me diſpatched be.
               
               
                  All were the Grecians nere ſo ſtrong & bold.
                  And that hereof you may be out of doubt,
                  I will in briefe to you the meanes vnfold,
                  How I with eaſe will bring the ſame about:
                  And hope thereby your mind ſo to content,
                  That you'le reioyce that I was thither ſent.
               
               
                  
                  For that the Gods of their benignitie,
                  Haue ſhewed to me by reuelation,
                  Which way the ſame may well effected be:
                  And to that end I had a viſion
                  Not long agoe, as in a ſleepe I fell,
                  Which if you marke, and it conſider well,
               
               
                  You need not feare to faile nor yet to care,
                  To get her home, whome you ſo much deſire.
                  The manner of my dreame I will declare,
                  And in moſt humble wiſe your Grace require,
                  With patience to abide till I haue done,
                  And I will it in briefe ſoone over-run.
               
               
                  Your Grace remembreth well to what intent,
                  By your command and with commiſſion large,
                  Into the Indian land of late I went,
                  For things that are committed to my charge:
                  And I as then tooke on me to effect,
                  Which that I might the time no whit neglect.
               
               
                  When Titan with his beames moſt faire and cleare
                  From Gemeny his furious ſteeds did chace,
                  And in the ſigne of Cancer gan apeare,
                  (Which called is Lucinaes mancion place)
                  When as the Sun was in the higheſt degree,
                  Which in the midſt of Iuno we find to bee.
               
               
                  At that ſame time as ſoone as day I ſaw,
                  When Phoebus gan to ſhew his radiant light,
                  Commanding Pirrous vp his wane to draw,
                  And Dame Aurora beautifull and bright,
                  Began her face out of the Eaſt to ſhew,
                  And caſt on hearbs and flowers her ſiluer dew,
               
               
                  I roſe out of my bed with preſent ſpeed,
                  And full intent on hunting forth to goe,
                  For that within my heart I had decreed,
                  Some honour vnto Cupid then to ſhow:
                  And Ladie Venus that day magnifie,
                  Which called is the Queene of Venerie.
               
               
                  And reverently the ancient rights obſerue,
                  Of Cinthia nam'd the faire bright ſhining Moone,
                  And her in all ſubmiſſiue wiſe to ſerue,
                  The which by vs the better to be done,
                  My mates and I for pleaſure and delight,
                  Determined to reſt and ſtay till night
               
               
                  Within a wood, to play and make ſome ſport,
                  (As beſt beſeemeth men of youthfull mind)
                  And pleaſantly our ſelues to recomfort,
                  For that day vnto Venus was aſſign'd,
                  And hallowed to her ſacred deity,
                  With honour and with ſoueraigne Maieſty.
               
               
                  Which euery one obſeru'd both ſmall and great.
                  For on a Friday t'was when forth we went,
                  And when within the pleaſant woods we met,
                  To hunt for game (as t'was our ſole intent)
                  With labour great we rode both too and froe,
                  So long till many a fearefull Bucke and Doe
               
               
                  By ſtrength were kil
                        •
                     , as we them chanſt to find,
                  And mongſt the dales and vallies ſteepe and low,
                  With hounds did chaſe the Hart & tripping Hind,
                  Till Phoebus gliſtring in his chaire did ſhow:
                  Iuſt in the midſt or the Merid
                        •
                     en,
                  When as the beames moſt burning hot did ſhine,
               
               
                  And we vpon our chaſe moſt buſied were.
                  As I by chance ſtrayd from my companie,
                  Who in the woods were ſcattered here and there,
                  A mightie Hart did ſtart forth ſodenlie,
                  From out the thickets haſting to the greene
                  With moſt ſwift pace, which when that I had ſeen,
               
               
                  I ſpyed my horſe, and after gallopt faſt,
                  Vp hils, downe dales, through buſhes thick & thin,
                  And yet for all I made as then ſuch haſt,
                  I could by no meanes ground vpon him win:
                  But maugre all I did to my deſpight,
                  In little ſpace t'was gone out of my ſight.
               
               
                  Into a wood that Ida had to name,
                  Wherewith I waxt ſo faint that I did ſtay
                  To reſt my ſelfe, and ſo left off the game,
                  And for becauſe that I had loſt my way:
                  (And that my horſe whereon I then did ride,
                  Foam'd at the mouth, and ſwet on euery ſide.
               
               
                  And all his flankes in every place were ſtaind
                  With bloud, that with my ſpurs from him I drew,
                  So hotly in the chaſe I him conſtraind,
                  The Hart that ran ſo ſwiftly to purſue:
                  With hope in th'end he ſhould by me be caught,
                  But all that I could do availd me nought.)
               
               
                  When a mongſt the thick & lofty trees ſo greene,
                  I found by chance a ſweet and pleaſant ſhade,
                  As ſmooth and plaine as ever man had ſeene,
                  I lighted off my horſe and faſt him made
                  Vnto a tree, and wearie as I was,
                  I 
                        •
                     ayd me downe vpon a tuft of graſſe
               
               
                  Hard by a riuer ſide, whoſe ſtreames moſt cleare,
                  Like criſtall fine did caſt a radiant light,
                  And all the ſtones and ſand that therein were,
                  Appear'd and ſhone like gold moſt pure & bright:
                  Where preſently with my great wearineſſe,
                  A heauie ſleepe did me ſo ſore oppreſſe.
               
               
                  
                  That ſince I firſt was clad with earthly mold,
                  I neuer ſlept ſo faſt. And ſodainly
                  As I lay ſtill, me thought I did behold
                  God Mercurie deſcend downe from the skie,
                  And ſtood by me, which put me in a feare,
                  For he as then his crooked ſword did weare
               
               
                  Gi
                        •
                     t to his ſide, and held within his hand
                  His charming rod, about the which did wind,
                  Two vgly Snakes, (with which his pliant wand,
                  He vs'd to worke all things vnto his mind:)
                  And at his feet me thought there ſtood a cocke,
                  That crowed each hower as true as any clocke.
               
               
                  And in his mouth were pipes that plaid ſo ſhrill,
                  And with ſo ſweet and pleaſant harmony,
                  That both mine eares and ſences they did fill,
                  With many ſeverall kinds of melody:
                  So that I did aſſuredly ſurmiſe,
                  That I had beene in earthly Paradiſe.
               
               
                  (In this ſtrange ſort appeared Mercury,
                  
                  And much more ſtrangethen I can well declare,
                  Like as Fulgence in his methologie
                  Of him d
                        •
                     th write, wherein he doth not ſpare,
                  In pleaſant verſe full of varietie,
                  His ſhape to ſhow as you therein may ſee.
               
               
                  To moraliſe his ſhape, you muſt ſurmiſe
                  His rod ſo ſtraight which neuer ſtandeth bent,
                  Doth ſignifie men politicke and wiſe,
                  Who by their good and carefull gouernment
                  All dangers do prevent before they fall,
                  And by that meanes preſerue themſelues from thrall.
               
               
                  His pipes ſo ſweet and pleaſant to the eare,
                  Significantly vnto vs do ſhow,
                  The eloquence which dailie we doe heare,
                  And Rethoritian phraſes that doe flow
                  Out of mens mouths of great diſcretion,
                  Whereof that God is th'only pateron.
               
               
                  The Cocke that doth ſo louely chant and crow,
                  And iuſtly keepes each hower of the night,
                  Doth ſignifie and rightly to vs ſhow,
                  The watch fulneſſe and the interiour ſight
                  Of men, that by their care and diligence,
                  Driue from their minds all ſloth & negligence.
               
               
                  His ſword that crookes like to a Fawchion,
                  Which neither forged was nor made in vaine,
                  Doth ſerue to force ſuch as haue ſtraid and gone,
                  Out of the way of truth to turne againe:
                  The ſerpents which about his rod do wind,
                  Are like to diuers croſſes which we find,
               
               
                  And daily ſee do lie in wait to ſtop
                  The way of truth, by hatred and diſdaine,
                  And of the ſame the branches ſo to lop,
                  That by their will it nere ſhould grow againe:
                  And ſo poore truth conſtrained is to flie,
                  And in a hole lie hidden ſecretly.)
               
               
                  And with this winged God there did appeare
                  As then to me, three Goddeſſes moſt bright,
                  The which ſo faire and paſſing comely were,
                  That I in them did take no ſmall delight:
                  To ſee and to behold their beauties rare,
                  The names whereof to you I will declare.
               
               
                  The firſt whereon my gaſing eyes I caſt,
                  Was Venus faire the Goddeſſe of delight;
                  Next vnto her Dame Iuno fore me paſt,
                  A Goddeſſe of no little power and might:
                  The third and laſt that ſhowd her ſelfe in place,
                  The wiſe and valiant Goddeſſe Pallas was.
               
               
                  Faire Venus to procure the more delight,
                  To thoſe that vnto her obedience ſhew,
                  Aboue her head had Pigeons faire and white,
                  Who flickering with their wings about her flew.
                  To ſhew to vs that by the ſame is meant,
                  That as thoſe birds are meeke and innocent.
               
               
                  So louers that are faithfull and do meane
                  T'obſerue God Cupids lawes, and truely giue
                  To loue her due, ſhould be ſo pure and clane
                  In deed and thought, that while that they do liue,
                  No manner of diſliking, nor of blame
                  Should be in them, their credits to defame.
               
               
                  The freſhnes of the Roſes faire and red,
                  Which in the Summer ſhew moſt pleaſantly,
                  And in the Winter are ſo pale and dead.
                  The thoughts of louers yong do ſignifie,
                  And ſuch as in hot loue do burne like fire,
                  With fervent hope t'attaine to their deſire.
               
               
                  When loue at firſt within their hearts beares ſway,
                  Vntill the time of old vnweldy age,
                  When luſt is paſt and ſeemeth to decay,
                  And doth begin no more in them to rage
                  Through feeblenes, when ſpring of youth is gone,
                  Which by good proofe to many men is known.
               
               
                  
                     Venus therefore we oft diſtiled ſee,
                  To ſit within a floud of water deepe,
                  To ſhow what trouble and adverſity
                  Is found in loue, and how that it doth keepe
                  Men in deſpaire, with fancy them to feed,
                  Till hopeleſſe they remaine in doubt to ſpeed.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Pallas me thought in th'one hand then did beare
                  A ſhield, the which of mettall pure was made.
                  In th'other hand a ſharpe and warlike ſpeare,
                  And round about his head a Rainebow had
                  O
                        •
                      colours three, red, greene, and perfect blew,
                  And as it ſeem'd to me before her grew
               
               
                  An Oliue tree, which ſhewd moſt freſh and greene,
                  And in the verdant branches thereof ſat,
                  The vglieſt Owle that ever eye had ſeene,
                  With ſtaring eies, and face moſt brawd and flat,
                  Whereof the morrall with the reſtile ſhow
                  As they in order ſtand. Then muſt you know
               
               
                  The 
                        •••
                     eld which Pallas beares within her hand,
                  D
                        •
                     th ſignifie the power and paſſing might
                  That 
                        〈◊〉
                      hath by wiſedome to withſtand
                  All 
                        〈◊〉
                      and manly gainſt the ſame to fight.
                  A
                        ••
                      that 
                        •
                     er ſpeareſ
                        •
                      ſmoth & ſharply ground,
                  Was forg'd by iuſt reuenge, for to confound
               
               
                  And overthrow vniuſt and wicked men;
                  And for that mercie ſhould with rigor goe,
                  The ſta
                        •
                     e thereof is ſhau'd and ſmothed cleane,
                  Leaſt merciles right ſhould iuſt rigor ſhoe.
                  The Oliue tree 
                        ••
                     tokens ſigne of peace,
                  Which doth enſue, whē bloody warre doth ceaſe.
               
               
                  The broad fac't ſtaring eyed vgly Owle,
                  The which gainſt death and bankets funerall
                  Of cuſtome hath by kind to ſ
                        •
                     ritch and howle,
                  Doth ſhow that death is th'onely end of all.
                  The glory of the world, and happie's he
                  That dayly beareth it in memory.
               
               
                  The Rainebow where ſuch ſeverall colours were
                  Of divers kinds to beautifi't withall,
                  Doth ſhow what ſundry chaunces are in warre,
                  Wherein ſome win, ſome looſe, ſome fall.
                  Like conſtant, and light wavering greene,
                  Varietie ſo great therein is ſeene.
               
               
                  
                     Iun
                           •
                        
                      as learn'd Fulgentius to vs tells,
                  A 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                      with barren wombe and dead,
                  And alwa
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in Rivers, and in Wells,
                  To whom the Peacocke proud is ſacared,
                  With Argus eyes imprinted in her tayle,
                  The which ſhe ſpreads abroad like to a ſayle.
               
               
                  The waters ſayd to be in wells and flouds,
                  Doe repreſent the cares and troubles great
                  That men indure, to ſcrape and gather goods,
                  Not ſparing paine nor toile the ſame to get.
                  But whoſoere within thoſe floods doth row,
                  Let him beware, for after they doe flow,
               
               
                  By courſe of time, as it is moſt true
                  (Directed by the Moone their governeſſe,)
                  There will an ebbe with preſent ſpeed enſue.
                  The feare is moſt, when Cinthia doth increaſe,
                  And orderly attaine vnto the the full,
                  Leaſt Fortune chance the feathers way to pull
               
               
                  Of men that doe abound in riches great,
                  (For ſhe is Queene of mutabilitie.)
                  And Argus eyes that in the tayle are ſet
                  Of Peacocks proud, are ſayd to ſignifie
                  Such niggards hearts as commonly are blind,
                  And onely on their riches ſet their mind.
               
               
                  Remembring not, that it with them doth fare
                  As with the ebbe, which ſoone doth paſſe away.
                  (Whereof they ſeeme to haue but litte care.)
                  For as the Peacocks feathers freſh and gay
                  Doe often ſhed, and from her tayle doe fall:
                  So riches when men thinke them ſur'ſt of all,
               
               
                  Will ſodainely conſume and waſt away,
                  And vnawares their maiſter cleane deſie,
                  For that in them there is no certaine ſtay.
                  And as the Goddeſſe Iuno's wombe is drie:
                  So are the greedy covetous hearts of ſuch,
                  As on their riches ſet their minds ſo much.
               
               
                  That nothing whatſoere will ſatisfie
                  Their greedy thoughts, poſſeſt with feare and woe,
                  Leaſt they ſhould fall in want before they die,
                  And yet at laſt they muſt it all forgoe.
                  Thus riches breeds to thē continuall care, (ſpare▪
                  
                  That while they liue, doe nought but pinch and
               
               
                  But he that hath a free and liberall heart,
                  Doth ſcorne to pinch and liue ſo niggardly:
                  But kindly vnto others will impart
                  Such as he hath, when opportunitie
                  And time doth ſerue, and doth in heart deteſt,
                  (Like greedy gut to hide his gold in cheſt.)
               
               
                  And thus theſe ſtately Goddeſſes all three,
                  Did ſhow themſelues in ſhape as I haue told,
                  And for their guide had winged Mercurie,
                  
                  Who ſtanding ſtill a while did me behold.
                  At laſt his rod vpon my lips he laid,
                  And in theſe words did ſpeake to me, and ſayd;
               
               
                  Sir Paris, lift thine eyes vp now, and ſee
                  Theſe goodly Dames that downe frō skies deſcend,
                  And in their ſeverall ſhapes appeare to thee,
                  Are come a certaine ſtrife; twixt them to end.
                  And thus it is as they with all the reſt
                  Of great celeſtiall Gods, weare at a feaſt
               
               
                  
                  With Iupiter, in his moſt heauenly bowre,
                  And not one fail'd but all as then were there,
                  Except the Goddeſſe Diſcord, who did lowre
                  And fret therefore, and ſuch deſpight did beare
                  Againſt thoſe Dames, that for revenge the ſought
                  And at the laſt in this wiſe ſhe it wrought.
               
               
                  She did by Art and skill an Apple frame
                  Of maſſie gold, and round as any ball,
                  With Grecian letters grauen vpon the ſame,
                  Which ſayd let her that is the fair'ſt of all,
                  Take this for her reward, and bear't away,
                  And let the reſt not once thereto ſay nay.
               
               
                  This Apple ſhe vnto the feaſt did bring,
                  And when they were ſet downe about the board,
                  With countenance ſterne ſhe did it thereon fling,
                  And without more delay or ſpeaking word,
                  Went out the hall as faſt as ere ſhe might,
                  And ſodainely there roſe ſo great deſpight
               
               
                  And envie for the ſame betweene theſe three,
                  To know which of them all hath greateſt right,
                  (For every one of them doth thinke it's ſhee
                  That beſt deſeru'd that golden Apple bright.)
                  And mongſt them yet there is ſo great diſdaine,
                  Which of them is in beautie Soveraigne,
               
               
                  And beſt deſires to beare away the game?
                  That night and day they never ceaſe to ſtriue;
                  And wrangle, chide, and brawl about the ſame,
                  And all their hearts in manner ſeeme to riue
                  And burſt for ſpight, vntill that they do ſee
                  Which of them ſhall obtaine the victorie.
               
               
                  Such enuy raignes in hearts of women kind,
                  That every one is jealous of the other,
                  And none of them but thinks within her mind,
                  That ſhe deſerues the praiſe before another.
                  And all of them in their opinions,
                  Doe thinke their beautie paſſeth every ones.
               
               
                  For not the fowlſt amongſt them all that are,
                  If that their face within a glaſſe they ſee,
                  But doth ſuppoſe their beauties to be rare.
                  But I thinke him a very foole to bee.
                  And one that hath in colours ſmall inſight,
                  That chuſeth ſallo, wyellow, for a white.
               
               
                  And that mans eye deceiued is full ſoone,
                  That vſually doth ſtay till it be night,
                  And then doth chuſe his colours by the moone,
                  For colours are refined by fier-light:
                  And ſome encreaſt by wine and coſtly cheare,
                  And ſome with oyntmēts ſweet their faces cleare.
               
               
                  And many times by falſe jlluſion,
                  By night ſome doe ſhow beautifull and faire,
                  But ſuch as haue tried that concluſion,
                  Oft find them fowle by day-light in the aire:
                  It's good therefore to chuſe (by my aduiſe)
                  In morning when a woman firſt doth riſe.
               
               
                  For then her beautie beſt is to be tride,
                  And follow Ouids counſell in that caſe,
                  Who ſaith, when drugs and pots are ſet aſide
                  Then chuſe, and thou ſhalt truely ſee her face:
                  Leaſt (as he ſaith) thou mayſt deceiued bee,
                  And think thou ſeeſt, the thing thou doſt not ſee
               
               
                  For at this day ſuch practiſes are rife,
                  (And knowne and vſd too much in euery place.)
                  And thus began the malice and the ſtrife,
                  Betweene theſe Ladies three, who for that caſe
                  By one conſent deſcended from the skie,
                  The quarrell of their beautie there to trie.
               
               
                  The doome whereof committed is to thee
                  Sir Paris, that ſo wiſe and prudent art,
                  See that therein thou well adviſed bee,
                  For from it by no meanes they may not ſtart:
                  But muſt abide all three by one conſent,
                  Without delay or ſtrife to thy iudgement.
               
               
                  But firſt before thou tak'ſt this thing in hand,
                  Or any word out of thy mouth be heard,
                  Thou ſhalt doe well from me to vnderſtand,
                  What each of them will giue thee for reward,
                  If thou doſt Iudge her beautie to excell
                  The other two, now harke and I will tell.
               
               
                  If thou vnto Queene Iune doſt it giue,
                  She will reward thee highly for the ſame,
                  With riches ſtore, and while thou heere doſt liue,
                  Will thee advance to honour great and fame,
                  And in all theſe will proſper thee ſo well,
                  That thou in them all others ſhalt excell.
               
               
                  If vnto Goddeſſe Pallas it befall,
                  To haue his golden Apple for her fee,
                  And that thou judgeſt her the fair'ſt of all,
                  For thy reward ſhe will aſſure to thee,
                  That thou in wiſedome, wit, and government,
                  Shalt be ſo perfect and ſo excellent,
               
               
                  That euen as farre 
                        ••
                      
                     Phebus giueth light,
                  And in the world ſince that it firſt began,
                  There never was a more couragious Knight
                  Then thou, nor nere was knowne a wiſer man.
                  Thus riches, honour, wiſedome, fortitude,
                  May be at thy command, if thou conclude
               
               
                  
                  Thy iudgements on their ſides; therefore beware,
                  And herein take aduiſe, and do not looſe
                  Theſe gifts that are ſo noble and ſo rare,
                  While thou to leaue or take haſt time to chooſe,
                  I ſpeake not this to moue thee therewithall,
                  To iudge amiſſe, or to be partiall.
               
               
                  And if to Venus thou this Apple giue,
                  Thou ſhalt for thy reward haue to thy wife
                  The faireſt Dame that now on earth doth liue,
                  Or ever man did ſee in all his life,
                  Which thou by valour great in Greece ſhalt win.
                  Now be aduis'd, before thou doſt begin
               
               
                  To iudge aright, and ſee for nought thou ſpare,
                  Leaſt after thou repent for doing ſo.
                  Wherewith amaz'd I gan about me ſtare,
                  In doubt to thinke what I therein ſhould doe,
                  At laſt I ſpake and ſaid to Mercurie,
                  
                  That I by no meanes would their beauties trie,
               
               
                  Nor iudge thereof, vnleſſe they naked there
                  Before me ſtood, that at my libertie,
                  I might behold, if everie member were,
                  As faire in all reſpect and each degree,
                  As outwardlie their faces faire did ſhow,
                  And then my doome they preſentlie ſhould know.
               
               
                  When they had heard me ſpeak they gaue conſent,
                  And did agree my mind therein t'obay,
                  (And ſtraight to ſtrip themſelues were all content,
                  The which to do they made no long delay)
                  For they had all decreed before they came,
                  That in no point they would denie the ſame.)
               
               
                  When naked all before me there they ſtood,
                  And that I did behold them at the full,
                  And vewed everie part, it did me good
                  To ſee their bodies faire and beautifull:
                  But when mine eies on Venus bright I caſt,
                  For her without delay my iudgement paſt.
               
               
                  And vnto her the Apple gaue with ſpeed,
                  As faireſt of them all (excepting none)
                  And as at firſt it was by them decreed,
                  I ſhould not partiall be to any one,
                  So did I iudge her beautie great to be,
                  Much more then th'others two in each degree.
               
               
                  For as me thought her eies moſt faire and bright,
                  That caſt forth ſtreames ſo cleare and delectable,
                  Were like the ſtarre that ſhines to vs by night,
                  Cald Heſperus, and ſo moſt amiable
                  Faire Venus ſhewd her ſelfe, ye t'was true,
                  I could not chooſe but giue to her her due.
               
               
                  Whereat this Goddeſſe faire did much reioyce,
                  And in her heart therewith did ſeeme to glorie,
                  That of her beautie rare I made the choice
                  T'excell the reſt, and that the victorie
                  By iudgement, vnto her as then did fall,
                  To be the fair'ſt and beautiful'ſt of all.
               
               
                  And as the winged God to me did ſay,
                  What ſhould be my reward of Venus part,
                  She ſaid ſhe would performe without delay,
                  And from his vowe and promiſe neuer ſtart:
                  And ſaying ſo the Goddeſſes all three,
                  Did vaniſh and depart away from me.
               
               
                  And Mercurie with wings began to flie,
                  And ſoaring vp with ſpeed his waie did take,
                  Directlie to the cleare and criſtall skie,
                  And ſodainlie therewith I did awake
                  Out of my deadlie ſleepe, and vp I ſtart,
                  And mounting horſe from thence did ſtraight depart.
               
               
                  Now my good Lord, whom I both loue & dread,
                  Ift pleaſe your Grace your ſelfe herein t'adviſe,
                  And vnto that which I haue ſaid take heed,
                  You will it not eſteeme, nor yet ſurmiſe
                  To be in vaine, by Venus to me ſaid.
                  And therefore I wiſh you not to be afraid,
               
               
                  But boldlie let me goe to Greece in haſt,
                  With ſome great power of men about the thing
                  Which I haue ſaid, and ere long time be paſt,
                  I doubt not but the ſame to paſſe to bring:
                  And as by Venus I am promiſed,
                  Of ſome faire Ladie certainlie to ſpeed.
               
               
                  That by exchange of her you may obtaine
                  An eaſie and a moſt aſſured way,
                  To get your Siſter Exion home againe,
                  This is (ſaid he) all that I haue to ſay,
                  For my adviſe and counſell to your Grace,
                  And ſo ſate downe againe into his place.
               
               
                  But Priam what ſhould cauſe thee to forget
                  Thy ſelfe ſo much, that thou ſhouldſt be ſo vaine,
                  Thy hope and truſt vpon a dreame to ſet?
                  I cannot chooſe but needs muſt tell thee plaine,
                  That ſhallow was thy wit and thy diſcretion,
                  To truſt vnto a falſe illuſion.
               
               
                  As that thou all care hadſt ſet aſide,
                  To follow after dreaming fantaſie,
                  T'is ſure that reaſon then was not thy guide,
                  That thou vpon meere follies wouldſt relie
                  As Paris did, that Pallas did neglect,
                  And ſacred wiſedome wilfullie reiect.
               
               
                  
                  And ſome alſo careleſly re
                        •
                     uſ'd
                  With riches and with all her offers great,
                  And ſhe that hath all men ſo much abuſ'd,
                  (And at whoſe hands their's nothing els to get
                  But pleaſure, and the fond delights of loue,
                  Which onely doe a man to folly moue)
               
               
                  Faire J'enus cal'd the blackſmith Vulcans wife,
                  (Whoſe ſeruice though it doth nought els procure
                  Vnto a man, but bloody warre and ſtrife,)
                  By him preferred was, but tis moſt ſure
                  That Paris in his judgement was vniuſt,
                  And that his mind was wholy ſet on luſt.
               
               
                  Whereby the great and famous Troian Towne,
                  When it had long been vext with bloudy warre,
                  Was in the end brought to confuſion
                  By Paris meanes, that had ſo little care,
                  When it was offred him, his choiſe to make
                  Of wiſedome, gold, and valor; and to take
               
               
                  A Woman that was cauſe of all the woe
                  Which vnto Priam afterward befell.
                  A
                        •
                      in this Booke hereafter I will ſhoe,
                  And now on dreames I will no longer dwell,
                  But to my matter ſeriouſly proceed,
                  And ſhew you what by Priam was decreed.
               
               
                  Vpon the dreame by Paris then declard,
                  But firſt of all in briefe i'le let you know
                  What Diophebus ſayd, who having heard
                  His brothers ſpeech, ſtood vp his mind to ſhow:
                  And grauely with a countenance benign,
                  Obedience made, and ſpake vnto the King,
               
               
                  And ſayd, my Lord, if every man ſhould doubt,
                  And in his mind forecaſt and deepely way,
                  Concerning future things what might fall out:
                  It would be cauſe to make men often ſtay
                  All actions whatſoere, and neuer bend
                  Their wits nor wils to bring them to an end.
               
               
                  Nor would they ſeeke their valours forth to ſhow,
                  For he that doubts, dares nothing vndertake:
                  For if a man before that he doth throw
                  His Corne into the groūd, ſhould recknoning make
                  How many grains thereof conſum'd would be
                  By Birds, or by ſome other Caſualtie:
               
               
                  I'would make him feare his ground to ſow againe.
                  Let vs lay all ſuch fooliſh doubts aſide,
                  For I eſteeme and hold them meerely vaine,
                  And counſeil now no longer to abide,
                  Nor ſlacke the time, but with a Navy ſtrong
                  Send Paris into Greece for to revenge our wrong:
               
               
                  This I dare affirme and boldly ſay,
                  That he hath counſelled you and vs full well,
                  Which no man to ſpeake truth can well denay.
                  So that I thinke and muſt you plainely tell,
                  Great error t'were his purpoſe to contrary,
                  And therefore let him now no longertarry.
               
               
                  But thither with a warlike Navy goe,
                  That we may quit them for the villany
                  Which they vnto vs and ours did ſhow,
                  In former times with extreame cruelty.
                  And for the better execution,
                  And getting of our Aunt, faire Exion,
                  
               
               
                  Whom they doe hold from vs by force and might,
                  And long haue done to our no little ſhame,
                  And that againſt all equitie and right,
                  Which wounds my heart to thinke vpon the ſame:
                  For remedy whereof I muſt needs ſay,
                  There is no better meanes, nor readier way
               
               
                  Then to ſend forth a ſtrong and warlike band,
                  With him to Greece, that forcibly he may
                  Some Lady take, within the Grecians land,
                  And mauger all their might, her thence conuay,
                  And bring her vnto Troy, with preſent ſpeed,
                  By which ſo braue exploit, and warlike deed,
               
               
                  You may haue meanes to ſatisfie your mind,
                  By changing her for Princes Exion.
                  
                  This is the readieſt way that I can find
                  For to procure her reſtitution.
                  Which my good Lord I hope you do intend,
                  (Quoth he) my counſell I will end.
               
               
                  Which ſayd, his brother Helenus did riſe
                  Out of his ſeate, and with due reverence
                  Vnto the King, as beeing learnd and wiſe,
                  Deſired him he might haue audience
                  To ſpeake, and to declare vnto them all,
                  What future danger might on them befall.
               
               
                  And ſo with ſober countenance and ſad,
                  He ſpake and ſayd, my Lord may't pleaſe your grace
                  To giue command, that ſilence now be made,
                  And that I may haue licence for a ſpace,
                  Without deceit or guile to ſhew my mind,
                  What I by ſecret Art and ſcience find.
               
               
                  Hereafter will fall out, wherein as yet
                  I never fail'd as well your grace doth know,
                  And ſure I am you doe it not forget,
                  For whatſoere I tooke on me to ſhow,
                  Did come to paſſe as I did tell it you,
                  And you likewiſe did find it to be true.
               
               
                  
                  And by Gods leaue I will not ſpare as now
                  To tell the truth without all flattery,
                  For I haue tane an oath, and made a vow
                  That from my mouth there ſhall proceed no lye,
                  I ſay therefore with true intention,
                  And as t'will follow in concluſion.
               
               
                  If you to Greece my brother Paris ſend,
                  I know it well by Revelation,
                  (Though he effect the thing you doe pretend.)
                  In fine twill be our owne confuſion.
                  For ſo I find by true Aſtronomy.
                  And never yet in any Propheſie
               
               
                  Was I deceau,d in future accident,
                  Nor any that did put his truſt in me.
                  Then ſith all things muſt haue their true event,
                  I counſell you by me forewarn'd to be:
                  And by no meanes for malice, nor for pride,
                  Seeke not reuenge what ever may betide,
               
               
                  Againſt the Greeks: for if that you proceed
                  T'effect the thing which you as now intend,
                  And as within your mind you haue decreed,
                  Which is that you to Greece will Paris ſend:
                  Know for a truth and full concluſion,
                  Twill be the cauſe of our deſtruction.
               
               
                  For by that meanes will certainely befall
                  The ouerthrow of our moſt ancient Towne:
                  Wherefore the howſes, Pallaces, and wall,
                  Shall be deſtroyd and cruelly throwne downe.
                  Few words me thinks heerein ſhould now ſuffice
                  To men that are eſteemd to be ſo wiſe.
               
               
                  Wherefore if you reſpect your owne eſtate,
                  Or doe regard my words, I doe not doubt
                  But that you will before it be too late,
                  Bethinke your ſelfe ere worſe to vs fall out.
                  For better tis for to refraine in time
                  From your pretence, which yet is in the prime.
               
               
                  They haſtily t'agree and giue conſent
                  Vnto a thing that can vs nought availe,
                  And in the end will make vs all repent.
                  For this is true, and by no meanes can faile,
                  Twill be the death without exception,
                  Of all of vs that are within this Towne.
               
               
                  Firſt, you my Lord, th'effect thereof ſhall trie,
                  And by the Grecians fury end your life.
                  Your noble Queene that by your ſide doth lie,
                  And long hath been your true and faithfull wife,
                  Shall end her daies by extreame cruelty,
                  In ſorrow, woe, and great extreamity.
               
               
                  Your ſubiects all moſt woefully ſhall paſſe
                  By dint of ſword, and none from it be freed,
                  For ſilly Infants then ſhall find no grace,
                  If that in your intent you doe proceed,
                  And willfully a warre begin to make
                  Againſt the Greeks, and fondly vndertake
               
               
                  To trouble your moſt peaceable eſtate,
                  And ſo procure the ruine of vs all.
                  I ſay no more, but ere it be to late,
                  And fore this miſchiefe doth on vs befall,
                  My counſell is, againſt it to prouide,
                  And ſet all fooliſh willfulneſſe aſide:
               
               
                  Eſpecially when death as I Iaue told
                  Will be the end, and finall deſtenie,
                  (If that this dangerous purpoſe you do hold,)
                  Which all too ſoone both you and we ſhall trie.
                  Whereof be ſure, for it will fall out ſo,
                  If Paris in this Greecian voyage go.
               
               
                  And therewith hauing giuen his aduiſe,
                  With heauy cheare and pale and deadly face,
                  (As by his countenance ſad they might ſurmiſe.)
                  He ſate him downe againe within his place.
                  At which his words aſtonied they were,
                  And all their hearts were ſtricken into a feare.
               
               
                  So that to ſpeake not any one was bold,
                  But every man as mute, his lips held cloſe,
                  Till Troylus did them ſo ſad behold,
                  With courage ſtout, out of his place aroſe:
                  (Who like a valiant and couragious Knight,
                  Deſiring nought but gainſt his foes to fight,
               
               
                  And manfully with them his force to trie,)
                  Then with a mind exceeding light and glad,
                  He did behold his Fathers heart to die
                  With feare, and all his brethren there ſo ſad,
                  And all the reſt to looke with heauie cheare:
                  T'incourage them, he ſpake as you ſhall heare;
               
               
                  And ſayd, My Lords moſt valorous and ſtrong,
                  Whoſe wiſedomes and diſcretions well I know,
                  Why ſhould you offer to your ſelues this wrong
                  That ſodainely ſuch ſignes of feare you ſhow?
                  Are you perplext within your valiant breaſts,
                  And feared at the words of coward Prieſts?
               
               
                  For all of them as you full well ſhall find,
                  By nature are addicted vnto reſt,
                  Deſirous from their hearts (by very kind)
                  To liue at eaſe, and travell doe deteſt.
                  Abhorring warre, and onely doe apply
                  Their minds to luſt, and filthy gluttony.
               
               
                  
                  And care for nought, but how they may deviſe
                  To fill their guts, and pleaſe their appetite
                  In eating, drinking, and in avarice,
                  They haue their onely joy, and ſole delight,
                  And all their ſtudy is on luſt and eaſe,
                  For nothing els their greedy minds will pleaſe.
               
               
                  Now fie for ſhame why are you ſo diſmayd,
                  And ſet abaſhed thus with inward griefe,
                  To heare the words that Helenus hath ſayd,
                  Whom I dare ſwere doth ſhake as t'were a leafe,
                  And tremble, but to heare vs ſpeake of fight,
                  And which is more, againſt all law and right?
               
               
                  In preiudice of th'immortallitie,
                  Doth take on him the truth to certefie
                  Of future things decreed in heauens hie,
                  As if he had a ſpirit of Propheſie
                  Given vnto him alone in ſpeciall,
                  And that he were in ſcience coequall
               
               
                  With all the Gods, and in him had the skill,
                  By wiſedome and preſcience to declare
                  When vnto men ſhall happen good or ill,
                  But I ſuppoſe that none ſo ſimple are,
                  V
                        ••
                     e
                        ••
                     e they want their ſences to beleeue,
                  That any man that on the earth doth liue,
               
               
                  Hath knowledge to deuine of things to come,
                  Nor yet can ſhow the fatall deſtinie
                  Of any one, (although that there be ſome
                  Which take on them to do't, but ſure they lie.)
                  For that ſuch things conceald in ſecreſie,
                  Reſerved are to Gods owne privitie.
               
               
                  Men may divine, but nought it will availe
                  To credit them, for as it doth appeare
                  None of them all but doth in judgement fayle,
                  Wherefore my counſell is good, Father deare,
                  And brethren all, this feare aſide to lay
                  Out of your hearts, and let not that diſmay
               
               
                  Your courages, which Helenus hath told,
                  Let him within the ſacred Temple lie
                  If that in heart he feares, (as no man would)
                  To helpe vs to revenge our jniurie,
                  And ſpend his time in contemplation,
                  And faſt and pray with great devotion
               
               
                  In thoſe moſt holy places, dayes, and nites,
                  And ſtudy vpon his ſpels, and charmes:
                  And let ſuch as are luſty valiant Knights
                  Imploy their greene and youthfull time in armes,
                  That they may know the better how to weild
                  A ſword and lawnce when as they come in field.
               
               
                  Againſt their foes, for to revenge their wrong,
                  And giue command to Paris ſtraight to goe,
                  As you pretend well furniſhed and ſtrong,
                  With all your ſhips, his puiſſant force to ſhow
                  Vpon the Greeks, our jniuries to requite,
                  Which to our ſhames, are vnrevenged yet.
               
               
                  And with that word he did ſit downe againe,
                  And ſayd no more, when all that preſent were
                  Did much commend his wit and warlike vaine,
                  And ſayd that he deſerued praiſe to beare,
                  For valor, high renowne, and chivalrie,
                  And with applauſe extold him to the skie.
               
               
                  Wherewith the King gaue thanks vnto them all,
                  Diſmiſſing them as then; and preſently
                  To dinner went in his moſt ſumptuous hall,
                  Withall his ſonnes, and his Nobilitie,
                  And hauing din'd, as ſoone as he did riſe
                  From Table, cald his ſonnes in ſecret wiſe.
               
               
                  Prince Paris and Deiphobus his brother,
                  And bad them ſtraight into Panomia hie,
                  And take with them great ſtore of Knights & other
                  To ayd them and to beare them company,
                  And therewith ſpeed a Navy to prepare
                  To put to Sea, vpon the Greeks to warre.
               
               
                  And next day after Priam haſtily
                  Appointed all his counſellors to meet
                  In Ilyon, and they accordingly
                  With ſpeed did come, and when they were all ſet,
                  The King commanding ſilence to be made,
                  In pithie words ſpake vnto them, and ſayd,
               
               
                  My noble Lords, and Counſellors moſt graue,
                  The cauſe that I for you as now haue ſent,
                  Is your adviſe and counſell wiſe to haue
                  About our Grecian warres, which my intent
                  I did jmpart to you not long agoe,
                  And now againe the ſame doe meane to ſhow.
               
               
                  It's not vnknowne vnto you all full well,
                  How that the Greeks gainſt vs ſo enviouſly,
                  In moſt diſpightfull wiſe, like Tygars 
                        •
                     ell,
                  Did execute their cruell tyranny:
                  The which is yet ſo freſh within my thought▪
                  
                  That I cannot forget it if I mought.
               
               
                  Which day by day increaſing more and more
                  Within my breaſt, it doth ſo much torment
                  My grieued heart, and vexeth me ſo ſore,
                  That in my mind I cannot becontent,
                  Eſpecially when as I thinke vpon
                  My deare and loving Siſter Ex
                           •••
                        .
                  
               
               
                  
                  Who by them ſtill is held in ſervitude,
                  Which many times conſtraineth me to weepe,
                  And doth all joy ou
                        •
                      of my heart exclude,
                  And makes me fetch moſt extreame ſighes & deepe,
                  Whoſe cruelty we haue too deerely bought,
                  And yet of late in friendly wiſe I ſought
               
               
                  To them, to graunt me one thing and no more,
                  (In recompence of all the wrongs I had,)
                  Which was my Siſter Exion to reſtore
                  To me againe, but they an anſwere made
                  Contrary to my expectation,
                  In ſcorneſull wiſe and great preſumption.
               
               
                  Refuſing that ſo ſmall and iuſt requeſt,
                  And with proud threats and brags did me defie:
                  And ſayd, that in their hearts they did deteſt,
                  In any thing my mind to ſatisfie.
                  But as we learne by rules of Surgerie,
                  We muſt with Irons ſharpe ſeeke remedie
               
               
                  To cut away dead fleſh, which oft doth lie
                  Within a wound, and will by no meanes heale,
                  Though nere ſo many oyntments we applie:
                  Even ſo we muſt be forſt with them to deale.
                  For ſith peace can procure no remedie,
                  It's our beſt way to vſe extremitie.
               
               
                  Therefore by your adviſe I do jntend,
                  As ſoone as ere I can without delay
                  A Navy to the Grecian land to ſend
                  With Paris, to find meanes if that he may,
                  Deſpight of all that dare him there withſtand,
                  Some Lady faire by force take in that land
               
               
                  And bring her vnto Troy, and ſo conſtraine
                  Them ſpight their hearts t'exchange faire Exion
                  
                  For her, before they get her home againe,
                  Which by vs cannot faile for to be done,
                  If that the Gods to vs be favourable,
                  And this my counſell be acceptable
               
               
                  To you each one, as well as't pleaſeth me.
                  For when a thing concernes the whole eſtate
                  Of Subiects, and their Princes dignitie,
                  It's reaſon they both ſhould thereof debate.
                  And that before they doe thereon decree,
                  They ſhould with one conſent agree.
               
               
                  For things that meerely touch the comminalty,
                  Of right ſhould be approved by them all,
                  And therefore (by you all adviſ'd to be,
                  What I ſhould do,) this counſell I did call:
                  Now let me heare (ſayd he) what you will ſay,
                  And therewithall his ſpeech as then did ſtay.
               
               
                  This ſayd, a Knight Percheus cal'd by name,
                  Stood vp (who was as Ovid telleth vs,
                  The ſonne of that moſt worthy man of fame,
                  In his time cal'd the great Euforbius)
                  (In whom as Ovid fames, transformed was
                  The ſoule of learn'd and wiſe Pithagoras.)
               
               
                  And in moſt humble wiſe theſe words he ſpake:
                  My ſoveraigne Lord, may't pleaſe your noble grace
                  To giue me leaue (and no diſpleaſure take,)
                  In this moſt high and honourable place,
                  With faithfull zeale my mind now to declare
                  And giue you my adviſe, I will not ſpare
               
               
                  To tell the truth, for favor nor for dread,
                  And to my power adviſe you to beware
                  Of danger that as now begins to breed,
                  For doubtles this t'affirme I boldly dare,
                  That if you meane to do as you pretend,
                  And Paris into Greece of purpoſe ſend;
               
               
                  You will repent the ſame 
                        •
                     re long time paſſe,
                  For that my Father cal'd Euforbius,
                  
                  (Whoſe skill in Art ſo true and perfect was,
                  And therewithall moſt wiſe and vertuous,
                  Who future things by his preſcience knew,
                  And could divine what after would enſue:
               
               
                  And plainely tell by true Philoſophy,
                  Th'event of future Fortune ere it fell:
                  For nothing whatſoere of ſecreſie,
                  But he it knew, and could the ſame foretell,)
                  And all men eſteem'd him wiſe and ſage,
                  When he was iuſt an hundred yeares of age.
               
               
                  I do remember well would ſit and weepe,
                  And let fall teares vpon his beard ſo gray,
                  And many times with ſighes full ſore and deepe,
                  And mournfull wiſe would to me ſpeake and ſay:
                  If Paris once be ſent to fetch a wife
                  By force in Greece, t'will breed ſuch mortall ſtrife
               
               
                  Againſt vs all, that this moſt noble Towne,
                  By Grecians force and extreame crueltie,
                  Shall be deſtroi'd and vtterly throwne downe:
                  And nothing ſhall procure our ſafety,
                  But Grecians ſwords ſhall all of vs devoure,
                  So much (ſayd he) ſhall fortune on vs lowre.
               
               
                  Wherefore I you beſeech now euery one,
                  (Without offence at that which I haue ſayd,)
                  Let all revenge for former wrongs alone,
                  And your pretended voyage likewiſe ſtay,
                  And let not malice be the cauſe to ceaſe,
                  The pleaſant courſe of your moſt happy peace.
               
               
                  
                  Nor let vs not commit ore haſtely
                  Our happines to fickle Fortunes hand,
                  Ne yet diſturbe with ancient enmitie
                  This ſtate which now ſo flouriſhing doth ſtand.
                  For if that to the ſame you giue conſent,
                  Ther's none of you but ſhall it ſore repent.
               
               
                  And if thereto your minds ſo much are bent,
                  That by no meanes this voyage you will ſtay,
                  Let ſome man els in Paris place be ſent,
                  That ſo perhaps the better ſpeed you may:
                  This is (ſayd he) my counſell in this caſe,
                  Which I thought good to giue vnto your grace.
               
               
                  Which ſayd, they all began to ſhoot and cry
                  Againſt him in moſt fierce and furious wiſe,
                  And ra
                        •
                     l'd at him and at the Propheſie,
                  His Father told, and ſayd t'was all but lies.
                  Which after proved in concluſion,
                  To turne vnto their owne confuſion.
               
               
                  For that's before ordain'd, ſhall ſure fall out,
                  And ſtate of things with fate is ſo inglewd,
                  That whatſoere muſt be, without all doubt
                  Will come to paſſe, and may not be eſchewd:
                  Which cau
                        •
                     d them all t'agree in one conſent,
                  That Paris into Greece ſhould ſtraight be ſent.
               
               
                  (Their deſtiny was ſuch they could't not ſhun)
                  And hauing all agreed thereon, they roſe,
                  And for that time their counſell it was don.
                  But when t'was knowne abroad as Guydo ſhoes,
                  Like woman cleane diſtraught of wit ſhe far'd,
                  And wiſe and learn'd Caſſandra thereof heard.
               
               
                  And ſayd, alas what will you doe?
                  And in moſt dolefull wiſe began to weepe,
                  And ſayd, ſhall Paris thither goe?
                  Which words ſhe did pronounce with ſighes full deepe,
                  And falling in a ſwound with extreame paine,
                  Infurious wiſe began ſore to complaine.
               
               
                  And woefully gaue many a grieuous groane,
                  And for to die, ſhe could not then with hold
                  To mourne and make great lamentation,
                  And tare her haire, and both her hands did fold,
                  And ſaid, alas (a hundred times and more)
                  Oh fortune fell why is thy rage ſo ſore
               
               
                  Againſt vs bent, that with moſt angry frowne,
                  Thou weau'ſt the webbe of our adverſitie?
                  And plotting the vtter ruine of our Towne,
                  Procur'ſt our deaths with great extreamitie
                  By ſword of vengeance, (worſe then peſtilence,)
                  Increaſing of hate and extreame violence.
               
               
                  Oh woefull Troy, what is thy gu
                        •
                     lt alas
                  That thou muſt be deſtroid & brought to nought?
                  What haſt thou done, or what is thy treſpaſſe,
                  That for the ſame ſuch vengance ſhold be wrought?
                  Oh Priam noble King, what fault haſt thou
                  Committed gainſt the Gods, that they as now
               
               
                  Provoked are ſuch vengeance great to throw
                  On thee, and on thy whole poſteritie?
                  Oh Mother deare, Queene Hecuba alſo,
                  Tell me I thee beſeech the certaintie,
                  What manner crime, and other great offence
                  Haſt thou committed, t'haue ſuch recompence?
               
               
                  For to behold the daies ſo terrible,
                  When all thy ſonnes in cruell wiſe ſhall die
                  By dint of ſword, and death moſt horrible:
                  Why will you not alas your minds applie
                  To hearken to my counſell now in time,
                  And ſeeke how to prevent while t'is the prime,
               
               
                  Theſe dangers great before they doe proceed
                  Vnto the full effect and period?
                  Which by the Gods is certainely decreed,
                  And by no meanes nor way may be withſtood;
                  Vnleſſe that wee another courſe will ſhape,
                  The doome of th'incenſed Gods t'eſcape.
               
               
                  The memory whereof doth ſo torment
                  My grieued mind, that I cannot jndure
                  The woe I feele. And therewithall ſhe went
                  To Priamus her Father to procure
                  Some remedy, and fell vpon the ground,
                  And wept as faſt as if ſhe ſhould haue dround
               
               
                  In flouds of teares, which trickled downe her face▪
                  
                  And as her paine would her permit, ſhe ſpake
                  To him, and cried in that moſt woefull caſe,
                  Beſeeching him ſome remedy to take
                  In that extreame, as ſhe that too well knew
                  What danger by the ſame there would enſue.
               
               
                  But all her teares and cries did nought preuaile,
                  For Priam would no anſwere thereto make,
                  For as men ſay, what ſhall be, cannot faile,
                  But in due time the full effect will take.
                  And fortune with her ſmoth diſſembling face,
                  Offended (as it ſeemes) with Troian race;
               
               
                  With malice did in heart againſt them burne▪
                  
                  And waighting to intrap them by a wile,
                  Vpon a ſudden gaue her wheele a turne,
                  And that ſhe might the ſooner them beguile,
                  She haſtened them to their confuſion,
                  With wilfulneſſe, and jndiſcretion
               
               
                  
                  Againſt the Greeks a quarrell to vndertake,
                  And therevpon their counſell they did hold,
                  And did agree that voyage then to make
                  Into the Grecian land, fall out what would.
                  But if they had been rul'd by good adviſe,
                  Of thoſe that did perſwade them to be wiſe.
               
               
                  And followe Hectors counſell which he gaue,
                  And Helenus adviſe retaind in mind,
                  And well obſerud Percheus ſentence graue,
                  Which after they to be moſt true did find:
                  And laſtly to Caſſandraes Propheſie,
                  Had bent their 
                        •
                     ares, and holden't for no lie:
               
               
                  They had not fallen into ſuch miſerie,
                  As afterward they did, but had liu
                        •
                     d ſtill
                  In honor, and in great felicitie.
                  But Fortune that will alwaies haue her will
                  Who ere ſayth nay, was cauſe that mou'd themſo
                  In haſt vpon their voiage for to goe.
               
               
                  And with lookes ſmoth and full of flatterie,
                  And ſugred words with venomous intent,
                  To ſhow her double heart and trecherie,
                  Pretending good, but vnto miſchiefe be
                        •
                     t.
                  And watching time againſt them to preuaile,
                  With Faith in face, but fraud within her tayle.
               
               
                  So much intiſed them to giue conſent,
                  That Paris ſhould in haſt to Grecia goe,
                  That by no meanes they could themſelues content,
                  Till that they had agreed it ſhould be ſo.
                  Whoſe Voyage in the chapter doth enſue,
                  I will at large declare and ſhow to you.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  ¶ How King Priam ſent Paris, Diophebus, and others into Greece, to be revenged for the rauiſhing of his Sister Exion, and how they being in Grecia rauiſhed faire Helena wife to Menelaus, and brought her with them to Troy.
                  
               
               
                  WHen time approacht that Titan gan to lead
                  His chariot twixt the ſtarres of Hiades,
                  
                  (Which haue their ſeate in Taurus horned head,)
                  And in the gliſtring ſtarres cal'd Pleiades:
                  
                  Whereof ſix doe continually appeare
                  Vnto our ſight, the Seauenth for ſhame & feare
               
               
                  Doth hide her head, ſtill thinking on her crime,
                  And therefore dares nor ſhow her beames ſo cleare
                  But keepeth backe, and will not in due time
                  With her faire ſiſters openly appeare,
                  Becauſe that ſhe with an earthly God did lie,
                  And was found with him in adulterie.
               
               
                  And ſince that time ſhe hath ſo baſhfull beene,
                  (And for her fact aſham'd as doth appeare,
                  That ſeldome in our ſight ſhe wilbe ſeene.)
                  And when the Sun in the celeſtiall ſpheare,
                  Betweene theſe ſtarres in full ſixteenth degree,
                  Of Taurus heat was iuſtly found to bee,
               
               
                  And in the ſweet and pleaſant moneth of May
                  
                  When Flora fills each medow, hill, and dale,
                  With faire and dainty flowers freſh and gay,
                  And Zephyrus with his moſt pleaſant gale
                  Doth ayd to cloth them there in liueries new,
                  And makes their bloſſomes ſhow with liuely hew.
               
               
                  And bid vs to be merry, light, and glad,
                  That they new fruit vpon them gin to beare,
                  Gainſt Antumne when as harueſt in his had,
                  And ripened grapes vpon each Vine appeare.
                  In that ſame moneth when men for their diſport,
                  Doe walke abroad themſelues to recomfort,
               
               
                  Reioycing to behold the trees ſo full
                  Of bloſſomes ſweet, in hope that they will beare
                  Good ſtore of fruit, to gather and to pull,
                  In ripening time, and ſeaſon of the yeare,
                  In midſt of the freſh and pleaſant ſpring,
                  When little Birds delightfull notes do ſing.
               
               
                  
                     Paris and Deiphobus that were gon
                  In haſt into Panomie, purpoſely
                  To muſtar men and make proviſion,
                  And all things for the Navy, ſpeedily
                  Returne to Troy, and in their company
                  Three thouſand valiant Knights of great activity
               
               
                  And twenty two faire ſhips well furniſhed,
                  With all things that to them belonging were,
                  Who having all provided that ſhould need,
                  King Priam did no longer time deferre,
                  But willed Lord Aeneas, Anthenor,
                  
                  And Polidamus, and many Troians more
               
               
                  To arme themſelues, and preparation make,
                  With Paris on that voiage for to goe:
                  And when they came their leaues of him to take,
                  In pithie words he did vnto them ſhow
                  The full effect of his intention,
                  Was chiefly to recover Exion.
                  
               
               
                  
                  For when that Voyage eſpecially he made,
                  And ſo the time no longer to delay,
                  When Paris and the reſt together had
                  Their leaues of Priam tane, they went their way,
                  And entring ſhip, did preſently ſet ſayle
                  (In Venus name,) in hope ſhe would not fayle
               
               
                  By ayd of Ioue, t'aſſiſt them in their need,
                  And entring Sea, with weather faire and cleare,
                  And wind at will, they ſayled with great ſpeed,
                  That in ſhort time they vnto land gr
                        •
                     w neare.
                  For nothing in their voyage did them let,
                  And yet by chance vpon the Sea they met
               
               
                  A Ship wherein King Menalaus then was,
                  That Sayled vnto Pyilon there to ſee
                  Duke Nestor, and the time with him to paſſe,
                  Suſpecting not each to other foes to bee.
                  Within thoſe ſhips, the which King Menalaus
                  
                  Vnto King Agamennon brother was,
               
               
                  And husband to Queene Helena the faire,
                  That ſiſter was vnto the brothren twaine,
                  King Castor and King Pollux, Knights that were
                  Of great renowne in armes, and did attaine
                  Vnto ſuch height therein, that for the ſame
                  No Grecian Knights did ere deſerue more fame.
               
               
                  Who at that time remaind within a Towne
                  Cald Strineſter, their cheife and princely ſeat,
                  Wherein they joyntly raignd with great renowne,
                  For that the loue betweene them was ſo great
                  That they could not jndure to liue alone,
                  And with them was the Princes Hermione.
                  
               
               
                  (A Lady that in beautie did excell
                  The daughter of their ſiſter Helena.)
                  And yet although as then it ſo befell,
                  That they together met vpon the Sea,
                  And that they ſaild cloſe by each others ſide,
                  Yet were their hearts fild with inward pride,
               
               
                  That neither to each other one made ſhow
                  To call or aske from wence they came or were,
                  But paſt along, and for the wind did blow
                  Directly with the Troians, and did beare
                  Them ſwiftly thence, they did within a while
                  Ariue before an old and ancient Iſle,
               
               
                  Which Cithera is called at this day.
                  And there within the haven did anchor caſt,
                  Where preſently not making any ſtay,
                  Apparelling themſelues, they did in haſt
                  Set foot on land with reſolution ſtout,
                  And hope to bring their purpoſeſone about.
               
               
                  (Within this Iſle an ancient Temple was,
                  Moſt pleaſant and moſt beautifull to ſee,
                  For that in ſumpteous worke it did ſurpaſſe
                  All other whatſoere in that countrie,
                  Which honourd was of all both farre and neare
                  Throughout the Land, and once in every yeare
               
               
                  A ſolemne feaſt was kept within the ſame,
                  Where many men with great devotion,
                  In honour of the Goddeſſe Venus came.
                  To whom they vſe with ſuperſtition,
                  (Which by them was obſerud from age to age,)
                  To bring great gifts, and went on pilgrimage,
               
               
                  And every man did offer ſacrifice,
                  Where while they kneeld and moſt deuoutly ſaid
                  Their Orations to her in Parum wiſe,
                  The Image vnto them an anſwere made
                  Of every thing whereof they ſtood in doubt,
                  Reſolving them, how that it would fall out.
               
               
                  This cuſtome they do vſe continually
                  Within that Church ſo ſumptuous and ſo braue,
                  And did obſerue the ſame moſt reuerently,
                  (In hope that they the better ſpeed ſhould haue.)
                  And as the Gods would hau't, their fortune was
                  To goe on ſhoare the ſelfe ſame day when as
               
               
                  This yearely feaſt was kept in ſolemne wiſe,
                  Whereto great ſtore of Grecians flockt and came
                  From every place to offer ſacrifice,
                  And other rights t'obſerue about the ſame.
                  The which as ſoone as Paris did eſpie,
                  He tooke with him ſome of his company
               
               
                  And with them to the Temple went his way,
                  Apparelled in braue and ſumptuous wiſe,
                  T'obſerue the ancient rights there vſd that day,
                  At Uenus ſhrine and t'offer ſacrifice,
                  And kneeling downe with great devotion.
                  Before her Altar made his Oration,
               
               
                  And on it layd great ſtore of Iewells rare,
                  Orientall pearles, rich ſtones, and heapes of gold,
                  (For at that time he would not ſeeme to ſpare.)
                  Which made the Greekes admire, and to behold
                  His beauty, ſumptuous port and Maieſtie,
                  And in their hearts to muſe what he might be.
               
               
                  For as the ſtory ſaith, he was ſo faire▪
                  
                  That no man might therein compare with him.
                  And therewithall ſo fine proportion bare,
                  For comely ſhape of body and of lim,
                  That there was never ſeene a brauer Knight,
                  For all men to behold him tooke delight.
               
               
                  
                  And preſt in heaps about him for the ſame,
                  Deſiring much his name and ſtate to know,
                  And for what cauſe as then he thither came,
                  And prayd his men the ſame to them to ſhow:
                  But they did make their anſwere in ſuch wiſe,
                  That no man by their ſpeech could ought ſurmiſe.
               
               
                  Yet ſome of them not fearing to declare,
                  The truth both of his name and dwelling place,
                  Did boldly tell, and thereof made no ſpare,
                  That Priam King of Troye his Father was,
                  A Prince of mighty force and great renowne,
                  And that he thither came for Exion.
                  
               
               
                  And thus of him they did enquire and ſpake,
                  As they together were, and every one
                  Of ſeverall minds did ſeverall verdicts make,
                  And all of them were in ſuſpition:
                  But chiefly they in whome no iudgement were,
                  For euery man deſireth newes to heare.
               
               
                  And whilſt of him the ſpeech went far and neare,
                  And paſt from man to man in Greecian land,
                  Queene Helena at laſt thereof did heare,
                  And when as ſhe the ſame did vnderſtand,
                  And truth thereof for certainty did know,
                  Of thoſe that went and came both too and fro,
               
               
                  She could not reſt vntill that with her eie,
                  She found report and ſight in one t'agree,
                  And for that time determined to trie
                  The truth, and thoſe braue Troyan Knights to ſee:
                  (But more (God knows) of meere intention
                  For Paris ſake, then for devotion.)
               
               
                  She fained on a Pilgrimage to goe,
                  Vnto the ſhrine of Venus bright and cleare,
                  That vnto her ſome honor ſhe might ſhoe:
                  And when all things for her prepared were,
                  And ſhe adorn'd moſt like a ſtately Queene,
                  She went to ſee, and likewiſe to be ſeene.
               
               
                  For what ſhould mooue her elſe with ſuch deſire,
                  And in her heart put ſuch a motion,
                  To goe to ſee new ſights; but ſecret fire
                  Of wanton luſt? and no devotion,
                  Vpon the Goddeſſe Venus then to call.
                  And as the manner is of women all,
               
               
                  Delighting to be there where great reſort
                  Of people are, and t
                        •
                     ſhew themſelues at playes,
                  And at each common paſtime and diſport,
                  That men their beauties may commend & praiſe:
                  And at their better libertie to ſee,
                  How they may find an oportunitie
               
               
                  T'effect their wils, and alwaies lie in wait,
                  In places where their minds and thoughts are ſe
                        •
                     ,
                  In couert wiſe their wanton lookes to 
                        •
                     ait,
                  And priuily like favor there to get
                  From thoſe they loue, by glauncing of the eie,
                  And for to ſhew what in their hearts doth lie.
               
               
                  With touch of hand in ſecret mongſt the preaſe,
                  Or pinch on arme, or on the foot to tread,
                  Of thoſe whome they do like, they never ceaſe,
                  Till of their wanton purpoſe they haue ſped:
                  For gainſt their wils there's neither wit nor might
                  That may prevaile: for be it wrong or right,
               
               
                  They'l haue their wils who ſo ſaith yea or nay,
                  For to withſtand their luſt no man hath might,
                  Thus much of them doth Guido boldly ſay,
                  And throughout all his Booke takes great delight,
                  Of women-kind to ſpeake nought elſe but ill,
                  The which to write is ſore againſt my will.
               
               
                  And't grieues me that I muſt of force rehearſe,
                  The bitter words which in his Booke are found,
                  Whereby he doth their honors ſo reverſe;
                  For that I am to women ſo much bound:
                  And ſith th'are all ſo courteous and ſo kind,
                  I dare notſpeake of them more then I find
               
               
                  In Guidoes Booke, which when I read, did make
                  My very heart and ſences all to tremble,
                  And with the feare I had my hand did ſhake,
                  To thinke my words with his I muſt reſemble:
                  But to amend his fault, as loath t'abide
                  Too long in ſpeaking ill, he ſeemes to chide
               
               
                  With Helena, becauſe that then ſhe went
                  With fained ſhew of great devotion,
                  Her offring vnto Venus to preſent,
                  When as ſhe had another motion
                  Within her heart, the which ſhe ſhould haue ſtayd,
                  And in theſe words his mind he ſpake, & ſayd:
               
               
                  The greateſt croſſe that man on earth can find,
                  And of all woes beginning, and the root,
                  Is the deceit and fraud of women-kind,
                  Againſt the which to ſtriue it doth not boot:
                  For when as luſt doth in their hearts preuaile,
                  Some miſchiefe doth enſue without all faile.
               
               
                  Which no man can by any meanes reſtraine,
                  Whereof let faire Queene Helen ſample bee,
                  The which could not her inward luſt refraine,
                  But needs would go the Troyan Knight to ſee,
                  Whome he had never knowne in all his life,
                  For which there did ariſe ſuch mortall ſtrife,
               
               
                  
                  That thouſands for her ſake were after ſlaine,
                  And brought vnto their ends by cruelty.
                  But Helena, in ſooth now tell me plaine,
                  What vglie ghoſt was it that mooued thee,
                  To leaue thy louing Lord and husband ſo,
                  And all along on pilgrimage to goe?
               
               
                  Didſt thou at home liue diſcontentedly,
                  That needs thou muſt go ſeeke for companie?
                  Thou rather ſhouldſt haue ſtaied priuatelie
                  Within thy houſe, and not ſo careleſlie
                  Haue left the ſame in abſence of thy King:
                  But ſure thou waſt too wilfull in that thing,
               
               
                  And negligent, to thinke what might enſue;
                  Thou oughtſt t'haue kept thy ſelf out of thy boūds,
                  And not haue tane thy flight within thy mew,
                  But thou wentſt out like Hare amongſt the hounds,
                  There to be caught of very wilfulneſſe:
                  For true, it is, and ſo thou muſt confeſſe,
               
               
                  That thou couldſt not thy wanton luſt refraine,
                  And wilfullie thy fained vowe wouldſt keepe.
                  But oh how many women haue been tane
                  In ſuch a ſnare, when fitter t'was to ſleepe
                  Within their beds, and not abroad been found!
                  Was't ever heard that any ſhip was drownd,
               
               
                  Or caſt on rocks, and all in peeces rent,
                  Or toſt in ſeas by weather foule and ill,
                  If that vnto the ſea it neuer went,
                  But alwaies kept within the hauen ſtill?
                  So he that no occaſions will eſchew,
                  Nor feare what danger after may enſue,
               
               
                  Cannot but needs muſt of neceſſity,
                  At vnawares, when leaſt he doth ſuſpect,
                  Fall into trouble and adverſity:
                  And he that is ſo fooliſh to neglect
                  His way, and of his footing hath no care,
                  Let him take heed he fals not in a ſnare.
               
               
                  For when as any harme is done and paſt,
                  It is too late thereof for to repent:
                  If Helena had in her mind forecaſt
                  What after might enſue, and been content
                  To ſtay at home, bad rumor had not run
                  Of her throughout the world as it hath done.
               
               
                  Which her miſhap men pittie may of right,
                  That ſhe the cauſe was and deſtruction
                  Of many a valiant, braue, and worthy Knight,
                  And likewiſe brought vnto confuſion
                  Her husband, and full many thouſands more,
                  That in her quarrell fought, & dyde therefore.
               
               
                  Thus Helen vnto Cithezon did goe,
                  In all her braue and Princely ornaments,
                  And ſolemnly (although with fained ſhoe)
                  Her offring made, with many rich preſents
                  Vnto the Goddeſſe Venus, on whoſe name
                  She called, cry'd, and prayd t'accept the ſame.
               
               
                  When Paris this advantage had eſpide,
                  With all the haſt and ſpeed that ere he might,
                  Vnto the Temple preſently he hide,
                  Where he of her no ſooner had a ſight,
                  But he was pierced through with Cupids dart,
                  And ſtricken in loue euen at the very heart.
               
               
                  So much he mus'd at her great ſeemlineſſe,
                  Her goodly face, and her intiſing eye,
                  Her fine proportion, and her comlineſſe,
                  And laſt of all, her great and rare beautie:
                  Preſuming that for fame and feature,
                  Nature nere fram'd a fairer creature.
               
               
                  So Angell like to him ſhe did appeare,
                  And therewithall ſhe was ſo amiable,
                  That in his ſight ſhe ſeem'd as if ſhe were
                  A heauenly Goddeſſe, faire and admirable:
                  For in his heart he did himſelfe aſſure,
                  That ſhe could be no mortall creature.
               
               
                  So faire and ſo celeſtiall ſhe did looke,
                  In every part, whereof moſt curiouſly
                  Within his heart a perfect view he tooke,
                  And well beheld and mark't aduiſedly,
                  Her golden haire like to the radiant ſtreames,
                  Which do deſcend from Phebus gliſtring beams.
               
               
                  Her beautifull complection cleare and bright,
                  Her cherry checkes like to the Damaske Roſe,
                  Mixt with the leaues of Lillies pure and white,
                  Her chriſt all eyes, which in them did incloſe
                  A Paradiſe of pleaſure and delight,
                  And able were with their tranſparant ſight,
               
               
                  This amorous heart cleane through & through to pierce
                  All which with other parts in her that were,
                  If I ſhould take vpon me to rehearſe,
                  As Guido doth from head to foot declare
                  The ſame at large, with eloquent deuiſe,
                  My engliſh tong thereto would not ſuffice:
               
               
                  For that our ſpeech and Latine are vnlike,
                  I likewiſe want the Art of Portraiture,
                  And haue no skill in copious Rethoricke,
                  For to deſcribe ſo faire a Creature.
                  And of the Muſes nine I know not one:
                  Therefore I muſt vnto you every one,
               
               
                  
                  Excuſe my ſelfe, though not of negligence,
                  For that no want of will there is in me,
                  But onlie for default of eloquence,
                  And vnto Guido ſend you there to ſee,
                  How orderlie he did declare the ſame,
                  So that to tak't on me I were too blame.
               
               
                  But I will to the point proceed and ſhow,
                  How Paris ſtill his eye on her did caſt,
                  And in the temple walked too and fro,
                  Till hauing well bethought himſelfe at laſt,
                  To eaſe his heart enflam'd with Cupids fire,
                  He did approach vnto her ſomewhat nier:
               
               
                  And ſtill full of this colour went and came,
                  So deeply was his mind with loue poſſeſt,
                  And Helena for her part did the ſame,
                  And priuately in heart could take no reſt:
                  But ſtill on him by ſtealth did caſt an eye,
                  Though outwardly none could her well eſpie.
               
               
                  For as ſhe thought ſhe never ſaw his peere,
                  Mongſt all the men that on the earth did liue,
                  For comelineſſe and beautie paſſing cleere,
                  Nor that to her contentment more did giue:
                  So that on nothing elſe ſhe ſet her mind,
                  But how ſhe might a fit occaſion find,
               
               
                  And haue the meanes and opportunitie,
                  Conveniently with him a word to ſpeake,
                  In other place at better libertie,
                  Which was the onely thing that ſhe did ſeeke:
                  And ſtil her countenance chang'd. For Cupids fire
                  In both their hearts had kindled like deſire.
               
               
                  And cloathed them with Venus liverie,
                  And yet no meſſage twixt them then there went,
                  But privie lookes glauncing from the e
                        •
                     e,
                  Aſſured them what each to other ment:
                  And made them wiſh in heart, that ſecretly
                  An amorous combate twixt them they might try,
               
               
                  And their deſires vnto each other ſhoe.
                  At laſt as Paris by degrees him gat
                  Vp higher, and vnto the place did goe,
                  Whereas the faire Queene Helena then: ſat:
                  In ſecret wiſe together they did ſpeake,
                  And as they might their minds to other breake.
               
               
                  Declaring what did puniſh them at the heart,
                  But this was done leaſt that it ſhould be ſpied,
                  When as the preſſe of people did depart,
                  And ſuch as ſtayd were buſie occupied
                  To ſtare vpon the temple, and to gaſe
                  About the ſame, as people in a maſe,
               
               
                  To ſee it ſo adornd in ſumptuous wiſe,
                  And while they ſpake not any one might heare
                  A word that paſt, leaſt that they ſhould ſurmiſe,
                  That twixt them any bad intent there were,
                  Nor what their ſecret ſpeech as then ſhould meane.
                  At laſt it was agreed by the Queene
               
               
                  And Paris with one full and free conſent,
                  What time they ſhould together meet againe,
                  And ſo they both out of the Temple went,
                  (Though loath) with hearts repleat with louers paine,
                  And that they might avoyd ſuſpition.
                  When Paris from Queene Helena as gone,
               
               
                  With preſent ſpeed vnto his ſhip he went,
                  Where hauing ſta
                        •
                     d a while, without delay
                  For all the Troyan Lords and Knights he ſeat,
                  To whome in pithie words he gan to ſay,
                  My Lords and friends in briefe to you to tell,
                  The cauſe vnto you all is knowne full well,
               
               
                  Wherefore to Greece my Father hath vs ſent,
                  And what Commiſſion to vs he did giue:
                  You know it was the full of his intent,
                  That we ſhould ſeeke to take and to relieue
                  My noble Aunt, the Princely Exion,
                  
                  Out of the hands of proud King Telamon.
                  
               
               
                  The which to do I can deuiſe no way,
                  How it by vs ſhould well effected be,
                  For no man can this vnto me denay,
                  That he is mighty ſtrong in his Country:
                  And well alied with friends on everie ſide,
                  And hath an heart abounding with ſuch pride,
               
               
                  That to leaue her by force he doth diſdaine.
                  The beſt way then that I can now deuiſe,
                  (Sith with him ſo to deale it is in vaine,
                  And that our power thereto doth not ſuffice:
                  Becauſe we are not able to withſtand
                  His force, nor with him fight within his Land.)
               
               
                  Is, ſith that fortune hath vs hither brought,
                  And caus'd vs by adventure here to land,
                  (When as God knows it was not in our thought)
                  At Venus home, that not far hence doth ſtand,
                  And wherein at this time there is great ſtore
                  Of Iewels, Gold, and other treaſures more,
               
               
                  The which the Greekes vnto it hither bring
                  By ſea and land, and there both rich and poore,
                  To Uenus vſe to make their offering,
                  And her therein moſt ſolemnly adore:
                  And that the faire Queene Helen now is there,
                  I thinke that it the beſt courſe for vs were
               
               
                  
                  To beare her hence by force, and priſoner make,
                  And having put the Grecians to the foile,
                  Their gold and treaſure forcibly to take,
                  And them of it and of their liues to ſpoile:
                  Which hauing done without all tarrying,
                  The ſame into our ſhips this night to bring.
               
               
                  Whereof we cannot faile who ere ſaith nay,
                  And to that end (ſaid he) let's ready make,
                  And without further reſpect or delay,
                  Our armours and our weapons to vs take:
                  To ſet on them with all our force and might,
                  Which ſaid, within their ſhips they ſtaid till night,
               
               
                  Till Phebus did on earth no more appeare,
                  But was gone downe as t'was his woonted guiſe,
                  And gliſtring ſtars did ſhine moſt bright & cleare:
                  Before the Moone that time began to riſe,
                  They all went forth their ſhips in braue array,
                  And to the temple ſtraight did take their way.
               
               
                  Intending not long in the ſame to tarry,
                  And ſo in haſt they entred Citheron,
                  
                  Where going ſtraight vnto the Sanctuarie,
                  (Without all manner of devotion,
                  To Venus done in her Oratorie,
                  For it was then out of their memorie
               
               
                  To worſhip her, they had no ſuch intent,
                  But onely for to rob and ſpoile the ſame,
                  Whereto as then their minds were wholly bent)
                  All what ſo ere vnto their hands then came
                  They tooke and bore away, and nothing left
                  Within the Church nor I ſle, but them bereft
               
               
                  Of all their Iewels, precious ſtones, and gold,
                  Their reliques and their veſſels ſacared,
                  And every other thing what ere they could,
                  Were it prophane, or were it hallowed,
                  They made it prey, and in their furious mood,
                  Did kill and ſlay all thoſe that them withſtood.
               
               
                  And many that with gaſtly wounds did bleed,
                  Which they receaued had to ſaue their right,
                  As priſoners to their ſhips with them were led,
                  (Not able to withſtand their puiſſant might:)
                  Which after liu'd in long captiuity,
                  With ſorrow, griefe, and great extreamity.
               
               
                  While Paris earneſtlie for Helen ſought,
                  Whom when he found in courteous wiſe he kiſt,
                  And ioy fullie within his armes her caught,
                  For ſhe ſeem'd not to ſtriue nor to reſiſt:
                  But yeelded vnto him without delay,
                  For't had been but meere follie to ſay nay.
               
               
                  Her heart being woone before that he came there,
                  She could not ſtriue, (for women tis not fit)
                  And for that cauſe to yeeld ſhe had leſſe feare,
                  And he with ſuch good words as then were meet
                  Did comfort her, and therewith did her beare
                  Vnto his ſhip, and letting her ſtay there
               
               
                  Well guarded by his men returnd againe,
                  To make an end of his deſired pray.
                  Not far from thence within a pleaſant plaine
                  A Caſtle ſtood, where many ſouldiers lay
                  To keepe the ſame, who waking gaue a ſhout,
                  And ſodainly at once did iſſue out,
               
               
                  Andran in haſt to reſcue Citheron.
                  
                  But ere they came the Troyans had their pray,
                  And with the ſame vnto their ſhips were gone,
                  Wherewith the Greekes did make no long delay
                  But followed them, and then began to fight
                  On either ſide, with all their force and might.
               
               
                  And Tygar like each other ſlew and kild,
                  Till many dead within the field did lie,
                  For neither vnto other then would yeeld,
                  But at the laſt the Greekes were forſt to flye:
                  For that the Troyans doubled them in nomber
                  With multitudes, and did them fore incomber.
               
               
                  And made them run backe to the Caſtle gate,
                  In hope to ſaue themſelues therein by flight,
                  But all in vaine for them, for t'was too late,
                  The Troyans were of ſo great force and might,
                  That to reſiſt it could them not availe,
                  So cruelly they did them then aſſaile.
               
               
                  And furiouſly did put them all to death,
                  Not ſparing one, but all they ouertooke,
                  By dint of ſword did yeeld their vitall breath,
                  And when the field by force they had forſooke,
                  The battaile by the Troyans being woone,
                  In fierce and furious wiſe he then begun
               
               
                  The Caſtle ſtraight to ranſacke and to pill,
                  Wherein they did great ſtore of treaſure gaine,
                  And hauing done their pleaſures and their will,
                  With that and all the reſt they did obtaine
                  In Citheron, vnto their ſhips they went,
                  And as it was their purpoſe and intent.
               
               
                  The wind as then being good and peaceable,
                  They ſailed towards Troye without delay,
                  And hauing weather faire and comfortable,
                  They did arriue within the ſeauenth day
                  That they put to the ſea, at Tenedowne,
                  
                  A Caſtle ſtanding neere vnto the Towne.
               
               
                  
                  And preſently out of their ſhips they went,
                  And with all ſpeed the King aduertiſed,
                  (By meſſenger whom they in haſt then ſent)
                  Of their returne▪ and how that they had ſped:
                  The which when Priam heard he was full glad,
                  And in his heart ſuch ioy and pleaſure had,
               
               
                  That their affaires ſo well had fallen out,
                  That in all haſt by his authority,
                  He caus'd it to be publiſht round about
                  The towne of Troye, with great ſolemnity:
                  Comanding that for thoſe good news they ſhold,
                  In ſumptuous wiſe a ſolemne feaſt-day hold.
               
               
                  To thanke their Gods in meeke and humble wiſe,
                  And on their Altars with devotion,
                  To offer them great guifts and ſacrifice,
                  While Paris ſtaying ſtill at Tenedon,
                  
                  Did welcome, feaſt, and Princely entertain'd
                  Queene Helena, that wept and ſore complain'd.
               
               
                  And evermore bewaild her fortune fell,
                  That ſo mongſt ſtrangers comfortleſſe alone,
                  She was conſtraind againſt her will to dwell
                  Farre ſequeſtred from friends, and knew not one,
                  To whome ſhe might declare in privitie,
                  The griefe ſhe had for her Captivity.
               
               
                  And ſtill ſhe wept and waild with pittious cheare,
                  That flouds of tears down frō her cheeks did raine,
                  Diſtilling from her eies moſt faire and cleare,
                  And through the great extreamity and paine
                  Which ſhe then felt, ſhe ſighed bitterly,
                  And with a wofull voice did often crye.
               
               
                  To thinke how ſhe had left King Menelaus,
                  
                  For which ſhe wiſhed death her heart to eaſe,
                  And for that cauſe became ſo furious,
                  That nothing could her griefe and woe appeaſe:
                  And more t'encreaſe and multiply her paine,
                  When as ſhe thought vpon her brethren twaine,
               
               
                  Her Husband, and her little Daughter deare
                  Faire Hermion, whome ſhe did loue ſo well,
                  Her face with griefe did pale and wan appeare,
                  Which other times in beautie did excell
                  The Lillie flower, and much the ſame ſurpaſſe:
                  But then her roſeat colour changed was.
               
               
                  And more and more her griefe did ſtill encreaſe,
                  That in her face ſhe was cleane altered,
                  And by no meanes her ſorrow would ſurceaſe,
                  But in moſt dolefull wiſe that life ſhe led:
                  Till Paris to relieue her heauineſſe,
                  Went vnto her, and with all gentleneſſe,
               
               
                  And pleaſant words ſomewhat appeaſd her mind,
                  And ſaid, alas moſt faire and noble Queene,
                  Why are you to your ſelfe ſo much vnkind?
                  I ſurely thinke that purpoſely you meane,
                  And will your death and finall end procure,
                  Or els you wold not ſuch extreme greefe endure▪
                  
               
               
                  Nor cauſleſſe ſhed ſo many a briniſh teare,
                  That with the ſame you wet your outward weed,
                  And ſhew your ſelfe like vnto one that were
                  A penitent, lamenting her miſdeed:
                  Alas faire Queene, alas, why do you ſo?
                  Let all this griefe and ſorrow now cleane goe.
               
               
                  And liue no more ſweet Ladie in diſtreſſe,
                  But leaue your woe and cheariſh vp your heart,
                  And thinke no more vpon this heauineſſe,
                  But as it is a prudent womans part,
                  Be glad, and what ſo ever you will craue
                  Of me or mine, be ſure you ſhall it haue.
               
               
                  Let paſſe I ſay theſe ſalt and briniſh teares,
                  For tis in vaine in ſorrow ſtill to liue,
                  And here my faith I plight to you and yours,
                  That I will you maintaine, keepe, and relieue,
                  In better ſort then ever yet you were
                  By Menelaus, and therefore haue no feare.
               
               
                  For I will doe what I to you proteſt,
                  Vpon the faith and honour of a Knight,
                  For falſhood in my heart I do deteſt.
                  Wherewith the Queene as well as then ſhe might,
                  Fayning ſighes with water in her eyes
                  Did anſwere him, and ſpake in louely wiſe:
               
               
                  I know (ſayd ſhe) whether I be loath or leefe,
                  Vnto your will I muſt not now ſay nay,
                  Although it be to my no little griefe,
                  For ſhe that's bound, of force muſt needs obay:
                  And ſith that from your hands I cannot flie,
                  I reſt content with my Captiuity.
               
               
                  Which (gainſt my will) conſtraines me here to dwell.
                  For it belongeth not to women-kind,
                  In forraine ſoyle to ſtriue or to rebell,
                  Where they are like no favour great to find:
                  And that their cauſe ſhall not maintained be.
                  But if you liſt in heart to pittie me,
               
               
                  And in your mind conceaue ſo good a deed,
                  As to extend to vs ſome charitie,
                  While that you liue you ſhall the better ſpeed:
                  For he that helps man in neceſſity,
                  And comforts them that are in woe and griefe,
                  Shall never faile of comfort and reliefe.
               
               
                  
                  Then Lady deare, quoth Paris, I aſſure
                  Vnto you now, that what ſo ere you craue,
                  I will the ſame at your deſire procure,
                  And thereof in your heart aſſurance haue:
                  And that in ſuch aboundance as you liſt,
                  For no man ſhall your will and heaſt reſiſt.
               
               
                  And therefore be no whit at all diſmaid,
                  But comfort take and certainly belieue,
                  That I will doe what euer I haue ſaid,
                  And now (ſaid he) all ſorrow cleane remoue:
                  And ſaying ſo, he led her to a place,
                  That purpoſely for her prepared was.
               
               
                  Where, after certaine ſpeeches twixt them two,
                  In ſecret wiſe when they together were,
                  He did begin her plainly there to woe,
                  And vnto her did ſay, my Ladie deare,
                  (Thinke not I call you ſo, to pleaſe your mind,
                  But from my very heart as you ſhall find.)
               
               
                  And therefore entertaine within your thought,
                  What I to you ſhall ſpeake, and thus I ſay,
                  S
                        •
                     th that by gods decree y'are hither brought,
                  (For no man can their will and power ſtay)
                  I dare affirme that you were not accurſt
                  Therein, and that they do't not for the worſt,
               
               
                  But for your good, and ſo you muſt it take,
                  And ſith there is no other remedie,
                  You muſt of your neceſſitie vertue make,
                  And be as glad, and liue as merrilie,
                  As if you were within your natiue land,
                  For now I giue and plight to you my hand.
               
               
                  That here you ſhall at pleaſure all things haue,
                  How deare ſo ere it doth vnto me coſt,
                  And what ſo ere your heart can wiſh or craue,
                  You ſhall it haue, and hereof dare I boaſt,
                  That this our land, (as well it ſhall be found)
                  In everie thing doth plenteouſlie abound.
               
               
                  And much more then within the Grecian land,
                  And though that far from th'I ſland cald Achay,
                  
                  You are as now, ſith you cannot withſtand
                  Your fortune, you muſt not your ſelfe diſmay:
                  For that with more and greater maieſtie,
                  Honor, dutie, wealth and dignitie,
               
               
                  You ſhall be ſerued here, then there you were.
                  And cauſe you muſt your husband now forſake,
                  And gainſt your will his companie forbeare,
                  For which you ſeeme ſuch ſorrow here to make,
                  Your care therein by me ſhall ſoone be eas'd,
                  For that if you therewith be not diſpleas'd:
               
               
                  In ſtead of him I will your husband be,
                  And loue and honour you with all my heart,
                  If you can likewiſe thinke ſo well of me:
                  And till that death by force ſhall make vs part,
                  I will be true both in my word and deed,
                  For in my heart I fullie haue decreed,
               
               
                  To be to you as loving and as kind▪
                  
                  As dutifull, as friendlie, and as true,
                  As ever you King Menelaus did find,
                  And in all things will yeeld to you your due:
                  And here my faith and troth to you I plight;
                  To laſt vntill that death with dart me ſmight.
               
               
                  And though my words do ſeeme but rude & plaine▪
                  
                  I hope for that you will me not diſgrace,
                  Nor any whit this my requeſt diſdaine,
                  Sith I deſcend and come of roy all race,
                  And am as noble of degree and blood
                  As Menelaus, and in each point as good;
               
               
                  And will to you more faithfull be in loue
                  Then ere he was, and never change for new,
                  For nothing ſhall my heart from you remoue;
                  Then ſith this I proteſt to you is true,
                  I pray you now leaue off to waile and weepe,
                  And let ſome comfort in your boſome creepe:
               
               
                  For little doth availe this woe and greefe,
                  If you conſider well your owne eſtate,
                  And thanke the Gods that ſend you ſuch reliefe
                  In your diſtreſſe, and thinke y'are fortunate
                  To hap ſo well, and this is all I craue,
                  That loue for loue of you I now may haue.
               
               
                  Alas (ſaid ſhe) can it poſſible be,
                  That I which haue my friends abandoned,
                  And liue in ſorrow and adverſitie,
                  Should not be grieu'd, and wiſh that I were dead?
                  I ſee no cauſe why I ſhould ceaſe to erie,
                  Nor yet my cheeks from briniſh teares to drie.
               
               
                  It cannot be, for ſure it were gainſt kind,
                  That my ſo ſore and great extreamitie,
                  I ſhould ſo ſoone abandon out of mind,
                  And that the thing which toucheth me ſo nie,
                  And is the onely cauſe of this my ſmart,
                  Could be ſo lightlie caſt out of my heart:
               
               
                  And for whoſe ſake I am as now conſtrain'd,
                  To ſorrow for our ſeparation:
                  But ſith the Gods for me haue thus ordain'd,
                  That I ſhould loue in this ſtrange Nation,
                  I am content to take it patientlie,
                  And to their heaſts t'ob
                        •
                     y ſubmiſſiuely.
               
               
                  
                  For follie t'were to ſtriue againſt their will.
                  Wherefore as now my ſelfe I will prouoke,
                  (Although it ſeeme my very heart to kill)
                  For to ſubmit my necke vnto this yoke:
                  And gainſt my will of meere neceſſitie,
                  Obay to what ſo ere you'l do with me,
               
               
                  For't would not helpe if that I ſhould't refuſe.
                  And thus ſomewhat he did her griefe appeaſe,
                  And yet what ere ſhe ſaid, ſhe could not chuſe
                  But thinke thereon. But what ſhould ſhe diſeaſe
                  Her ſelfe ſo much, ſith t'is a thing moſt ſure,
                  An heart of 
                        ••
                     int could not ſo much endure.
               
               
                  For 'tis the common vſe of women-kind,
                  Till they haue wept and wailed at their will,
                  Nere to ſurceaſe nor to content their mind,
                  But when they haue of ſorrow had their fill,
                  And wearied are therewith, they will as faſt,
                  All ſorrow from their hearts as lightlie caſt:
               
               
                  And ſoone lay hold on comfort in their griefe,
                  A man their hearts may eaſilie diſſeuer,
                  From woe to ioye, from ſorrow to reliefe,
                  There is no ſtorme that can endure for euer:
                  For as the learned write, things violent,
                  By natures courſe cannot be permanent.
               
               
                  When ſtormes are paſt the Sun much brighter is,
                  And ſhineth hotter after then before,
                  So by the ſpeech and counſell of Paris,
                  
                  Faire Helena as then did weepe no more.
                  For as the faire and pleaſant morning bright,
                  By cuſtome and by kind doth follow night:
               
               
                  Right ſo in time her heart began to cheare,
                  And of her teares the flouds likewiſe to drie,
                  And hauing cleane abandoned all feare,
                  She liu'd in Troye with Paris ioyfullie:
                  As in the Chapter following you may ſee,
                  Whereas at large it ſhall declared bee.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  ¶ How Paris was receaued into Troye at his returne out of Greece, and how he was married to Queene Helena.
                  
               
               
                  WHen Helena had left her mourning cheare,
                  And that her roſent colour ſhewd againe,
                  Within her face moſt beautifull and cleare,
                  And had forgotten all her griefe and paine:
                  
                     Paris that was in heart ſo amorous,
                  In haſt did ſend vnto King Priamus,
                  
               
               
                  For horſe and men, apparell gorgeous,
                  And diuers coſtlie iewels of great priſe,
                  That Helena might ſhew more glorious,
                  And enter Troye in braue and ſumptuous wiſe:
                  And all things he deſired being ſent,
                  Without delay to Troye with her he went.
               
               
                  And by the way King Priamus them met,
                  Accompanied with his Nobilitie,
                  And many faire and gallant Ladies great,
                  And maidens by their birth of high degree:
                  And with thē ſtore of knights that were moſt braue▪
                  
                  And Citizens which their attendance gaue.
               
               
                  To welcome Paris, who as then did ride
                  With all his priſoners, two and two before,
                  And he, and Deiphobus on each ſide
                  Of Helena, to honor her the more:
                  And after them the Lords of high degree,
                  And all the reſt moſt orderlie to ſee.
               
               
                  And tweene each ranke did leaue a little ſpace,
                  That ſo their traine the longer might appeare,
                  And in that ſort they road an eaſie pace,
                  Till that by Priam they encountred were:
                  Who met them in a faire and pleaſant plaine,
                  And in his hand tooke Helens horſes raine.
               
               
                  And ſo conuaied her into the towne,
                  Where ſtore of people flockt on every ſide,
                  And all the way along ran vp and downe,
                  To gaſe and looke vpon their new come bride:
                  The Trumpets ſounding in moſt ſtately wiſe,
                  Which made their eccho mount vp to the skies.
               
               
                  And many another kind of Inſtrument,
                  In ſundrie wiſe playd ſeuerall melodie
                  Before them as into the Towne they went,
                  So that to heare the pleaſant harmonie,
                  T'would make mans heart to leap & mount for ioy.
                  And when they all were entred into Troye,
                  
               
               
                  King Priam at his Pallace did alight,
                  And by the hand did take the Grecian Queene,
                  And ſtraight with all convenient ſpeed he might,
                  Led her into a Chamber well beſeene:
                  Commanding all his Officers to ſee,
                  That all what ere ſhe need prepar'd ſhould be.
               
               
                  And calling for a cup of wine, he dranke
                  Vnto the Queene to welcome her withall,
                  Forthwith ſhe did in humble wiſe him thanke,
                  And ſo he went againe into the Hall
                  Till ſupper time, and left her there to make
                  Her ready, and her eaſe meane while to take.
               
               
                  
                  But of the ioy that was within the towne,
                  In every place where people ſat together,
                  And in the ſtreets of Troye walk't vp and downe,
                  And ſpake thereof the one vnto the other:
                  My ſtile is all to rude of it to write,
                  So much they did in heart and mind delight.
               
               
                  That Paris ſafely home returned is,
                  And in his voyage ſped ſo luckily,
                  And of his men not any one did miſſe,
                  But all had ſcaped death moſt happily:
                  And to fulfill their ioy vpon next day,
                  As Guido in his Latine verſe doth ſay,
               
               
                  They did the time no further off prolong,
                  But with all ſpeed t'Apolloes Temple went,
                  And fore the Larke that morne begun his ſong,
                  Together did with full and free conſent,
                  Giue faith and troth, & knit the wedlocke band
                  Betweene them two, for euermore to ſtand.
               
               
                  Whereto the King himſelfe did giue conſent,
                  And all his Lords and Nobles in likewiſe,
                  The Commons alſo were therewith content
                  And greed thereto, in favour of Paris:
                  
                  And ſo the wedding feaſt moſt royally,
                  Continued was with great ſolemnity
               
               
                  Within the towne of Troye for eight daies ſpace.
                  To write each kind of revell, ſport, and dance,
                  The ſeverall ſorts of mirths that then there was,
                  The braue attire and lofty countenance
                  Of Courtiers proud, and lovers amorous,
                  The privie grutching of the jealious.
               
               
                  The runnings and the tilts on every day,
                  The divers courſes ſerued at the feaſt,
                  The ſeuerall kinds of muſicke that did play,
                  The Largis given, the overplus did reſt,
                  When all was done whole thouſands to ſuffice;
                  My Engliſh will not ſerue for to deviſe,
               
               
                  Such tearmes and phraſes as ſufficient were
                  To ſhew the ſame. But when the certainty
                  Thereof did come vnto Caſſandraes eare,
                  A thouſand ſighs ſhe fetcht and gan to cry:
                  And woefully did teare and rent her haires,
                  And in this ſort her face all wet with teares,
               
               
                  Said wretched Troye, why erſt thou in this caſe,
                  And giu'ſt conſent vnto this villanie,
                  Why art thou now become ſo voyd of grace,
                  As to maintaine ſo foule adultery:
                  And ſuffreſt Paris thus to wed and wiue
                  Queene Helena, whoſe husband is aliue?
               
               
                  Oh woefull Troye too cruell is thy fate,
                  The time is come thou ſhalt deſtroyed be,
                  To ſhun the ſame it is now all too late,
                  For many Fathers ſhall their children lee
                  This day in health, the next day ſhall be ſlaine,
                  And midſt the fields lie wounded in great paine.
               
               
                  And many wiues in ſorrow great ſhall weepe,
                  To ſee their husbands lie in open field,
                  Their bodies pierſt and cut with wounds full deepe,
                  And there in grieuous wiſe their breaths to yeeld:
                  Alas how can they chuſe but ſore complaine,
                  And yet muſt be content and this ſuſtaine.
               
               
                  Oh wretched Mother, woefull is thy caſe,
                  To looſe thy children without remedy,
                  And ſee them ſlaine each one before thy face,
                  And ſhall not help't though nere ſo lowd thou cry:
                  Alas (good Queene) what griefe ſhall thee ſurpreſſe,
                  And yet ſhalt and no eaſe in thy diſtreſſe.
               
               
                  Oh Troyans blinded with ſecurity,
                  Why will you not be rul'd by my aduiſe,
                  And to avoyd the Grecians cruelty,
                  With ſpeed make ſeperation twixt Paris
                  
                  And Helena, and their foule act abhorre,
                  And her againe vnto her Lord reſtore.
               
               
                  What, thinke you that his theft and cruell deed,
                  The Grecians will forget and not require?
                  No, no, aſſure your ſelues without all dread,
                  The ſword of vengeance ſhall moſt ſharpely bite
                  For his offence, and will endure the ſmart,
                  When as we ſhall behold in ſpight our heart,
               
               
                  Our Pallaces and houſes all caſt downe,
                  And cruelly deſtroyd before our face,
                  And laſtly the ſubverſion of our towne,
                  Which at the Grecians hands ſhall find no grace:
                  Alas, alas, moſt wretchleſſe Queene Helaine,
                  
                  Vnhappy woman cauſer of our paine.
               
               
                  Bold miſadvis'd, and meerly without grace,
                  Thou onely art procurer of our care,
                  And ſole diſturber of our happie peace,
                  And kindled haſt the brand of cruell warre:
                  For thou alone art ground and root of all
                  The miſchiefe that on vs is like to fall.
               
               
                  And ſhall ſee many a dolefull funerall,
                  And mournfull feaſts held herewithin this towne,
                  Thus did Caſſandra loudly cry and call,
                  To every one as ſhe went vp and downe
                  Throughout the ſtreets, & boldly to them told,
                  What by that meanes vnto them happen ſhold.
               
               
                  
                  Still crying out alas and welaway,
                  Are you ſo hard of heart that you nought feare?
                  And no man could her furious courſe then ſtay,
                  Till Priamus the King thereof did heare:
                  Who that ſhe might no more ſuch crying make
                  About the Towne, he did her cauſe to take,
               
               
                  And being bound with chaines in priſon caſt,
                  Where ſhe remain'd long time in miſerie,
                  (And no man for her words and counſell paſt,
                  But liued all in great ſecuritie:)
                  Where I will let her lye to weepe and mourne,
                  And to the Greekes my ſtile againe retourne.
               
               
                  The moſt vnhappy time being come, and while
                  That fortune wild the Troyans to be glad,
                  And with diſſembling face on them did ſmile,
                  For which great ioy and triumph then they made:
                  Suppoſing that all things would fall out weele,
                  Not thinking on the turning of the wheele
               
               
                  Of her that is as wavering as the clocke,
                  And when men truſt her moſt will turne aſide,
                  And ſodainly vnto them giue a mocke,
                  For in deceit ſhe hath her onely pride:
                  And loues to hide her beauty vnder cloud,
                  Againſt whoſe might ther's no man can him ſhroud
               
               
                  For when ſhe fawnes, ſhe's leaſt to truſt vpon,
                  For in her ſmile the Troyans little thought,
                  That ſhe pretended their confuſion,
                  And by that means which they as then had ſought:
                  For they ſuppos'd of that to be ſecure
                  Which they deſir'd, & ſhould the Greeks procure
               
               
                  To yeeld vnto their wills and not reſiſt,
                  Suppoſing by that thing by Paris done,
                  They ſhould be forſt to doe what ere they liſt.
                  But when report thereof abroad did runne,
                  And tydings vnto Menelaus was brought,
                  Of all the wrongs gainſt him by Troyans wrought.
               
               
                  Whil'ſt he with Nestor did at Pirrha ſtay,
                  Where he receaued newes moſt certainly
                  What they had done in th' Iſland Citheray,
                  
                  And what exceeding rage and tyranny,
                  They did vpon his men there execute,
                  As alſo of th' aſſault and hot purſute
               
               
                  That on the Greekes they made that fled away,
                  And how they ſpar'd no man nor woman-kind,
                  But killed ſome, and tooke the reſt as pray,
                  And all the gold and treaſure they could find:
                  And when he heard how they had tane his wife,
                  Whome he did loue as dearely as his life,
               
               
                  And more, if more might be, a thouſand fold,
                  His face did looke with pale and deadly hue,
                  And therewithall his heart did wax ſo cold
                  With ſorrow which therein did ſtill renue:
                  That with much griefe being caſt into a ſound,
                  Like ſenceleſſe corps he fell vnto the ground,
               
               
                  And could vpon his feet no longer ſtand:
                  Which when Duke Neſtor mark't, & ſaw him ſtriue
                  Twixt life and death, he tooke him by the hand,
                  And ſpeedilie did him againe reviue:
                  Wherewith he ſigh'd and ſaid, now woe is me,
                  That of my wife I ſhould bereaued be,
               
               
                  Which was my onely ioy and my delight.
                  Come death I ſay and with thy cruell dart,
                  (Sith fortune hath to me done this deſpight)
                  In pieces twaine now cleaue my wofull heart:
                  For I cannot indure that Helena
                  
                  My Queene ſhould thus frō me be borne away.
               
               
                  Farewell my ioy, farewell my chiefeſt bliſſe,
                  Now ſtrangers haue thee in poſſeſſion,
                  And I the thing I loue do ſo much do miſſe,
                  And muſt endure't with extreame paſſion:
                  Would God I knew how that they doe intreat
                  My Helena, that was to me ſo ſweet.
               
               
                  Now thou art gone the thought of thee me ſlayth,
                  And I muſt liue in ſorrow, griefe, and woe,
                  Expecting ſtill my end by cruell death.
                  And therewithall he ſaid, that he would goe
                  To Sparta, therein comfortleſſe alone,
                  His great & grievous loſſe to waile and mone.
               
               
                  But Neſtor would not leaue his company,
                  But went with him for conſolation,
                  By all meanes ſeeking how to pacifie
                  His mind; and hauing great compaſſion
                  On his diſtreſſe, did make no longer ſtay,
                  But did him to his Country thence convay.
               
               
                  And being there arriu'd with woefull heart,
                  By letters ſent in poſt to euery place,
                  He did vnto his brethren twaine impart,
                  His great miſchance, and ſad, and woefull caſe:
                  Deſiring them to come to him with ſpeed,
                  To aid him with their counſell in his need.
               
               
                  And firſt to King Agamemnon did write,
                  And to King Caſtor and King Pollux ſend,
                  Deſiring them with all the ſpeed they might,
                  In his diſtreſſe their ayd to him to lend:
                  And when they came and ſaw his countnance dead,
                  Like to a man with thought halfe murthered,
               
               
                  
                  They could not chuſe but for his ſorrow grieue,
                  And by perſwaſions ſought the ſame to eaſe,
                  But when they ſaw they could it not remoue
                  Out of his mind, nor him no whit appeaſe:
                  King Agamemnon wiſely gan to ſpeake,
                  And in theſe words his mind to him did breake;
               
               
                  Brother (ſaid he) what woe, what heauineſſe,
                  What deadly griefe doth thus torment your mind,
                  And as it ſeemes your ſences all oppreſſe
                  So furiouſlie; and we no caſe can find,
                  You ſhould do thus? but grant it to be true,
                  That cauſe for to be grieu'd is giuen you:
               
               
                  Yet you ſhould be ſo arm'd with providence,
                  That what ſo ere diſlike were offered you,
                  You ſhould thereat not ſeeme to take offence,
                  And make as though thereof you nothing knew:
                  For that a wiſe man in adverſitie,
                  Should ioyfull countenance ſhew, and ſecretly
               
               
                  Conceiue in mind the thing that doth him grieue,
                  And priuilie within his breaſt incloſe
                  His wrath and ire, that none might it perceiue,
                  Nor let it once be knowen vnto his foes:
                  For tis the counſell of the provident,
                  That when mans heart with furie thinks to rent,
               
               
                  He ſhould not ſeeme to be poſſeſt with ire,
                  Till that he findeth fit occaſion,
                  To kindle and reviue the burning fire
                  Of vengeance, when his foe thinks not thereon:
                  For griefe ſhew'd outwardlie, by proofe we find
                  Two things doth breed, which are of ſeveral kind;
               
               
                  Firſt, it provokes thy friend to ſigh full ſore,
                  (For nature binds him to lament thy griefe)
                  And it doth cauſe thy foe reioyce the more,
                  (For he is glad when thou doſt want reliefe:)
                  Wherefore when griefe moſt in thy heart doth lie,
                  Shew cheerefull face to croſſe thine enemie.
               
               
                  And make as though thou doſt eſteeme at nought,
                  The thing which doth thee moſt torment and vex,
                  And evermore remaineth in thy thought,
                  Ye though it doth thee nere ſo much perplex:
                  And where thou haſt moſt cauſe for to complaine,
                  There make beſt ſhow, & ioyful countnance faine.
               
               
                  For into teares although thou ſhould'ſt diſtill,
                  And never ceaſe tormenting of thy mind,
                  Yea though thy ſelfe thou ſhouldeſt therewith kill,
                  Thou could'ſt but little eaſe and pleaſure find:
                  For vengeance nere was tane, nor honor wonne,
                  By any thing that man that way hath done.
               
               
                  For though it laſteth long, it brings no gaine,
                  It's ſaid the man that can diſſemble wrong,
                  (Although it be with inward greete and paine)
                  Is ſubtill, and of valiant heart and ſtrong:
                  And he that can be peaceable in ſmart,
                  Doth well declare he hath a noble heart.
               
               
                  For he that weepes like women in their rage,
                  And thinkes by words and teares to eaſe his paine,
                  His ſorrow and his griefe ſhall nere aſſwage,
                  And by no meanes to honor ſhall attaine:
                  Let's not with words, but with our weapons fight,
                  And hold our tongs, & manlike try our might.
               
               
                  Words are but wind, and water tis we weepe,
                  And though the ſtormes & flouds of either two
                  Do multiply, and vs in ſorrow keepe,
                  They do no good but ſtill increaſe our woe:
                  And to our foes (when as that they do 
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     e
                  That we doe make ſo ſad and heauie 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  It doth increaſe and multiply their ioy,
                  And giues them cauſe much more to laugh at vs;
                  Wherefore let not this ſorrow thee annoy,
                  Which now doth ſeeme ſo to torment thee thus:
                  For it is ſaid, the courage of a Knight
                  Is prou'd, when as with miſchiefe and deſpight
               
               
                  He is not feard, nor in adverſity
                  Doth not himſelfe faint-heartedly ſubmit
                  To any danger what ſo ere it be,
                  Nor doth impaire his honor any whit
                  Through foule deſpaire, but hopeth alwaies well,
                  And hath a mind as firme as any ſteele,
               
               
                  T'effect the thing that he doth take in hand,
                  And his deſire at laſt to ſatisfie;
                  For this from me I pray you vnderſtand,
                  That he which in himſelfe hath fantaſie
                  T'aſſaile his foe, and venture life and lim,
                  What ere befall or happeneth vnto him,
               
               
                  And takes the chance that vnto him is caſt;
                  He commonly nere failes in victorie,
                  And hauing dangers all cleane over-paſt,
                  In fine obtaineth praiſe eternally:
                  And now tis time to ſpeake in words but few,
                  Good brother mine your valour forth to ſhew,
               
               
                  To cheare your heart, and for to make you ſtrong,
                  The forces of your foes for to withſtand,
                  And to revenge your domages and wrong,
                  And we thereto will put our helping hand:
                  And all with one conſent, and force, and might,
                  Aſſiſt you in your need t'obtaine your right.
               
               
                  
                  And in deſpight of all that ſhall vs let,
                  Within the fields before the Towne of Troye
                  
                  Will plant our ſiege, and there our tents vp ſet,
                  And ere we part will't vtterlie deſtroy,
                  Albeit as now I can appoint no day.
                  Therefore let vs with all the ſpeed we may
               
               
                  Send meſſengers into the Grecian Land,
                  The Princes of the ſame to certifie
                  Of theſe your wrongs, & craue their helping hand
                  T'aſſiſt you, and the ſame to remedie:
                  And ſo full well revenge your ſelfe you may,
                  And this is all that I to you can ſay.
               
               
                  King Menelaus therewith ſomewhat appeas'd,
                  Began more cherefull countenance to make,
                  And with his heart and mind thereby was eas'd,
                  All outward griefe did preſently forſake:
                  And ſeeing that by care he could't not mend,
                  To all his friends throughout the land did ſend.
               
               
                  And firſt his Kinne and allies he did moue,
                  By ſhowing them what had chanced vnto him,
                  Deſiring them of courteſie and loue,
                  His caſe as t'were their owne for to eſteeme:
                  And with their powers aſſiſtants to him be,
                  To ayd him in his great extreamitie.
               
               
                  His letters ſeene and read, there did reſort
                  
                     Achilles, and Patroclus Princes ſtout,
                  
                     Diomedes, and others to his Court:
                  Who having heard what things had fallen out,
                  Did all with one conſent and will agree,
                  Vpon the King of Troye reveng'd to bee.
               
               
                  And in that caſe and enterpriſe refer'd
                  Themſelues vnto the prudent government
                  Of valiant King Agamemnon, prefer'd
                  By them (with all their full and free conſent)
                  To be the chiefe Commander of their hoſt,
                  Provided at each ſeverall Princes coſt.
               
               
                  With faithfull vow and promiſe to maintaine
                  And follow warres, while life & meanes ſhould laſt,
                  Againſt their foes triumphantly to gaine
                  Renowne and fame when vitall daies were paſt:
                  Thereof to leaue perpetuall memorie,
                  From age to age, to their poſteritie.
               
               
                  But ere they did aſſemble all their men,
                  And bring them to the place by them aſſign'd,
                  Queene Helena had two valiant bretheren,
                  King Pollux and King Caſtor, grieu'd in mind
                  To thinke thereon, their ſhip did rig in haſt,
                  And with the ſame to ſea did hie them faſt,
               
               
                  Accompanyed with many a valiant Knight,
                  In mind t'oretake the Troyans on the way,
                  And to recouer Helen by their might,
                  But Gods decree no mortall man can ſtay:
                  For ere that they three daies had ſail'd along
                  The Grecian ſeas, the wind did blow ſo ſtrong,
               
               
                  And ſuch a darkneſſe roſe within the skies,
                  That it did ſeeme as day had turn'd to night,
                  And therewithall ſo great a ſtorme did riſe,
                  That billows huge againſt the ſhip did ſmight:
                  And then a great and mighty clap of thunder,
                  Stroke down their maſts, & broke thē cleane in ſunder.
               
               
                  And with the furious blaſts of Eolus,
                  
                  The waue ſo high did mount vnto the skie,
                  And made them ſwell ſo huge monſterous,
                  That every man made full account to die:
                  And after they had toſſed too and fro,
                  Sometimes aloft, and then againe as lowe.
               
               
                  The waters greene and white ſo ſore did rage,
                  And ſeem'd to boyle with furie of the wind,
                  That nothing could th'vnpiteous tempeſt ſwage,
                  Nor yet procure the Grecians eaſe in mind:
                  For what ſo ere reſiſtance they would make,
                  At laſt the ſhip in many pieces brake.
               
               
                  And rent in twaine with great extreamity,
                  Whereby not one eſcapt, but all were drownd,
                  And in the raging Seas caſt furiouſly,
                  And of them all not any one was found
                  To ſaue their liues, except the Brethren twaine,
                  Who as in Stories Poets of them faine,
               
               
                  The Gods did in the heavens deifie,
                  And in the skies did place them there to be
                  A ſtarre in th'aire by name of Gemini,
                  
                  And as the learned in Aſtronomie
                  Affirme, it is by Conſtellation,
                  Of Mercurie the houſe and manſion.
               
               
                  Which is both male and female in his kind,
                  The Eagle and the Dolphin in it riſe,
                  And in the ſame iuſt three degrees we find,
                  The Dragons taile exalted is likewiſe:
                  In Man it's ſaid to rule the armes and hand,
                  And mongſt the ſigns the third in place doth ſtand.
               
               
                  Thus were theſe ſtout & valiant brethren twaine,
                  In heauen pla'ſt (if that we may belieue
                  The fables of the Poets fond and vaine)
                  Which earneſt did the valiant Grecians grieue:
                  And was to them beginning of their woe,
                  And to the Brethren twaine their overthrow.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  How the Grecians aſſembled to be reuenged of the Troyans for rauiſhing of Helena.
                  
               
               
                  ERe that mine Author Guido doth declare,
                  What Grecian power did gainſt the Troyans goe;
                  It ſeemes he had a great and ſpeciall care,
                  The forme and ſhape of everie Prince to ſhoe:
                  Both on the Greekes, and on the Troyans ſide,
                  The which while he amongſt them did abide
               
               
                  In time of truce, beheld with great delight,
                  Omitting neither port nor ſeemelineſſe,
                  Beautie, nor yet deformitie that might
                  Be ſeene in them, but as he doth confeſſe,
                  Hath made a true and right deſcription,
                  Of everie one in his proportion.
               
               
                  And firſt he ſetteth downe Queene Helens ſhape,
                  As Dares hath deſcrib'd the ſame at large,
                  Wherein no point thereof he doth eſcape,
                  But tels the truth his promiſe to diſcharge:
                  And ſaith, ſhe had a ſcarre vpon her face,
                  And yet it did her beautie not diſgrace.
               
               
                  He ſaith, King Agamemnon was a man
                  Of bodie ſtrong and good proportion,
                  Of ſtature tall, of colour pale and wan,
                  And flegmaticke of his complexion:
                  Vnquiet, and impatient in his breſt,
                  Eſchewing, and refuſing eaſe and reſt.
               
               
                  So much to war and ſtrife his mind he gaue,
                  And yet he was to vertue whollie bent,
                  And therewithall a Prince moſt wiſe and graue,
                  Learned, diſcreet, and paſſing eloquent:
                  Whereby amongſt the Grecian Princes all,
                  He was elected to be Generall.
               
               
                  King Menelaus was valiant, ſtout, and ſtrong,
                  Of courage, and of heart victorious,
                  His ſtature middle-ſiz'd, twixt ſhort and long,
                  Of good proportion, and deſirous
                  Vnquietlie to liue in warre and ſtrife,
                  Then to poſſeſſe great wealth with quiet life.
               
               
                  
                     Achilles was of ſtature huge, and tall,
                  With ſholders broad, & breaſt both big & ſquare,
                  Faire faced, and right ſeemely therewithall,
                  And in each part the like proportion bare;
                  With eies moſt great, deepe, broad, & very quicke,
                  And a browne haire that curl'd, it was ſo thicke.
               
               
                  In Armes moſt fierce and right couragious,
                  And did in ſtrength the Grecians all ſurmount,
                  And yet of looke was paſſing amorous:
                  Of liberall mind, and made ſo ſmall account
                  To giue large gifts, and royally to ſpend,
                  That all men for the ſame did him commend.
               
               
                  The valiant Grecian Tantalus was ſtrong,
                  Of bodie huge, and good proportion,
                  Indifferent groſſe, and neither ſhort nor long,
                  Of ſanguine colour and complexion:
                  Vnſteadfaſt ey'd, and wavering in his head,
                  Abhorring ſtrife whereas he ſaw no need.
               
               
                  Of word and promiſe true what ſo ere he made,
                  And never any quarrell tooke in hand,
                  Vnleſſe that he a good occaſion had:
                  And when he knew and well did vnderſtand,
                  His cauſe to be both lawfull, iuſt and right,
                  Then would he ſhew himſelfe a valiant Knight.
               
               
                  
                     Oileus Aiax was of bodie great,
                  And in apparell rich and curious,
                  Whereon his heart and mind was onely ſet,
                  And yet of ſhape both huge and monſtrous,
                  With armes ſo great, & ſholders broad & ſquare,
                  And waied ſo much, no horſe could well him bare.
               
               
                  His ſtature it was high and very tall,
                  Vnweldy, and vnſeemely to behold,
                  Of ſpeach he was both rude and ruſticall,
                  And car'd not how his mind he did vnfold:
                  And though to ayd the Greeks he did his part,
                  Yet was he but a coward in his heart.
               
               
                  Another Aiax (ſurnamed Telamon)
                  There was, a man that learning did adore,
                  Of bodie ſtraight and faire complexion,
                  His haire cole blacke, and turning vp before:
                  Who did ſo much in eloquence abound,
                  That in his time the like could not be found.
               
               
                  In Muſicke ſweet his time moſt part he ſpent,
                  Wherein he tooke ſuch pleaſure and delight,
                  That he did his owne inſtruments invent,
                  And yet he was a braue and valiant Knight:
                  And one that hated pride and flattery,
                  With honor, ſeeking fame and victory.
               
               
                  
                     Vliſſes was a Prince of power and might,
                  That liued in great fame and royalty,
                  And yet he tooke great pleaſure and delight,
                  To vſe all kind of fraud and ſubtilty:
                  Of double, hollow, deepe diſſembling heart,
                  And well could play a perfect lyers part.
               
               
                  
                  With face that made a 
                        •
                     hew cleane void of guile,
                  And words full ſmooth whē nothing leſſe he ment,
                  Much giuen to mirth, yet ſieldome ſeene to ſmile,
                  In counſell he was graue and provident;
                  Right eloquent in ſpeech, and did with ſpeed
                  Full often aid the Greekes in time of need.
               
               
                  
                     Diomedes was valiant, fierce, and tall,
                  Of countnance proud, and paſſing ſtrong & bold,
                  Broad breaſted, & moſt ſterne of looks withall,
                  Deceitfull, and his promiſe nere would hold:
                  So haſty that his hand he could not ſtay,
                  But ſtrike he muſt who ere ſtood in the way,
               
               
                  If once to wrath and anger he was bent;
                  Deſiring ſtrife, ſtill ſhunning reſt and peace,
                  Vnto his ſervants moſt impatient,
                  And never frō contentious thoughts would ceaſe:
                  But quarrell ſtill (though t'were but for a ſtraw)
                  And held his will and pleaſure for a law.
               
               
                  In lecherie his whole delight he plaſt,
                  And was ſo giuen thereto, that where ſo ere
                  He did become, on loue his mind he caſt,
                  And from the ſame could by no meanes forbeare:
                  But ſpent therein full many a night and day,
                  Which at the laſt procur'd his owne decay.
               
               
                  Duke Neſtor was of ſtature ſomewhat tall,
                  And well compoſde of members in each part,
                  Crooke ſholdered, his middle very ſmall,
                  Exceeding ſtrong of hands, and valiant heart:
                  In counſell wiſe, well learnd, and politicke,
                  And yet of nature was ſo cholericke;
               
               
                  That neither friend nor foe he could refraine,
                  He was ſo given to melancholie,
                  And would with no man flatter nor yet fame,
                  Nor for the time his anger mollifie;
                  Which nere the leſſe but little ſpace did laſt,
                  For as it lightly came it lightly paſt.
               
               
                  
                     Protheſalus was gallant, freſh, and gay,
                  Of ſeemly ſhape, and beautie paſſing rare,
                  Wherein no man ſurpaſt him as they ſay;
                  Quicke ſprighted, light, of courage paſſing rare,
                  Exceeding ſwift, and therewithall moſt ſtrong,
                  And heart ſo fierce that he would take no wrong.
               
               
                  The valiant Grecian cald Neptolemus,
                  
                  That had his haire as blacke as any Iet,
                  Was of proportion made right curious,
                  With eyes that were exceeding broad and great:
                  His breaſt moſt large, & ſomewhat ſtooping back,
                  And vſed much to ſtammer when he ſpake.
               
               
                  An Orator he was but turbulent,
                  And willingly would plead in any cauſe,
                  For that he was of nature wholly bent
                  To ſtudie, and to learne the Grecian lawes:
                  Where in he tooke great pleaſure and delight,
                  And yet he was a moſt couragious Knight.
               
               
                  
                     Pallamides King Naulus Son was ſtrong,
                  Of valiant heart and courage paſſing great,
                  Of face moſt faire, of body leane and long,
                  And fierce vpon his enemie to ſet:
                  Familiar, courteous, wiſe, and tractable,
                  In all his actions iuſt and laudable.
               
               
                  Of great account, and onely had the name
                  For bounty and for liberality,
                  Amongſt the Grecians all, which caus'd his fame
                  To ſpread abroad into each Country:
                  Whereby in fine great honor he obtain'd,
                  And for the ſame perpetuall praiſes gain'd.
               
               
                  The worthy Polidamus was ſo fat,
                  And big of body, bellie, and of bone,
                  And ſo vnweldy that moſt part he ſat,
                  And could not well ſuſtaine himſelfe alone:
                  Exceeding proud of heart, and very ſad,
                  And ſodaine or elſe nere ſhewd countnance glad▪
                  
               
               
                  King Machaons ſtature was indifferent,
                  Twixt ſhort and long, his forehead broad & hie,
                  Moſt prowd and fierce, to choller wholly bent,
                  And ſo much giuen vnto jmpatiencie;
                  That nothing but revenge his mind would plea
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  Whereby he ſieldome ſlept or tooke his eaſe.
               
               
                  Next after theſe of Creſida he tels,
                  But here my pen is daſht, for long agoe,
                  My Maiſter Chawcer that each one excels
                  In Rethoricke, her ſhape ſo well did ſhoe;
                  And thereof ſuch a fine diſcourſe doth make,
                  That follie t'were for me to vndertake
               
               
                  To write thereof, or adde vnto the ſame;
                  As knowing well that when that I haue done,
                  I ſhall deſerue no praiſe but rather blame,
                  And yet I can the ſame by no meanes ſhun:
                  For if I write it not I muſt truth leaue,
                  And of the truth the Hiſtorie bereaue.
               
               
                  If I preſume to ſlip and let it goe,
                  And not as Guido doth write orderlie,
                  Or vndertake the very ſame to ſhoe,
                  Which Chawcer hath declar'd ſo learnedly:
                  Full ſure I am therein to make offence,
                  Either by folly, or by negligence
               
               
                  
                  And ſo am plung'd twixt two extremities,
                  Great cauſe I haue to find fault and diſlike
                  Of Atropos, that mongſt her cruelties,
                  Durſt with her knife the thread in ſunder ſtrike
                  Of Chawcers life, chiefe Poet of Britaine,
                  
                  That firſt did cauſe to flouriſh and to raine
               
               
                  The golden drops of Rethoricke ſo ſweet
                  Mongſt Engliſh-men, their ſpeech to clarifie,
                  And their dull wits with Eloquence to whet.
                  (But who liues neare ſo long at laſt ſhall die.)
                  I muſt be forſt his ayd herein to craue,
                  And read his booke, to ſee if I may haue
               
               
                  Some words of Art from thence to place with mine,
                  Which are ſo rude, ſo bare, ſo plaine, and courſe,
                  For as the Ruby red that bright doth ſhine,
                  Set in a Copper Ring, is nere the worſe,
                  But beautified the more, ſo is his phraſe
                  When it's compar'd with wrighters of our daies.
               
               
                  It's knowne ſo well, and is ſo excellent,
                  That tis in vaine the ſame mongſt ours to ſet,
                  For all our paine is as it were miſſpent,
                  When as wee ſeeke his ſtile to counterfet:
                  Well may we do't on meere preſumption,
                  But when al's done there's no compariſon.
               
               
                  Yet for all this I muſt it not deny,
                  (Craving excuſe) but as I firſt began,
                  Proceed to end the Troian Hiſtory,
                  And doe the beſt that poſſibly I can
                  T'effect the ſame; and now of Creſida
                  
                  I will declare her beauty as I may.
               
               
                  Yet muſt I vnder Chawcers whings ſtill hover,
                  And plainely tell that Rethoricke I haue none,
                  Nor eloquence my learning to diſcouer,
                  But letting all curioſitie alone,
                  (As Bayard blind doth boldly giue the venter,
                  And never feares what perill he doth enter.)
               
               
                  To ſhow my ſimple skill I will not ſpare,
                  And thereby ſome proſpect vnto you giue
                  Of Colchos daughters beauty paſſing rare,
                  That while ſhe in this earthly mould did liue,
                  Was held to be an excellent faire creature
                  For forme of face, and comlineſſe of feature.
               
               
                  Wherein none did ſurpaſſe her in her daies,
                  Her ſtature and proportion was but ſmall,
                  Her haire that ſhind like Phoebus gliſtring raies
                  In comly wiſe did on her ſhoulders fall:
                  And at her backe in treſſes hung behind
                  Which oft ſhe did't with golden hearlace bind.
               
               
                  And but that both her eye-browes ioynd in one,
                  You could no fault at all in her eſpie,
                  And that was all her imperfection,
                  To ſpeake of her faire, cleare, and rowling eye,
                  Whoſe gliſtring beams was of ſuch force & might
                  And from the ſame did caſt ſuch peircing light,
               
               
                  That whoſoere them earneſtly beheld,
                  Could not withſtand their power, but muſt confeſſe
                  Their extreame beauty had them forſt to yeild
                  Vnto her loue, and with her ſeemelineſſe
                  She was indowed with great ſobriety,
                  Well ſpoken, wiſe, and full of modeſtie,
               
               
                  And therewithall gentle and tractable,
                  And yet my Author Guydo plaine doth wright,
                  That in her loue ſhe was too variable,
                  And tooke too great a pleaſure and delight,
                  To giue her mind vnto vnſtedfaſtneſſe,
                  And womanly to all new fangleneſſe.
               
               
                  Laſtly he ſayth how that the Percian King
                  Came to the Greeks, with many a worthy Knight,
                  And with him diuers thouſands more did bring
                  To ſuccour them with all his power and might:
                  And that he was of body tall and long,
                  Yet very fat, and therewithall moſt ſtrong.
               
               
                  Red haire and beard, and deepe and fiery eyes,
                  And in his face great ſtore of warts he had,
                  His countnance ſterne, and often times would riſe
                  Into ſuch rage that he did ſeeme halfe mad,
                  Which did in him ſo deepe jmpreſſion take,
                  That therewithall his body it would ſhake.
               
               
                  Thus much I find that Dares doth declare
                  Of all the Grecians ſhapes and perſonages.
                  But of the Troians he no paines doth ſpare,
                  In cerious wiſe at large them to expreſſe;
                  Omitting none, as you may well behold,
                  The Chapter next enſuing doth vnfold.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  ¶ The deſcription of Priam and his ſonnes, and daughters, and of the arriuall of the Greeks, at the Temple of Diana.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ANd firſt he ſheweth how King Priamus
                  
                  Of body was both ſlender, tall, and ſtrong,
                  Of countenance and looke right gratious,
                  Delighting much in muſicke and in ſong,
                  And therewithall was moſt deſirous
                  To heare ſuch ditties as were amorous.
               
               
                  A ſeemely Prince and of great hardines,
                  Cleane void of feare, abhorring flattery,
                  And with low voyce his ſpeech he did expreſſe,
                  Of word moſt true much given to equitie,
                  And never did refuſe to any wight,
                  To doe him vpright juſtice, law, and right.
               
               
                  No favor nor no loue made him decline,
                  Nor leane vnto the greateſt or the leaſt,
                  His manner was full ſone in morne to dine,
                  And of all Kings he was the worthieſt.
                  One that eſteem'd each worthy Knight and trew
                  Or any valiant ſouldier that he knew.
               
               
                  On whom he did beſtow great ſtore of gold,
                  And did aduance them vnto dignitie.
                  And ſpared not his treaſure to vnfold
                  Mongſt them, to ſhow his magnanimitie.
                  And by that meanes in ſuch wiſe with them dealt,
                  That every one his bounty largely felt.
               
               
                  Of many ſonnes he had, the eldeſt was
                  
                     Hector, the famous Prince and worthy Knight
                  Who all the world in valor did ſurpaſſe,
                  Such was his courage, hardineſſe, and might:
                  The very root and ſpring of Chivalry,
                  As ancient Hiſtories doe certifie.
               
               
                  And therewithall ſo ſober, wiſe, and ſad,
                  Courteous, demure, and full of gentleneſſe,
                  That in his time no Prince more honor had,
                  And truth to ſay, he did deſerue no leſſe.
                  Forvertue did ſo much in him abound,
                  That throughout all the world he was renownd.
               
               
                  Of fleſh and bones he was ſo well compact,
                  And rightly formed in proportion,
                  And every lim ſo perfect and exact,
                  That no defect has found in any one.
                  Huge made he was, and of juſt hight & length
                  Thereto compleat and of ſurpaſſing ſtrength.
               
               
                  Liuely, well breathed, and able to ſuſtaine
                  Againſt his foe a long and furious fight.
                  So that no mortall man could ere attaine
                  Vnto the fame of that moſt valiant Knight,
                  For his ſurpaſſing ſtrength and courage bold,
                  If vnto him his due aſcribe I ſhould.
               
               
                  Wherewith he was ſo wiſe and ſo diſcreet,
                  And louely, (though a Prince of high degree.)
                  To rich and poore that met him in the ſtreet,
                  That all men praiſ'd his great humilitie.
                  A Prince that vſ'd few words to any one,
                  And ſhew'd good countenance vnto every one.
               
               
                  That all men joyed when as they him beheld,
                  Vnto his Troian Subiects he was kind:
                  But when as he once entred in the field;
                  His foes did him a furious Lyon find.
                  So valiantly he could himſelfe maintaine,
                  And by his might their forces all ſuſtaine.
               
               
                  No man was euer able to endure
                  The moile of the paine that he would take:
                  (For as the ſtory plainely doth aſſure,
                  And thereof doth a large relation make;)
                  He neare had feare, nor did in fighting faile,
                  Nor with faint heart his enemies aſſaile.
               
               
                  Of all the valiant Knights that ever were,
                  He was the beſt, for vertue, proweſſe, and might,
                  And did the prize of honor from them beare,
                  The which he might by valor claime of right.
                  For none could euer equall him therein,
                  Since that this earthly globe did firſt begin.
               
               
                  In whom Dame nature did ſo much prevaile,
                  And like a skilfull workeman faſhioned
                  His mold, that not one thing did in him faile
                  But was compleat, ſaue that he ſtammered.
                  But had no other imperfection,
                  And was of ſanguine pure complexion.
               
               
                  His brethren Deiphobus and Helenus,
                  
                  In each reſpect and every property,
                  Were both ſo like vnto King Priamus,
                  
                  That twixt them three was no diverſitie,
                  Except in age, he old, they young and light,
                  The firſt, he was a ſtrong and valiant Knight,
               
               
                  And in his warres did many a valiant deed:
                  But Helenus to learning wholy bent,
                  Of feates of armes and proweſſe tooke no heed,
                  But in all Arts became ſo excellent,
                  And had ſuch knowledge in Aſtronomy,
                  That he could tell what future things ſhould be.
               
               
                  Of Troilus to ſpeake, it is moſt ſure
                  There never liu'd a more couragious Knight:
                  Nor likelier in Armes for to indure,
                  As hauing therein pla'ſt his whole delight.
                  Of body well compact, of ſtature tall,
                  Young, luſtly, freſh, and hardy therewithall.
               
               
                  
                  So valiant, ſtrong, and ſtout a Champion,
                  That equall vnto him neare any was,
                  For none with him could make compariſon,
                  So much he did in worthines ſurpaſſe.
                  For which his great and moſt exceeding might,
                  He was a ſecond Hector cal'd by right.
               
               
                  He did behaue himſelfe ſo valiantly
                  In that great warre againſt his enemies.
                  In loue he did perſeuere conſtantly,
                  And was therein moſt ſecret, firme, and wiſe.
                  Of face moſt faire, and of a pleaſant cheare,
                  Wherein no alteration did appeare.
               
               
                  He was ſo firme and conſtant in his heart,
                  And therewithall ſo loving and ſo kind,
                  That nothing could diſſwade nor make him ſtart
                  From that which he had once decreed in mind.
                  So true he was in word, and ſo vpright,
                  And to his foes he was ſo ſterne a Knight
               
               
                  And fierce, that they could not his force withſtand,
                  Vnto the Greeks it was confuſion.
                  When as he held his bloody ſword in hand,
                  And to the Troians their protection.
                  For that his Knight-hood was of ſuch account,
                  That no man might in valor him ſurmount.
               
               
                  Thogh al the world they ſhold haue ſought throghout
                  What 
                        •
                     hall I ſay (to make his praiſes laſt)
                  More then I haue? but that amongſt the rout
                  Of Greeks and Troians all, none him ſurpaſt,
                  Vnleſſe it were his jnvinſible brother
                  
                     Hector alone, and neuer any other.
               
               
                  King Priamus ſonne cal'd Paris, was a Knight
                  So beautifull of fleſh and blood to ſee,
                  That for to yeild to him his due and right,
                  I muſt confeſſe none was ſo faire as he.
                  Whoſe criſping looks that ſhin'd like golden wier,
                  Made all men his great beautie much admire.
               
               
                  His ſole delight was ſhooting in a bow,
                  And hunting in the woods to chaſe wild deare,
                  And did therein ſuch skill and cunning ſhow,
                  That he all Archers paſt that euer were.
                  And was a Knight of great renowne and fame,
                  Whoſe valiant deeds did well approue the ſame.
               
               
                  
                     Aeneas that King Priams daughter had,
                  Was light of lims, and ey
                        •
                     d bright and cleare,
                  Well breſted, and of good proportion made:
                  Sterne of his looke, yet glad in port and cheare,
                  And in the Towne of Troy held great eſtate,
                  In all his actions wiſe and temperate.
               
               
                  A man ſurpaſſing in great eloquence,
                  And did ſo much his mind to ſtudy giue,
                  That he thereby attaind great ſapience,
                  And of all thoſe that in the Towne did liue.
                  In lands and goods he did them all ſurpaſſe,
                  Such and ſo great his gold and treaſure was.
               
               
                  
                     Anthenor was a ſlender man and tall,
                  Right circumſpect, and of good gouernment:
                  Diſcreet, and wiſe, and elopuent withall,
                  Copious in words, and one that much time ſpent
                  To ieſt when as he was in companie,
                  So driely that no man could it eſpie,
               
               
                  And therewith held his countenance ſo well,
                  That every man receiued great content
                  To heare him ſpeake, and prety ieſts to tell,
                  When he was pleaſant and in meriment:
                  For though that he moſt commonly was ſad,
                  Yet in his ſpeech ſome ieſt he alwaies had.
               
               
                  His ſonne cal'd Polidamus was moſt ſtrong
                  Of perſon, and of ſhape in each degree,
                  Like to his Father tall, and ſomewhat long,
                  Gentle and true, and ſoone would moved be
                  To anger, though he kept it covertly,
                  And yet it would be gon full ſuddainly.
               
               
                  King Merdon was large breſted, huge and tall,
                  Vpright and well compact of bone and l
                        •
                     m,
                  And of ſo good proportion therewithall,
                  That none therein might well compare with him▪
                  
                  His haire it was as yellow as the gold,
                  And finely curld, moſt pleaſant to behold:
               
               
                  Demure and ſtill, and kind to euery one,
                  And paſſing ſtrong all actions to aſſay,
                  Ne're vſing rigor vnto any one.
                  Delighting much in pleaſure, ſport, and play,
                  And one that wondrous feates in Armes achieu'd
                  While he amongſt the Troian Princes liu'd.
               
               
                  Queene Hecuba was faire, but pale and wan,
                  In members and proportion ſtrongly made:
                  Enclining more vnto the ſhape of man
                  Then woman, ſuch a manly corps ſhe had.
                  Right vertuous, wiſe, diſcreet, and womanly,
                  And did behaue her ſelfe moſt prudently
               
               
                  In all her actions vnto every wight.
                  In jeſture mild, demure in countenance:
                  And while ſhe liu'd did take a great delight,
                  Her ſervants, and her favorites t'aduance.
                  Vnto the poore moſt pittifull and kind,
                  Beſtowing almes with glad and liberall mind.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Andr
                           •
                        macha Prince Hectors faithfull wife,
                  In ſhape was like to Hecuba his Mother,
                  And was ſo chaſt and vertuous all her life,
                  That in her time there was not ſuch another.
                  And did in good behauiour much delight,
                  Her ſtature tall, her breaſt round, faire, and white.
               
               
                  With ruddy cheeks, not over coloured,
                  And peircing eyes moſt beautifull and cleare,
                  Her haire like gold, her lips were ſoft and red,
                  And alwaies did of colour freſh appeare,
                  Wherewith ſhe had a countenance right ſweet,
                  And poore and rich in friendly wiſe would greet.
               
               
                  And gaue good words to all and every one,
                  Perferring all poore ſuters as ſhe might,
                  And by her will there did not any one
                  With heauy heart depart out of her ſight.
                  And every man whatſoere, ſtood in need
                  Of ayd from her that was ſure thereof to ſpeed.
               
               
                  To them that had committed an offence,
                  She was ſo giuen vnto compaſſion,
                  That gladly with all care and diligence,
                  She got their pardon and remiſſion.
                  Such was her care her Subiects to preſerue,
                  And of each one good words and praiſe deſerue.
               
               
                  
                     Caſſandra was a Princeſſe beautifull,
                  And did in body good proportion beare,
                  Her colour white, her countenance baſhfull,
                  And in her face great ſtore of warts there were,
                  Whoſe onely ioy and chiefe felicitie,
                  Was chaſt to liue in pure virginitie.
               
               
                  And vertuouſly ſhu
                        •
                     'd imperfections,
                  Which naturally doe raigne in women kind,
                  And by leauing of all bad occaſions,
                  She did ſo much on learning ſet her mind:
                  That reading Bookes was her felicitie,
                  But moſt of all to learne Aſtronomie.
               
               
                  A Propheteſſe ſhe was, and could foretell
                  What future things ſhould happen and would be,
                  And therein while ſhe liu'd did ſo excell,
                  That ſhe was thought one of the Cybiles three
                  That liu'd on earth, whoſe fame ſo much ſurpaſt,
                  And ſhall doe while this mortall world doth la
                        •
                     t.
               
               
                  Of Polycene to ſpeake it were in vaine,
                  Or to declare the great perfection
                  Of beauty wherevnto ſhe did attaine,
                  And t'were in me a great preſumption,
                  To ſeeke therein your minds to ſatisfie,
                  For it aboue my ſimple reach doth lie.
               
               
                  Sith nature in the framing of this ma
                        •
                     d
                  Vſd all her Art, and to ſelfe-will was bent,
                  And by all meanes ſhe could deviſe, aſſaild
                  To make her beauty ſeeme moſt excellent,
                  And to her ſelfe ſayd in her proud conceit,
                  Behold and ſee my workmanſhip ſo great.
               
               
                  For as the ſonne aboue the clouds in skie
                  Shewes paſſing cleare; ſo is it in my might
                  My worke to adore and beautifie to th'eye,
                  By mixing of like faire and white,
                  With ruddy roſe in ſuch equallity,
                  That no exceſſe in them you may deſcrie.
               
               
                  And for to proue my ſaying to be true,
                  A pattern of my Art you may behold
                  In Polican, which if you marke and view,
                  I dare affirme is not to be controld.
                  Whom I muſt ſay, and know it very well,
                  In beauty doth all others much excell.
               
               
                  Thus did this Dame, of her moſt proudly ſay,
                  And ſure ſhe did not lie, for true it was,
                  Her beauty full as much, as doth the day
                  Excell the night, all others did ſurpaſſe.
                  Her body ſtraight, and middle fine and ſmall,
                  Her hands exceeding white, her ſtature tall.
               
               
                  And every other member whatſoere,
                  With due proportion was ſo faſhioned;
                  That great ſimplicitie in me it were,
                  (That am of Rethorick vnfurniſhed)
                  Her beawty to deſcribe, for ſure t'was much,
                  And truth to ſay, there ne're was any ſuch.
               
               
                  And therefore thinke it beſt to make an end
                  With her, for that mine Author ſaith no more
                  Concerning this: But doth his purpoſe bend
                  To ſhow their Knightly valor and their power,
                  While that the ſiedge did laſt, as you ſhall find
                  In this diſcourſe; and thus he tels his mind:
               
               
                  WHen cold and ſhiuering winter gan decline,
                  And drew his froſtie face from off the groūd,
                  Which made each tree & flower to mourne & whine,
                  When they in th'aire ſo cold: no comfort found,
                  When Titan had cleane paſſed Aquarie,
                  
                  And Piſces, in the Moneth of Februarie,
                  
               
               
                  And to the horned Ram his courſe did bend,
                  And on the mountaine tops his beames did ſmite,
                  And to each plant and tree did vigor ſend,
                  And cauſ'd the flakes of ſnow that are ſo white
                  To melt, and made the water to diſtill
                  Downe from the ſame, the valleys low to fill.
               
               
                  
                  When th'
                        •
                     ce which then vpon the Rivers flow'd
                  Diſſolved and with heate began to melt,
                  And with their ſtreames the medowes overflow'd,
                  And to each ditch and pit their largeſſe dealt.
                  When as the moſt delightfull time of ſpring,
                  With new freſh greene did comfort every thing,
               
               
                  By Phoebus gentle heate and temperature,
                  Which then aſſends the ſphere celeſtiall,
                  When March to Trees and hedges did procure
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     loſſomes, and th'equinoxiall,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hen as both day and night are of a length,)
                  Was halllowed and began to ſhow his ſtrength.
               
               
                  At that ſame ſeaſon ſweet and amorous,
                  The Greeks to ſhow their puiſſant force and might,
                  (As they that were of hearts couragious,)
                  Aſſembled many a ſtout and hardy Knight
                  In Athens, where a Navy huge they had,
                  And there their preparations all were made
               
               
                  To ſayle to Troy, whoſe number was ſo great
                  That never ſince this fatall world began,
                  So many Knights at once were knowne to meet,
                  Nor hath it ere been ſeene by any man,
                  That ſuch a Navy was aſſembled,
                  As by the valiant Greeks as then was led.
               
               
                  Whereof to ſhew and make deſcription
                  What every Prince vnto the ſame did bring,
                  My Author ſayth, that King Agamemnon
                  
                  A hundred ſhips with men and every thing
                  That needfull was, prepared at his coſt,
                  To joyne with that moſt huge and famous hoſt.
               
               
                  King Menelaus the cauſer of that fleet,
                  From Sparta brought threeſcore great ſhips and tall,
                  
                     Prothenor and King Archelaus there met
                  With fiftie ſhips, whereof ſome great, ſome ſmall.
                  From Sithmene with Duke Achedaphus,
                  
                  Came threeſcore ſhips, and with him Helenus.
                  
               
               
                  The Kings Epiſtraphus and Thedaus,
                  
                  Together brought full fiftie ſhips compleat:
                  King Telemon Aiax and Amphimachus,
                  
                  Duke Theſeus and Earle Dorion, with a great
                  And puiſſant Duke that was by name cald Tentar,
                  
                  With that ſame fleet their fiftie ſhips did venter.
               
               
                  
                     Nestor a Duke of furious mind and thought,
                  Whoſe choller was not eaſie to appeaſe,
                  Full fiftie ſhips from Piron with him brought:
                  King Thoas, and the King of Dianes,
                  
                  A hundred ſhips had in their companie,
                  Well fraught with Knights of great activitie.
               
               
                  And Thelamon ſurnamed Pel
                           •••
                        
                     
                  
                  Had 36 ſhips in his leading,
                  King Polidete and ſtout Amphimacus
                  
                  Did thirtie ſhips from Calidonia bring,
                  King Merdon and Idameus from Creet,
                  
                  Fourſcore good ſhips had with them in that fleet
               
               
                  
                     Vliſſes King of Thracia with him had
                  Fiftie faire ſhips well furniſhed with men;
                  Duke Meleus and Prothecatus both made
                  Proviſion of great ſhips in number ten.
                  And from the Iſle of Philiarcha, ſtrong
                  
                     Protheſilaus brought 50 ſhips along.
               
               
                  
                     Machon and his brother Polidrus,
                  
                  Twenty two ſhips did bring well furniſhed
                  From Trincico and out of Phicius;
                  
                  
                     Achilles did in his conduct then lead
                  Iuſt Fiftie ſhips; and from th'iſle Rhodomus
                  
                  Came twenty ſhips with King Thelapobus.
                  
               
               
                  And with a valiant Duke cald Antipus,
                  
                  From Heſida Eleaven ſhips there came
                  In company of Duke Amphimachus,
                  
                  That partner was in furniſhing the ſame.
                  
                     Polibethe
                           •
                        
                      the ſtout and valiant King,
                  Did fiftie ſhips from Recha with him bring.
               
               
                  And Duke Lifuiſus bare him company,
                  
                     Diomedes vnto this army brought
                  Fowerſcore great ſhips out of Caledony,
                  
                  And with him came two Knights that honor ſought,
                  The one of them they did Thelemus call,
                  The other was the mighty Duriall.
                  
               
               
                  And with the valiant Knight Poliphebus,
                  
                  Came ſeauen ſhips well rigd and furniſhed,
                  And in that puiſſant fleet King Phineus,
                  
                  Eleauen ſhips at his command then led,
                  
                     Prothoyelus of Demeneſa King,
                  Did fiftie ſhips with him to Athens bring.
               
               
                  King Carpenor from fertile Capadie
                  
                  With fiftie ſhips in likewiſe thither came;
                  King Tricorius from his countrie
                  Cald Borſa, to win honor great and fame,
                  wenty two ſhips vnto that fleete did bring
                  Well furniſhed with men, and every thing.
               
               
                  And many ſhips more in that fleet there were,
                  Then Guydo in his Booke doth mention,
                  (For that in honors works it doth appeare,
                  Whereas he ſeemes to make deſcription
                  Of all the Grecians ſhips) they were ſo many
                  Ahat ne're the like fleet had been ſeen of any.
               
               
                  
                  Accounting thoſe that with Palamides
                  
                  Came to their ayd, the number to augment,
                  Which being ready their to put to Seas,
                  And to the Troians full deſtruction bent:
                  With many a valiant Lord, Earle, Duke, & King,
                  In Athens where they were aſſembling.
               
               
                  King Agamemnon generall of all
                  That fleete, a Prince diſcreet and very wiſe,
                  When as his charge to mind he gan to call,
                  Did ſtudy how he might beſt way deviſe,
                  In that moſt cerious buſineſſe to proceed,
                  With honor as they fully had decreed.
               
               
                  Eſteeming it a point of wiſedome great
                  To foreſee all with care and diligence,
                  Their enterpriſe that nothing might it let,
                  Nor hinder their determined pretence:
                  That as with honor they began the ſame,
                  It might ſo end to their eternall fame.
               
               
                  Leaſt that through haſt and miſadviſedneſſe
                  They might oreſhoot themſelues and be deceiu'd,
                  And by orewhelming pride and wilfullneſſe,
                  Of their conceiued glory be bereau'd.
                  He cauſed all the Lords and Princes great
                  Which in the hoaſt together then were met,
               
               
                  To hold a counſell with him in the field
                  Without the Towne of Athens, where each one
                  His reaſons and his arguments might yeild
                  About their warres, as then in queſtion:
                  And when they all together did appeare,
                  He ſpake and ſayd to them as you ſhall heare.
               
               
                  My Lords and Princes all whoſe worthines,
                  Is ſuch and of ſo great account and fame,
                  That in good truth I cannot but confeſſe
                  The world is fild with glory of the ſame:
                  For without doubt the flower of Chivalry,
                  Is met together here in company.
               
               
                  For who ere ſaw ſo great a multitude
                  Of valiant Knights aſſembled at one time,
                  So young, ſo freſh, and all ſo well indued
                  With courage bold, and in the very prime
                  Of Youth, as we amongſt vs can afford,
                  And are together come with one accord.
               
               
                  So that if Fortune be not to contrary
                  In this ſame warre by vs now tane in hand,
                  And that the Gods cauſe vs not to miſcarry,
                  And our pretence of purpoſe doe withſtand:
                  We doubt not but great honor we ſhall gaine,
                  And of our foes the victory obtaine.
               
               
                  For ſure I deeme him wholly without ſence
                  And worſe then mad, that dares oppoſe or ſet
                  Himſelfe againſt our power to make defence,
                  Or any wayes our enterpriſe to let:
                  Or privily ſeekes to do to vs deſpight,
                  Or wrong▪ but we full ſoone would him 
                        •
                     require.
               
               
                  For I could in this great aſſembly find
                  An hundred Knights and more, ſo fierce and bold,
                  And that doe beare ſo valerous a mind,
                  That with their forces onely durſt and would
                  Adventure for to take this warre in hand,
                  And valiantly our enemies withſtand.
               
               
                  Preſume then what our forces ioynd in one
                  May doe, againſt the Troians to requite
                  The wrong that they of late to vs haue done,
                  For all you know how with their power and might,
                  They entred into Greece and bare away
                  King Menelaus deare wife, Queene Helena,
                  
               
               
                  With many priſoners more, and all the gold
                  And treaſure that in Cithera they might
                  Lay hold vpon, with reaſon then we ſhould
                  Not onely ſeeke revenge for that deſpight:
                  But boldly warre againſt them vndertake,
                  And I ſuppoſe we ſhall them ſo awake,
               
               
                  That they ſhall feare hereafter while they liue
                  To be ſo bold, to dare to take in hand
                  The like attempt gainſt vs, or ſeeme to giue
                  Occaſion of diſlike to Grecian land:
                  For which offence by them done to vs ſo late,
                  Our hearts within doe burne with deadly hate.
               
               
                  The heat whereof converts them to ſuch ire,
                  That it renewes our rage and deadly paine,
                  And day by day ſo ſetteth vs on fire,
                  That we by no meanes longer can refraine,
                  But with all ſpeed our mortall power advance,
                  For this our wrong on them to take vengeance,
               
               
                  As rite requires, and ſo iuſt cauſe allowes
                  Vs for to ſeeke revenge vpon our foe,
                  And therefore let vs now performe our vowes,
                  And valiantly with courage gainſt them goe:
                  That wee ſuch terror in their hearts may ſtrike,
                  That they ſhall ever feare to doe the like
               
               
                  In time to come, if by our patience
                  We ſhould as now with their great folly beare,
                  And overſlip this notable offence,
                  For never yet waſt knowne no man did heare
                  That Grecians wronged were in name or fame,
                  Or any thing done gainſt them to their ſhame
               
               
                  
                  But they acquit it to their enemies griefe,
                  And now to ſpeake the truth in this reſpect,
                  I muſt in few words tell you and be briefe;
                  It ſtands not with our honors to neglect,
                  Or overſlip the offence ſo lately paſt,
                  Leaſt in our teeth heereafter it be caſt:
               
               
                  And to our heires reproach it might be ſayd,
                  Their Fathers durſt not once reuenge their wrong▪
                  
                  And of the Troians forces were afraid,
                  Which may not be, ſith that we are ſo ſtrong,
                  And all agreed with one conſent and will,
                  Our whole deſire in this point to fulfill.
               
               
                  And therewith of ſuch puiſſant power and might,
                  That no man can nor may with vs compare,
                  Nor ever durſt preſume gainſt vs to fight,
                  But they were ſure in time the loſſe to beare.
                  But lately when the Troians made a venter,
                  And ſodainly within our land did enter
               
               
                  Vnwares to vs, and with great ſpoile then went
                  To Troy againe, with their preſumption:
                  I doubt they ſhall full haſtily repent,
                  For it is knowne to all and every one,
                  How that of late the Greeks with number ſmall,
                  Vpon the Troians for cibly did fall,
               
               
                  When as their King Laomedon was ſlaine,
                  (That father was vnto King Priamus,
                  
                  Who now within the Towne of Troy doth raigne,)
                  Which at that time was cleane deſtroid by vs,
                  And all we found therein put to the ſword,
                  And thoſe to whom we mercy did afford,
               
               
                  And ſau'd their liues, and from death them did ſpare
                  Yet liu'd in woe, (and may not be recur'd,)
                  Still mongſt the Greeks in ſervit
                        •
                     de and care,
                  How cap they now gainſt vs be a
                        •
                     hurd,
                  And hold vs fight (with all their chiualry,)
                  When as we haue ſo huge a company.
               
               
                  For if ſo ſmall a number did prevaile
                  Gainſt them as then, it's likely now we be
                  So many thouſands, we ſhall no
                        •
                     es 
                        •
                     a
                        •••
                     
                  
                  To win on them anoble victorie.
                  And yet I know the Troians do not ſpare
                  Their forces gainſt our commings to prepare.
               
               
                  By all the meanes they can for to withſtand
                  Vs and our power▪ if that they may indure,
                  Gainſt vs to let our entry in their land,
                  And to that end their friends they doe procure,
                  In every place whereas they are a
                        •
                     ed,
                  Determining the vtmoſt to abide.
               
               
                  And therefore ſith w'are like to find them preſt
                  And ready to incounter in battaile,
                  My counſell is, and ſo I thinke it beſt,
                  That ere that we out of this Haven ſayle,
                  (To th'end this iourney may be proſperous
                  And fall out well and happily for vs.)
               
               
                  To ſend to Delos Iſle, which little ſpace
                  From hence doth lie, so offer ſacrifice
                  Vnto Apollo Patrone of this place,
                  And there to craue his anſwere and adviſe,
                  To know how we in this our warre ſhall ſpeed,
                  If that you all thereto be ſo agreed.
               
               
                  This counſell given, their full concluſion
                  Was t'agree thereto, not one ſayd nay,
                  Nor gainſt the ſame made contradiction,
                  Determining as ſoone as ere they may
                  To do it with as much conuenient ſpeed
                  As well they might, and therein did proceed.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  ¶ How Achi
                           ••
                        es and Patroclus 
                     
                        •••
                     e ſent to Delos to re-ceiue anſwere from their God Apollo, to know how they ſhould ſpeed againſt the Troians.
                  
               
               
                  WHen Agamemnon in ſuch wiſe had ſayd
                  His mind, as you haue hard the Greeks agre'd
                  With one conſent, no time ſhould be delaid▪
                  
                  And preſently amongſt themſelues decre'd,
                  
                     Achilles and Patroclus both ſhould goe,
                  That God Apollos anſwere for to know.
               
               
                  And with all ſpeed they ſay
                        •
                     d to D
                           ••••
                        
                      Iſle,
                  Where hauing wind and weather proſperous,
                  They did arriue within a little while.
                  Which Iland as the ſtoty telleth vs,
                  Doth lie among the C
                           ••
                        l
                           •
                        d
                           •
                        
                      I ſle
                        •
                     , whereas
                  The ſay
                        •
                     ers f
                        •
                     nd ſo many rocks to p
                        ••
                     ſe.
               
               
                  And in the Sea cald Helleſpont doth ſtand,
                  Whereof to make a full deſcription,
                  Like as mine Authour Guydo takes in hand;
                  I muſt aw
                        •
                     ile make ſome d
                        •
                     greſſion
                  And from the ſequell of my 
                        〈◊〉
                      vary,
                  Although I meane therein not longe 
                        •••
                     y.
               
               
                  
                  Within this Iſle as I
                           •
                        ydore doth wright,
                  
                     Latona did two goodly children beare
                  By Iupiter her friend (who in deſpight
                  Of Iuno when as they in diſcord weare,
                  Got hir with child, as Ovid teſtifies,
                  (If that we may giue credit to ſuch lies.)
               
               
                  Whoſe names Apollo and Diana weare,
                  And after men therin did dedicate
                  A temple, that Apolloes name did beare,
                  And vnto to him was wholly conſecrate:
                  Where from the time of the foundation,
                  They honored him with great devotion.
               
               
                  Becauſe his beames that are ſo bright and cleare,
                  (Noes flood orepaſt which all the world oreflow'd,)
                  In that ſame Iſle were firſt ſeene to appeare,
                  
                     Diana likewiſe firſt her ſelfe there ſhew'd,
                  And to the world did giue her gliſtring light
                  With radiant ſtreams, & horns moſt ſharp & bright
               
               
                  Of which their apparition as men ſay,
                  This Iſle that is thereby ſo great of fame
                  Was Delos cal'd by Grecians at that day,
                  And euer ſince that time hath borne that name.
                  Which word in Greeke doth ſignifie, to ſhow
                  Or to appeare, as learned Clarkes well know.
               
               
                  And thus Apollo firſt was honoured,
                  And by the Greeks great reverence to him done,
                  Who with devotion likewiſe worſhipped
                  His ſiſter faire Diana cald the Moone,
                  That was by them a Goddeſſe held to bee,
                  And did in hunting take felicitie.
               
               
                  And ſo Diana faire that ſhin'd ſo bright,
                  And 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      in that Iſle were worſhipped,
                  (Becauſe the firſt appearance of their light
                  Vpon that place by radiant ſtreames was ſpread,)
                  And mongſt the Pagans honord and eſteem'd,
                  And great & mighty Gods by them were deem'd.
               
               
                  Vnto this Iſle is given another name,
                  For by the Greeks it's cald Ortigia,
                  
                  Cauſe Curlewes firſt were ſeene within the ſame,
                  For by the word Ortigias as they ſay,
                  The Grecians doe a Curlew vnderſtand,
                  That firſt engendred were within that land.
               
               
                  Some doe Apollo Titan alſo name,
                  Who long before that he was made a ſta
                        ••
                     e,
                  So much and ſuch high honor wan and ſame,
                  When he againſt great Iupiter made warre.
                  By other ſome likewiſe he's cald 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  And many giue him name of Phito
                           •
                        s.
                  
               
               
                  For that vnto his honor great, and glory,
                  He ſlew the ſerpent Phiton with his bow,
                  And of him wan a noble victory,
                  When they two fought here on the earth below.
                  For which his conqueſt Cupid did ſo rage,
                  That by no meames his wrath he could aſſwage,
               
               
                  But in diſpight an arrow did diſcharge
                  At him, wherwtih he peirſt cleane through his ſid
                        •
                     ,
                  And in his heart did make a wound moſt large,
                  That cauſed him much ſorrow to abide,
                  And of Phiton thus brought vnto his end,
                  Men ſay the Phitoneſſes doe deſcend.
               
               
                  Which women are that future fortunes tell,
                  And things foreſhow; as we in ſcripture find,
                  That one did raiſe the ghoſt of Samuell,
                  
                  At Saules deſire to pleaſe his wicked mind,
                  And in this Church the which is now ſo old,
                  There was a mighty Image all of gold,
               
               
                  Wherein the Divell by his pollicie
                  A fowle infernall ſpirit placed had,
                  The which gaue anſwere with great ſubtiltie,
                  To each demand that vnto him was made,
                  And not the Image dumbe as people thought,
                  And by Illuſion fooliſhly were taught,
               
               
                  And thus into great error they were brought.
                  And in the ſame did wilfully perſever,
                  Addoring ſtocks and ſtones, and neuer ſought
                  Vnto th'eternall God that liues for ever.
                  And in this wiſe Idolatrie began,
                  And through the world was vſd by ſinfull man.
               
               
                  Whereof I meane a true diſcourſe to make,
                  And ſhow how long it did mongſt men remaine.
                  And when they left and did the ſame forſake,
                  The holy ſcripture tels and ſhowes vs plaine,
                  That at the birth of Chriſt our Saviour,
                  All Images (which God doth ſo abhorre.)
               
               
                  Downe from their Altars fell and brake in 
                        •
                     under,
                  And they were then eſteem'd as things of nought,
                  Which moved man vnto no little wonder,
                  For when for Chriſt King Herod ſtrictly ſought,
                  And cruelly by perſecution
                  Brought many Children to deſtruction,
               
               
                  An Angell in a viſion did appeare
                  To Ioſeph as he ſlept, and bad him haſt
                  And into Aegypt Chriſt and Mary beare,
                  Till Herods cruell wrath was overpaſt:
                  And when as Chriſt in Aegipt entered,
                  The Images in pieces ſhiuered,
               
               
                  
                  And ſuddenly did fall vnto the ground,
                  As holy ſcripture doth vs certifie,
                  And Eſay long before as it is found,
                  Fore-ſhowed in his ancient Propheſie.
                  That when as Chriſt in Aegypt ſhould deſcend,
                  All worſhipping of Images ſhould end.
               
               
                  But as the Iewiſh hiſtories doe ſay,
                  
                     Iſmael, Abrahams baſtard Son ſhould be,
                  The firſt that made an Image all of clay
                  With his owne hands, and vſ'd Idolatrie.
                  And Heathens ſayd, Promotheus did invent
                  An Image firſt with full and ſole intent
               
               
                  To worſhip it, and vſe thereof did bring
                  Mongſt men on earth, which after did increaſe,
                  For Sinulachrum ſignifies no thing,
                  But onely a ſimilitude t'expreſſe
                  The forme of men, and doth the likenes beare
                  Of them, when as vpon the earth they were.
               
               
                  And by that meanes and wicked fond deviſe,
                  The Heathens did adore the ſhapes of men,
                  And to them vſd to pray and ſacrifice.
                  Some doe affirme King Belus firſt began
                  Within his land t'erect Idolatrie,
                  As all the Aſſirian Hiſtories ſpecifie.
               
               
                  And after his ſonne Ninus for his ſake,
                  Mou'd therevnto by great affection,
                  Did of pure gold his Fathers Image make;
                  Whereto with fooliſh fond devotion
                  And ignorance, he offered ſacrifice,
                  And vnto it did pray in Pay-nim wiſe.
               
               
                  And not content to do't himſelfe alone,
                  Commandement gaue throughout all Babilon,
                  
                  And all Th'aſſirian land, that every one
                  Should honor him as God, and call vpon
                  His name, and ſay, that he was Deified,
                  Which of no man in time durſt be deni'd.
               
               
                  And not long after that, within a while
                  A fowle infernall ſpirit therein crept,
                  Who ſeeking man by all meanes to beguile,
                  In ſuch an error blind the people kept:
                  That whatſoere of him they ſought to know
                  Or aske, he did it plainly to them ſhow,
               
               
                  And anſwere made vnto each mans demand,
                  Whereby in fine through all that countrie
                  The people did obay to his command.
                  And offring vnto God great iniurie,
                  Still more and more did into error fall:
                  This Image Belus, and ſome Bell did call.
               
               
                  Some Belphegod and ſome God Bala
                           ••
                        ,
                  
                  But moſt of all the people commonly
                  The name of Belzebub did giue to him,
                  Of Bell and Zebub which doth ſignifie
                  The God of Flies, and by this meane
                        •
                      we find
                  Idolatry crept in amongſt man-kind.
               
               
                  For ſome vpon old Saturne vſd to call,
                  (Who while he liu'd on earth was King of Creet,)
                  And did eſteeme him to be principall
                  Of all the Gods, and from the Planet great,
                  That hath ſo large a circle in the heauen,
                  (As Poets faine) that name to him was giuen.
               
               
                  This Saturne by his skill did well perceiue,
                  (For that he could of future things foretell)
                  That he a ſonne by Iuno ſhould conceiue,
                  That our of Creet by force ſhould him expell:
                  When he did once attaine to perfect age,
                  Which made him fall into ſo great a rage;
               
               
                  That to prevent the miſchiefe as he thought,
                  When it was borne, he did expreſly will
                  His wife that it to him ſhould ſtraight be brought.
                  But ſhe in doubt and feare he would it kill,
                  In ſtead thereof a ſtone vnto him gaue,
                  And ſo her ſilly infants life did ſaue.
               
               
                  Which ſtone with over great melancholly,
                  (Suppoſing it indeed to be his child,)
                  He did deuoure and eat vp gredily,
                  And ſo for all his skill he was beguild.
                  Three ſonnes he had as ſtories witnes beare,
                  Who Iupiter, Neptune, and Pluto were;
               
               
                  And but one daughter Iuno cal'd by name,
                  The eldeſt ſonne all men did moſt eſteeme,
                  (Cald Iupiter) attain'd to ſo great fame,
                  For of him all the world ſo well did deeme,
                  That they cald him the God of fier and aire,
                  As being Saturnes eldeſt ſonne an heire.
               
               
                  The Paynims did likewiſe great honour beare
                  To Mars, whom they the God of battailes call,
                  And alſo to Apollo bright and cleare
                  The cheriſher of herbs, and trees, and all
                  The flowers and fruits that earth doth vs afford,
                  And (as I ſayd) in Delos him adord.
               
               
                  Some vnto faire Dame Uenus vſ'd to pray,
                  Eſteeming her a Goddeſſe of great might,
                  That power hath t'aſſwage, and to delay
                  The fervent heat of pleaſures fond delight;
                  And t'eaſe the hearts of lovers that complaine,
                  And are faſt bound in Cupids fiery chaine.
               
               
                  
                  As ſhe whom they did thinke great rule to beare,
                  In every place throughout the world ſo wide,
                  Becauſe there is no countrey whatſoere,
                  But hath her mighty force and power tride.
                  And next to her, to Mercury they praid,
                  Which is the God of Muſicke as they ſaid,
               
               
                  And of all Eloquen ceand Poetrie
                  Eſteem'd to be the onely patterne:
                  Some others did vnto Diana crie
                  And cald for helpe, which is the forked Moone,
                  Which oftentimes is named Lucina bright,
                  And was eſteem'd a Goddeſſe of great might,
               
               
                  And Lady of all mutabilitie:
                  Becauſe ſhe is addicted vnto change,
                  And wholy giuen to varietie,
                  Delighting much in woods and wells to range,
                  And ſo are thoſe of ſuch a quallity,
                  That vnder her haue their nativitie.
               
               
                  Their whole delight is in new fangledneſſe,
                  And wauering ſtill in their affections,
                  Do addict their minds vnto vnſtedfaſtneſſe,
                  And by this meames in ſundry Regions
                  Idolatry began, and much increaſt,
                  And calling on the name of God, decreaſt.
               
               
                  For as I find the Moores or Morians
                  
                  On Iubam long ador'd and worſhipped:
                  The moſt Idolatrous Egiptians,
                  
                  With great devotion Iſis honoured,
                  Who was the firſt that vnto them did ſhow
                  The manner how the land to till and ſow,
               
               
                  And how they ſhould their letters make and frame
                  Thereby to read and wright, for which th'extold
                  And did ſo highly magnifie her name,
                  That for a Goddeſſe great they did her hold.
                  And Iupiter was worſhipped in Creet
                  
                  Whereas he had his chiefe and ſoveraigne ſeat,
               
               
                  And did command with great authoritie.
                  And for his armes an Eagle volant bare,
                  And cald the God of all the earth and skie,
                  Who as the Poets faine and doe declare,
                  His kingdome large in three parts did deuide,
                  Whereof himſelfe did rule the heauens wide.
               
               
                  The Seas to Neptunes government he gaue,
                  And to his brother Pluto did befall
                  The ruling of the earthly Globe to haue,
                  Whom Poets cal'd the Soveraigne God of Hell.
                  This Iupiter aforeſayd Deified,
                  And throughout all the world ſo magnified,
               
               
                  In Creet to his perpetuall memorie,
                  They did for him a Tombe and Image make,
                  And on him never ceaſ'd to call and crie,
                  And wholly vnto him themſelues betake.
                  The Latins with much care and diligence,
                  Vnto the Fawnes did vſe great reuerence.
               
               
                  By them cald Gods, (if it be credible)
                  That liue in woods & groues moſt freſh & greene,
                  The which are ſayd to be inviſible,
                  And by no liuing creature can be ſeene.
                  The Romaines did adore one Querinus,
                  
                  Who as they ſay was cald Romulus.
                  
               
               
                  That firſt did build the walls about their towne,
                  And through his valor and great worthineſſe,
                  From ſhepheards ſtate attain'd to high renowne, ſeene
                  And as their ſtories ſaith deſeru'd no leſſe,
                  Whoſe ſpeare head pitcht into the ground, was
                  To ſpring, & bring forth buds & bloſſoms green.
               
               
                  And for the vertues that in him were knowne,
                  The Knights of Roome that were of noble fame,
                  And had in countreis ſtrange their valors ſhowne,
                  Were vſually cald Querites of his name,
                  And ſo he was by Romaines Deified,
                  And in their Temples praiſ'd and glorified.
               
               
                  
                     Th'athenians did vnto Minerva yeild
                  Great honor, likewiſe was Pallas nam'd,
                  Who in his hand did beare a chriſt all ſhield,
                  And as it's ſayd, did in contention ſtand
                  Gainſt Neptune, with her women on her ſid
                        •
                     ,
                  And he with men, wherein they did abide
               
               
                  Long time to, know which of them two ſhold name
                  The noble towne of Athens, which as then
                  Was held to be a place of worthy fame.
                  Wherein there dwelt great ſtore of learned men.
                  At laſt t'agree, each ſhould ſome wonder ſhow,
                  That every man might judge & plainely know
               
               
                  Which of them beſt might claime the ſame by right,
                  And ſtraight out of the earth there did appeare
                  An Oliue tree (which Pallas by her might
                  Had cauſ'd to ſpring) that leaues & bloſſoms beare,
                  And ſhow'd as faire, as pleaſant, and as greene,
                  As ever any man in ſpring had ſeene.
               
               
                  
                     Neptune to ſhow his power & great command,
                  Did make a well of water to be ſeene,
                  And ſodainely there preſently to ſtand
                  In place, whereas nere any fore had bin.
                  The which when as Apollo great did ſee,
                  (Whom they had made their Iudge therein to bee)
               
               
                  
                  That diſcord and contention to ſurceaſe,
                  Conſidering with him ſelfe that Oliue tree
                  Doth ſignifie loue, amitie, and peace.
                  And water doth foreſhow the contrarie:
                  His ſentence he forthwith for Pallas gaue,
                  That ſhe to name the town ſhould th'honor haue.
               
               
                  Who therevpon did make no long delay,
                  But with demure conſideration
                  Did Athens call the ſame, that is to ſay,
                  An everlaſting place, an habitation.
                  For wiſedome there did firſt begin to floriſh,
                  And that ſame towne all learned men did noriſh.
               
               
                  Within the towne of Pauie they ador'd
                  Faire Citheron, and with great holineſſe,
                  Her ayd and help continually implor'd,
                  (Of whom before I did ſomewhat expreſſe,)
                  And in the ſame with great ſolemnitie,
                  Her Image ſtood vpon an Altar hie.
               
               
                  All guilt and painted braue and curiouſly,
                  Where as ſhe naked ſtood in water cleare,
                  With three faire Nimphes to beare her company,
                  That there to ſerue her ſtill attentiue were.
                  And round about her flowers for delight,
                  Of colour azure, red, and Virgin white.
               
               
                  And on her head to beautifie't they ſet
                  Great ſtore of Roſes red, faire, freſh and ſweet,
                  That placed were about a Chaplet,
                  And all her body downe vnto the feet
                  Annointed was with Balme, that did excell
                  For coſtlines, and oyles that ſweet did ſmell.
               
               
                  And by her ſat God Cupid with his bow,
                  Wherein he did an arrow alwayes beare,
                  Who for becauſe he is blind, and doth not know
                  At whom to aime, oft ſhoots he knowes not where,
                  And yet lets fly, and cares not where he hits,
                  As one that were cleane void of ſence and wits.
               
               
                  The Naxiens worſhipt Bacchus God of wine,
                  And vnto him their offerings dayly made,
                  Whoſe liquor is moſt precious, pure, and fine,
                  To comfort hearts of men and make them glad:
                  And doth refreſh the colour in the face,
                  And cauſeth then to ſpeake with liuely grace.
               
               
                  And maketh men oft times themſelues forget,
                  And without wiſedome or diſcretion,
                  To vtter that they ſhould keepe ſecret,
                  For where as wine once hath dominion,
                  It maketh them vnwarely diſcloſe
                  Their ſecret thoughts and minds vnto their foes.
               
               
                  Some men that ſerue God Bacchus for a ſeaſon,
                  Are many times ſo mad and without dread,
                  That they are like to men cleane void of reaſon,
                  And ſome of them ſo giddy in the head,
                  That being void of power, ſtrength, and might,
                  They cannot guide themſelues to ſtand vpright.
               
               
                  And yet will prate and prattle like a pie,
                  And till the force of wine in them is ſpent,
                  They looke with colour pale and daizled eye.
                  So women that to wine and drinke are bent,
                  Compared are to beaſts vnreaſonable,
                  And by men ſayd to be deteſtable,
               
               
                  And farre vnfit to come in company,
                  When as they can no reaſon well aford,
                  Nor vſe an honeſt kind of modeſtie,
                  And which is worſe ſcant vtter any word.
                  And thus doth wine with men full often fare,
                  And cauſeth them to quarrell and to iarre.
               
               
                  And furiouſly when as there is no need
                  To fight and braule, but wiſedome men forewarnes,
                  And wiſheth them the force thereof to dread,
                  Bids them ſtriue to ſhun ſuch drunken charmes;
                  And by reſtraint their feeble braines to ſpare,
                  Ere they therewith be taken in a ſnare.
               
               
                  And like to Aſpen leaues begin to ſhake,
                  As if they had a fever tertian.
                  Some others when their heads begin to ake,
                  And to a fever falls quotidian,
                  To them it ſeemes the houſe about doth turne,
                  And that the aire and Elements doe burne.
               
               
                  And when they haue loſt vſe of head and hand,
                  Are ſo much diſtraught of ſence and wit,
                  As that they feare to drowne vpon the land,
                  They doe like vnto ſenceles creatures ſit.
                  And drowfily begin to i
                        •
                     wne and gape,
                  And play with ſtrawes, and counterfet the Ape.
               
               
                  And ſit and nod with drowſie drunken head,
                  (Which in that caſe ſo heavy is and ſad)
                  As if thereon they had a cap of lead.
                  And they whom Bacchus liquor hath ſo made,
                  And are of ſuch a drunken diſpoſition,
                  Are fitteſt men for his Religion.
               
               
                  Who it is ſayd hath ſoveraigntie
                  Of hony, milke, and balme ſo precious,
                  But hath the moſt and greateſt dignitie
                  Ore Grapes, and Vines. This God pernicious
                  Is alſo by the Vintners much eſteem'd,
                  Becauſe he is to them ſo good a friend.
               
               
                  
                  The Lemicians vſed to relie vpon
                  Blacke Uulcan, whom the God of fier they call,
                  Who was a Smith by his profeſſion,
                  That forg'd the thunder-bolts which vſe to fall,
                  With huge and fearefull noyſe downe from the skie,
                  And furiouſly from Eaſt to Weſt doe flie.
               
               
                  This Uulcan married Venus, that ſo rare
                  Of beauty was, and held her for his wife
                  Long time, to whom a iealous mind he bare,
                  So that twixt them there aroſe a mortall ſtrife,
                  And for that cauſe he watched her ſo nie,
                  That at the laſt he found her ſecretly
               
               
                  With Mars the God of warre, her valiant Knight
                  Layd cloſely dallying with her in a bed,
                  Whereat he did conceiue ſo great deſpight,
                  That to her ſhame her falult abroad he ſpread,
                  And therein did the Goddeſſe much abuſe,
                  But God forbid that men ſhould ſeeke t'accuſe
               
               
                  Poore women for a matter that's ſo ſmall,
                  For if they do ſuch things of gentlenes,
                  They are therein for to be borne withall,
                  And let no man eſteeme of them the leſſe,
                  Leaſt he in th'end to them grow odious,
                  As ſmotery Vulcan was for doing thus.
               
               
                  And yet mongſt Paynims he was Deified,
                  But for that he ſo churliſhly did let
                  Their pleaſant ſport when as he them eſpied,
                  Therefore I haue him laſt in order ſet
                  Among the Gods, that honoured were as then
                  Of jgnorant and ſuperſticious men.
               
               
                  And thus this fowle Idolatrie began
                  As you heaue hard through falſe opinions,
                  And was continued long on earth by man,
                  Still erring in his fond affection:
                  Which is moſt falſe as ſcriptures plain do ſhow,
                  And ſuch as learned are full well do know.
               
               
                  For by the rule of holy writ we learne
                  How to deſpiſe thoſe falſe opinions,
                  And all ſuch ſuperſtitious to diſcerne,
                  Which are the Diuels meere jnventions:
                  And not long after that the world began,
                  By him put in the head of wicked man.
               
               
                  For when the Angels firſt created were,
                  He that of them was higheſt in degree,
                  (Of whom the Prophet Eſay witnes bare,
                  And ſaith, ſuch was his ſupreame dignitie.
                  That all the great and goodly Ceders greene
                  In Paradiſe, ſo faire were neuer ſeene.
               
               
                  Nor any Phirre nor Palme-tree could attaine
                  Vnto his hight, no more could any tree
                  What ere it was that ſtood within the plaine
                  Of Paradiſe, to him compared bee,
                  For beauty, and for comely feature,
                  For he ſurpaſt each other creature.)
               
               
                  When by his pride and great preſumption,
                  He ſayd he would be like to God on hie:
                  And in the North place his dominion,
                  He was caſt downe from heauen ſuddenly:
                  And vnto his moſt great and fowle deſpight,
                  Bereaued cleane of Gods moſt glorious 
                        •
                     ight.
               
               
                  And ſo confind into the pit of Hell,
                  With horror and with great confuſion,
                  For ever there perpetually to dwell.
                  Of whom t'was ſaid when he frō heaven was thrown
                  How didſt thou fall oh morning ſtarre ſo bright,
                  From mōgſt the radiāt ſtones that caſt ſuch light.
               
               
                  Whom men for brightnes Lucifer did call,
                  And Chriſt himſelfe doth ſay and witnes beare,
                  That he from heauen ſaw fowle Sathan fall,
                  Like to the fiery ſtreames of lightning cleare.
                  Whom Iewes cald Bemoth, which doth ſignifie
                  A curſed beaſt and full of crueltie.
               
               
                  And is the ſerpent cal'd Leviathan,
                  
                  Whereof moſt learned Iſodore doth wright,
                  That is ſo great an enemy to man,
                  And taketh all his pleaſure and delight
                  To haunt the Seas and waters troubled,
                  Of whom King David to vs Propheſied,
               
               
                  In his divine and moſt ſpirituall ſong,
                  Wherein he doth ſet forth to vs that beaſt,
                  The fiery and moſt furious Dragon ſtrong,
                  That hath his habitation, and doth reſt
                  Within the Seas, mongſt Snakes and Adders vile,
                  Deviſing how he may man-kind beguile.
               
               
                  The which a Monke cald Br
                           •
                        ndon once did ſee,
                  (In viſion when vpon the Seas he was,)
                  Into a fearefull pit caſt downe to bee,
                  And there was bound his curſed daies to paſſe;
                  Vntill the laſt and great, a generall doome,
                  When Chriſt with power to judge the world ſhould come
               
               
                  This curſed ſerpent he that did deviſe
                  (As in the holy ſcriptures we doe find)
                  To come to Adam, when in Paradiſe
                  
                  He was, and cauſe he hated all man-kind,
                  When as occaſion fit he did eſpie,
                  Deceaued him by diueliſh polecie.
               
               
                  
                  And that he might the better worke the ſame,
                  He tooke on him the ſhape of ſerpent ſlie,
                  With maidens face, and in that manner came
                  To E
                           •
                        a, and with great ſubtility
                  And face full ſmooth, himſelfe to her did goe,
                  And of her did deſire the cauſe to know,
               
               
                  Why God did them forbid to touch and eat,
                  The fruit that on the tree of Life did grow,
                  Of which, he ſaid the vertue was ſo great,
                  That it would make them good and evill know
                  And be as Gods, and ſo to her did giue
                  Two Apples, which ſhe tooke and did belieue
               
               
                  What he had ſaid, of which when ſhe had fed,
                  And vnto Adam given thereof to proue,
                  As he alleadg'd their eies were opened,
                  And for their guilt God did them ſtraight remoue:
                  And from terreſtriall Paradiſe did throw,
                  Commanding them the earth to till and ſow.
               
               
                  With ſweat of browes their living there to get.
                  And thus this moſt accurſed fiend of hell,
                  His mind vpon all wickedneſſe did ſet,
                  And into ſuch a rage gainſt mankind fell:
                  That taking face of woman for a while,
                  By his falſe tongue he did them ſo beguile.
               
               
                  And vs'd that filthy beaſt to worke his will,
                  And ſpake in her; and often doth the like,
                  I
                        •
                      them that are poſſeſt with ſpirits ill,
                  And forceth them to fall in ſuch diſlike
                  Of God and all his workes, that furiouſly
                  They curſe and blaſpheme God moſt horribly.
               
               
                  This wicked ſerpent cal'd Leuiathan,
                  
                  Continuing in his purpoſe as we find,
                  T'effect his curſed will gainſt ſilly man,
                  Devis'd to ſpeake in Idols dumbe and blind:
                  And cauſed man on them to cry and call,
                  And them t'adore with worſhip ſpirituall.
               
               
                  As they did vſe in Delos to implore
                  
                     Apollos aid. But Dauid doth declare,
                  That we ſhould all ſuch jmages abhorre,
                  And that the workes of mans own hands they are:
                  This ſhall ſuffice to ſhew how, where, & whan,
                  The worſhipping of jdols firſt began.
               
               
                  And I ſuppoſe that Guido ment hereby,
                  To ſhew the ſame, as thinking t'was not knowne
                  Vnto the world, and for to certefie,
                  How at the laſt it was cleane overthrowne:
                  As alſo that ſuch as vnlearned bee,
                  Theſequell of the ſame might plainely ſee.
               
               
                  And now I will proceed and briefly ſhow,
                  That when Achilles, and Patroclus were
                  Arriu'd in Delos Iſle, they ſtraight did goe
                  Vnto Appollos Temple, there to heare
                  What anſwere he would giue them in that c
                        •••
                     
                  
                  So doubtfull, where they ſtayd a little ſpace,
               
               
                  Before they did begin to ſacrifice,
                  Conſulting with the prieſts what courſe to take,
                  And after mature, counſell, and adviſe,
                  From them receau'd, they did their prayers make:
                  And certaine rich oblations did preſent,
                  Wherin when they much time & long had ſpent
               
               
                  Devoutly fore the Altar: at the laſt,
                  
                     Appollo did his eares to them decline,
                  And after certaine daies were overpaſt,
                  Made anſwere vnto them with vowe divine:
                  And ſaid, Achilles thou that now art ſent
                  To me, by all the Grecians full conſent;
               
               
                  Returne in haſt againe and to them ſhow,
                  That their deſire accompliſhed ſhall be,
                  And that to Troye they all ſhall ſafely goe,
                  And there take land, though with ſome difficultie,
                  But at the laſt ſhall gainſt their foes prevaile,
                  And after they haue fought many battaile,
               
               
                  At ten yeares end the towne of Troye ſhall win,
                  And cruelly put it vnto the ſword,
                  And noneſhall ſcape of all they find therein,
                  But ſuch as they ſhall mercy then afford:
                  For Priamus, and Hecuba his wife,
                  And all their Sons in that ſame mortall ſtrife,
               
               
                  The Grecians ſhall vnto confuſion bring,
                  And ſlay them all, and having done, the towne,
                  The houſes, walls, and every other thing,
                  Shall be defaſt and vtterly caſt downe:
                  This is, ſaid he, decreed by heavenly doome,
                  And in due time moſt ſure to paſſe ſhall come.
               
               
                  
                     Achilles with this anſwere was full glad,
                  And thanked God Appollo with his heart,
                  For his ſo good and gracious anſwere made;
                  And ere he out the Temple did depart,
                  By fortune Biſhop Calchos thither came,
                  To ſacrifice and pray in Priams name.
               
               
                  And for to know what iſſue he ſhould haue,
                  In that his warre gainſt Grecians tane in hand,
                  (This Calchos was both learned, wiſe, and graue,
                  And one of great account in Tr
                           •
                        yan land:
                  A man that did in ſcience much excell,
                  And could both ſtrāge & future things foretell.)
               
               
                  
                  Who offering to the God due ſacrifice,
                  (As in that caſe their vſuall manner was)
                  And praying on his knees in humble wiſe,
                  (Wherein he did ſome certaine howers paſſe)
                  
                     Apollo without tarrying or delay
                  Spake vnto him, and in this ſort did ſay:
               
               
                  
                     Calchas, Calchas, (twice calling him by name)
                  See that to Troye thou goeſt not backe againe,
                  For if thou doeſt t'will turne thee vnto blame,
                  For know for truth, and ſo I tell thee plaine:
                  (Wherein thou maiſt belieue and credit me)
                  Ere long time paſſe it ſhall deſtroyed be.
               
               
                  For ſure it is, and they can't notwithſtand:
                  Therefore thou ſhalt vnto Achilles goe,
                  And with the Grecians joyne in heart and hand,
                  And ſtay with them, for I will haue it ſo:
                  For they (as I haue ſaid) ſhall victors be,
                  And thereby win great fame and dignitie.
               
               
                  For ſo the Fates their honors will advance;
                  And thou to them by counſell wiſe and graue,
                  Shalt be a helper, aid, and furtherance
                  In their affaires, and of them thou ſhalt haue
                  Thy maintenance. Wherwith he ſtraight aroſe,
                  And preſently vnto Achilles goes.
               
               
                  Of whome with honor great and reverence,
                  He was receau'd according t'his eſtate,
                  And to him ſhewd his mind and full pretence,
                  And therevpon became confederate:
                  And vowed to be good friends one to th'other,
                  And ſo went out the Temple both together.
               
               
                  And ſpeedely made preparation,
                  To goe from thence, and preſently ſet ſaile
                  For Athens, where they did arriue full ſoone,
                  (For neither wind nor weather did them faile)
                  And landing there, did make no long delay,
                  But in all haſt the very ſelfe ſame day,
               
               
                  Vnto the Greekes a full relation made,
                  What they had done in Delos bout their charge,
                  And what to them the God Apollo ſaid,
                  Declaring all and every thing at large;
                  And how that they in thoſe their wars ſhould ſpeed,
                  And that the Gods together had decreed,
               
               
                  The Troyans ruine and deſtruction.
                  And alſo what Apollo likewiſe ſpake,
                  And vnto Calchas ſaid, and had foreſhowne,
                  And willed him agreement ſtraight to make
                  With Greekes, and not to Troye returne againe,
                  But with them ever after to remaine.
               
               
                  Where at the Grecks reioyc't and were full glad,
                  That of the Gods ſuch favour they had found,
                  And after that with one conſent they made
                  A league, and vnto Calchas ſtraight were bound,
                  And he to them, with promiſe on each ſide,
                  As friends for ever after to abide.
               
               
                  Which done, each one vnto his lodging went,
                  Till next day in the morne, when glooming night
                  By force of Phebus beames away was ſent,
                  And Sun began to ſhine moſt cleare and bright:
                  When as the Grecians offered ſacrifice
                  Vnto the Gods in moſt ſubmiſſiue wiſe.
               
               
                  And did devoutly hold a ſolemne feaſt
                  In Paynim wiſe, and in remembrance
                  Of th'anſwere which they had in their requeſt
                  T'Apollo made, and with great reverence,
                  Gaue thanks to him with glad & ioyfull cheare.
                  The Troyan Biſhop Calchas did appeare
               
               
                  Before them, and downe on his knees did fall,
                  Deſiring them to giue him audience,
                  To ſpeake his mind in preſence of them all,
                  And that thereat they would take no offence:
                  Which being granted, they did ſilence make,
                  And he with ſober countnance to them ſpake.
               
               
                  My Lords and Princes all aſſembled here,
                  Whoſe fame and honor great ſo much is ſprad
                  Throughout the world, that Nations farre & neare,
                  Continually of you do ſtand im dread:
                  Is't not your purpoſe vnto Troye to goe,
                  And there againſt your foes your ſtrength to ſho
                        •
                     ?
               
               
                  Why then do you deferre the time ſo long,
                  And ſtill within the towne of Athens ſtay,
                  Sith that you haue an armie huge and ſtrong?
                  Aſſure your ſelues nought's gotten by delay:
                  For tis the meanes to worke your hinderance;
                  And not the way your purpoſe to advance.
               
               
                  For thinke you, while that you ſo long abide
                  Here in this place, and make ſo much delay,
                  That Priam for himſelfe will not provide,
                  And doth encreaſe his forces night and day:
                  And hath his ſpies here mongſt you ſecretly,
                  That your proceedings to him certifie.
               
               
                  Me thinks this courſe you take is not the beſt,
                  For be aſſur'd King Priam is ſo wiſe,
                  That while you lie here ſtill and take your reſt,
                  He will not ceaſe by all meanes to deviſe
                  To helpe ſtimſelfe; delay is dangerous,
                  And may vnto yourſelues be perillous.
               
               
                  
                  And thus I prou't, for all the while that ye
                  Within the towne of Atheni ſtill doe ſtand,
                  You giue your enemie meanes and libertie,
                  To make your ſelfe the ſtronger to withſtand
                  Your forces, and at leaſure to provide
                  Great ſtore of men your comming to abide.
               
               
                  Therefore I ſay, you ought to haue more care,
                  Sith that as now it's by you all decreed,
                  Againſt your foes to goe, and to make warre,
                  And doe it with as much convenient ſpeed
                  As poſſible you may withall your might,
                  For when the Iron's hote it's time to ſmite.
               
               
                  For if you ſtay vntill that it be cold,
                  And doe your time neglect to worke thereon,
                  Then will it neither plie, yeeld, bend nor fold.
                  Therefore I wiſh you all for to be gone,
                  And while you do in hearts and minds accord,
                  Without delay, each man ſtraight go abord:
               
               
                  And make no ſtay to march againſt your foe,
                  That hath to you ſo great a treſpaſſe done.
                  How many daies haue you as now let goe,
                  And months ore-paſt, and careleſly ore-run?
                  How oft hath Titan from the Eaſt to Weſt,
                  Compaſt the world whilſt you here take your reſt.
               
               
                  And haue conſum'd your time ſo pretious?
                  How long and often hath the pleaſant air
                        •
                     ,
                  Caus'd by the gentle wind cald Zephirus,
                  
                  And ſeas that haue ſo oft been calme and faire,
                  But overſlipt by you, while you lie here?
                  It makes your foes ſuppoſe you doe't for feare,
               
               
                  And giues them cauſe t'eſteeme the leſſe of you.
                  Belieue me, (as to you I now am bound)
                  I will not ſpare to giue you counſell true,
                  Remember then (I ſay) how you haue found
                  The Gods to favour you in this reſpect,
                  And ſtill will do't, if you do not neglect
               
               
                  Their grace, and by your great ingratitude
                  And ſloathfulneſſe, provoke them to agree
                  An other doome againſt you to conclude.
                  For if that they do you ſo careleſſe ſee,
                  Think it not ſtrange if they do change their minds,
                  And vnto you at laſt ſhould proue vnkind.
               
               
                  I counſell you therefore now to be gone,
                  And ſee that you no longer tarrie heare,
                  And ere the time of harveſt doth come on,
                  While that the weather is both faire and cleare,
                  And pleaſant Summer bideth in his heat,
                  And fore the Winter comes that's cold & weat:
               
               
                  In ſeaſon freſh and greene put to the ſeas,
                  And in the name of all the Gods proceed.
                  (This is my counſell take it as you pleaſe,)
                  For ſith thereon you fullie haue decreed,
                  Make no delaie, but each man go to ſhip,
                  And let no longer time thus over-ſlip.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  ¶ How the Grecians Nauie putting from Athens were distreſſed by tempest at Sea; and how they tooke the Castle of Saranaba belonging to the Troyans.
                  
               
               
                  
                     CAlchas thus hauing ſpoken as you heare,
                  The Grecians thinking his adviſe ſo given
                  To be moſt true, all that aſſembled were,
                  Agreed vpon the ſelfe ſame day, at even
                  To enter ſhip, and Agamemnon then
                  By ſound of Trump did ſummon all his men,
               
               
                  To make all haſt they could to part away,
                  Who being alſo willing to be gone,
                  Did ſpeedilie take ſhip without delay,
                  And having pleaſant wind at will, full ſoone
                  Put forth to ſea with all their warlike band▪
                  
                  And preſentlie were out of fight of land.
               
               
                  (To tell how many ſhips they had were vaine,
                  Becauſe it hath alreadie beene declar'd,
                  But ſure it is moſt evident and plaine,
                  That nere tofore of like fleet hath been heard▪
                  
                  Nor ſuch a number of moſt valiant men,
                  As in their hoaſt aſſembled were as then.)
               
               
                  And being on the ſeas in weather cleare,
                  Full ſodainelie the wind began to riſe,
                  The aire waxt darke, & they therewith did heare
                  Huge thunder-claps 
                        •
                     ebound out of the skies:
                  Which with ſuch furie on their ſhips then ſtroke,
                  That many Maſts and Yards in ſunder broke.
               
               
                  The waues likewiſe did riſe ſo huge and hie,
                  And ſuch a ſtorme of raine and haile did fall
                  Vpon the Seas, that it did make the skie
                  To ſhew as blacke as pitch; and there withall
                  The lightning in their fearefull faces flaſht,
                  So mightily, that they were ſore agaſt.
               
               
                  
                  And every man began to call and crie
                  Vnto their Gods in that moſt fearefull caſe,
                  And made account aſſuredlie to die;
                  But Colchos who in knowledge did ſurpaſſe,
                  When he had made and ſaid ſome Oraſions,
                  By diveliſh charmes and inchantations,
               
               
                  Did ceaſe the ſtorms & cauſe the Sun ſhine cleare,
                  Which made their heauie hearts exceding glad,
                  And told them how the cauſe of that great feare,
                  And tempeſt ſore which they endured had,
                  Was for that faire Diana, diſcontent
                  With them, becauſe their courſe to Troye they bent.
               
               
                  And put to ſea ere they did her adore,
                  Or offer'd any ſacrifice at all
                  Vpon her Altars, or her aid implore,
                  Which made her in ſo great a rage to fall:
                  That if he had not found the meanes t'appeaſe
                  Her wrath, ſhe would haue drownd thē in the ſeas
               
               
                  Wherewith King Agamemnon preſently,
                  (Belieuing Colchos counſell) with all ſpeed,
                  Perceiving that his fleet not farre did lie
                  From th'Iſle Aulides, ſodainlie decreed
                  To land therein, where by good fortune he,
                  A little Chappell found therein to be,
               
               
                  That was vnto Diana dedicate.
                  Whereto with all the ſpeed he could he went,
                  To offer ſacrifice (thereby t'abate
                  Th'incenſed Goddeſſe Wrath) and after ſpent
                  Long time in prayer, vntill that it appear'd,
                  The ſeas of ſtorms & tempeſts all were clear'd.
               
               
                  But ſome men ſay and for a truth declare,
                  (As Ou
                           •
                        d long diſcourſe thereof doth make)
                  That Agamemnon did as then not ſpare,
                  His daughter Effigenia to take;
                  And on the Altar naked did her laye,
                  Suppoſing with his virgins blood to ſtay
               
               
                  
                     Diana's wrath, and he therewith would be
                  Appeaſed with them, but ſhe loath to behold
                  The virgin put to ſuch extreamitie,
                  (The bowels of her mercie to vnfold)
                  Inviſibly from thence did take the maid,
                  And in her ſteed a Hart on th'Altar laid,
               
               
                  Which Agamemnon thereon offered,
                  And with the ſame the Goddeſſe ſatisfied.
                  Which having done and all things finiſhed,
                  That therevnto belong'd, in haſt he hyed
                  Vnto his ſhip, and having weather cleare
                  Put to the ſea againe, without all feare
               
               
                  And by her aid and helpe, whome ſome do ſay
                  To be mans guide and chiefe direction,
                  When on the ſea or land, by night or day,
                  He travaileth, and her protection,
                  By ſuch as skill haue in Aſtronomie,
                  And ſeeke her fame t'extoll and magnifie.
               
               
                  Reported is, and found moſt ſtrong to be,
                  When as ſhe keepeth this her ſcituate
                  Within his tents and twelfth houſe by degree,
                  For in thoſe two ſhe is moſt fortunate:
                  And doth her cleareſt light on earth reflect,
                  If that ſhe be conioynd with good aſpect.
               
               
                  Of any other faire and happie ſtarre,
                  Which vnto men that travell is bening,
                  And in ſhort time ſaild on the ſeas ſo farre,
                  With wind ſo good that ſoone it did them bring
                  Vnto the coaſt of Troye, where on the ſtrand,
                  A Caſtle ſtrong at that ſame time did ſtand:
               
               
                  Ditcht round about, and wal'd exceeding hie,
                  With divers Towers therein both round & ſquare,
                  And hard by it a haven there did lie,
                  Which many faddomes deepe of water bare:
                  Where ſhips might ſafely anker and abide,
                  And gainſt all wind and weather ſafely ride.
               
               
                  (Which Caſtle though that Dares hath forgot
                  To name it, yet ſome Authors do it call
                  
                     Saranaba) where Grecians failed not
                  To enter, and their ankors there let fall,
                  Deſpight of all that offered to reſiſt,
                  (For at that time they might do what they liſt.)
               
               
                  Which onely were the garriſon of men,
                  That in the fort (to keepe and hold the ſame)
                  Were placed by King Priamus as then,
                  Who valiantly (to their eternall fame)
                  Aſſoone as they eſpyed the Grecians enter,
                  Came forth, and to reſiſt them did adventer.
               
               
                  With full pretence their landing to jmpeach
                  With all their power, if that it might preuaile,
                  But t'was as then too farre aboue their reach,
                  For then the Greeks did them ſo farre aſſaile,
                  That they could not againſt them long endure,
                  Though they ſuppos'd & did themſelues aſſure.
               
               
                  (Becauſe the Grecians long at ſea had laine,
                  And wearied with ſailing too and fro)
                  The victory with eaſe they ſhould obtaine,
                  But yet they did not find it to be ſo:
                  For it fell out with them vnhappily,
                  Becauſe they did it vnadviſedly.
               
               
                  
                  For when that they together fiercely met,
                  With pikes and other weapons for the warre,
                  And that their powers vpon each other ſet,
                  The Grecians did exceed the Troyans farre
                  In number, and as then did plainlie ſhew,
                  That Troyans to withſtand them were too few.
               
               
                  And had a farre vnequall match then found,
                  To fight againſt a power innumerable,
                  And yet they would not yeeld one foot of ground▪
                  
                  Till many of them were wounded, and t'weake
                  The Grecians fierce and angrie moods to ſtay,
                  That ſpar'd them not in cruell wiſe to ſlay,
               
               
                  And ſhew'd not any mercie what ſo ere.
                  So that of force they were conſtraind to run,
                  As faſt as ere they could in extreame feare,
                  The furie of their foes as then to ſhun:
                  (For truth to ſay, and brieflie to conclude,
                  They had gainſt them too great a multitude)
               
               
                  And by conſtraint abandoning the place,
                  To ſaue their liues vnto their Caſtle fled,
                  The Grecians hotlie following them in chaſe,
                  And leaving in the field great numbers dead:
                  Pell mell with them, got to the Caſtle gate,
                  Whereas perforce (vnto their cruell fate.)
               
               
                  They entred in, and did it fiercelie win,
                  And without mercie ſlew them every one,
                  And all the treaſure that they found therein,
                  Vnto their ſhips did beare; which hauing done,
                  Intending there to make no longer ſtay,
                  They brake the Caſtle downe & did it lay
               
               
                  Flat on the ground, which being cleane defaſt,
                  And not a ſtone left ſtanding, they decreed
                  To goe from thence, and making all the haſt
                  They could, did ſaile to Tenadon with ſpeed,
                  A Caſtle then within the Troyan land,
                  That ſix miles frō the towne of Troye did ſtand;
               
               
                  And not farre diſtant from the ſea was ſet▪
                  
                  Within a faire and pleaſant plot of ground,
                  And aire moſt wholeſome, freſh▪ and verie ſweet,
                  Environed with ſpacious plaines, and round
                  About it grew all kind of corne, and vines,
                  (Wherof they made great ſtore of pleaſant wines)
               
               
                  Fruits, hearbs, & flowers, of faire & ſeverall kinds,
                  And everie other thing that man could wiſh,
                  To ſerue his turne, with ſtore of Harts & Hinds,
                  Calues, Hogs, and Sheepe, and everie ſort of fiſh
                  That ſurging ſeas doth yeeld: ſo that it might
                  Be cal'd a place of pleaſure and delight,
               
               
                  In which the ſouldiers liu'd in all content.
                  Whereto when as the Grecians did arriue,
                  And fore it boldlie did themſelues preſent.
                  The Troyans hoping them from thence to driue,
                  Moſt part of them well arm'd with ſpeed went out,
                  And caſting forth a huge and hideous ſhout,
               
               
                  Marcht valiantlie againſt their foes (as then
                  Vpon the land, in faire and rich array,
                  And with ſo great a multitude of men,
                  That all the ſtrand and field along the way
                  Vnto the Caſtle walls, was covered
                  By them,) but yet the Troyans without dread
               
               
                  (Demanding not wherefore they came, nor what
                  They ſought as then within the Troyans land)
                  Aſſailed them with ſo great courage, that
                  The aire at their encounter hand to hand,
                  Did ſound with noiſe of Drum & trumpets braue,
                  And with the ſtrokes that either ſide then gaue
               
               
                  On helmets, ſhields, & armes, from whence the fire
                  In ſparkes flew out, and many a man was ſlaine,
                  And ſome lay wounded groveling in the mire,
                  Some bleeding and in great and deadly paine▪
                  
                  Their Horſes running maiſterleſſe about,
                  And all the field, and all the way throughout
               
               
                  Was fild with legs, armes, heads and hands of men,
                  Smitten off, and fiercelie hewd and cut in ſunder,
                  And thouſands on each ſide were ſlaine as then
                  (But on the Grecians part the greateſt number:)
                  The Troyans did ſo fiercely them aſſaile▪
                  
                  But all their force at laſt could not preuaile,
               
               
                  Againſt ſo great a power and multitude
                  Of Greekes, that then were fortie at the leaſt
                  Gainſt one of them, ſo that for to conclude,
                  They were conſtraind (as being overpreſt)
                  With all the ſpeed they could for to retire▪
                  
                  (Though wanting neither manhood not deſire)
               
               
                  To fight againſt their foes, and in great haſt,
                  As many of them 
                        ••
                      could eſcape a
                        •
                     ay,
                  And ſaue their lines, by force through th'enemy paſt,
                  And to the Caſtle go
                        •
                     , and that ſame day
                  Some road in po
                        •
                     ſt▪ & with no little feare,
                  The newes vnto thetowne of Tr
                           •
                        ye to beare.
               
               
                  And need they had
                        ••
                      flie with all their might,
                  For in the chaſe the Gr
                           ••
                        kes did them purſue
                  Vnto the gates, and never left till night,
                  But many of them in incruell wiſe then flew▪
                  
                  That ſtragling here and there did chance to light
                  Into their hands, as they were in the flight.
               
               
                  
                  Nor any one of what degree ſo ere
                  Was ſpar'd by them, nor ranſome would be tane,
                  Such hatred to the Troyans they did beare:
                  And when they had great nombers of them ſlaine,
                  They did beſiege the Caſtle round about
                  So cloſely, that they could not iſſue out.
               
               
                  Which doue, the bulwarks preſently they wonne,
                  And then with fierce aſſault they did aſſay
                  To ſcale the walls, but they within full ſoone
                  Mounting thereon▪ their furious moods did ſtay:
                  And draue thē thence with ſo great force & might,
                  Of ſtones, long bowes, & blows of coutl
                        •
                     s bright▪
                  
               
               
                  Pikes, Croſſe bows, darts, & wild-fier which they caſt
                  Downe from the walles, and did the ſame defend
                  So valiantly, that ſpight their hearts at laſt,
                  When as the Greekes with ladders did aſcend,
                  They were by thē thrown headlong down the wall,
                  And forſt with great deſpight on ground to fall.
               
               
                  Till at the laſt the Grecians gins did frame,
                  Wherewith againſt the Caſtle ſtones they threw,
                  And in ſuch wiſe they battered the ſame,
                  (That Troyans hardly could their faces ſhew)
                  And then againe their ladders rear'd vpright,
                  And mounting vp vs'd all their power & might
               
               
                  To enter on their enemies forcibly▪
                  
                  But Troyans nought abaſht, with valiant mood
                  For their defence at them let arrows flie
                  From off the walls, and mightily with ſtood
                  Their fierce aſſault, and beat them off againe,
                  At which time many Grecians prowd were ſlaine
               
               
                  By puſh of Pike, and huge and mighty ſtones,
                  Which from the walls they caſt, and therewithall
                  Did breake the Grecians necks, & bruiſe their bones,
                  And ſpight their hearts conſtraind thē down to fall
                  Vpon the ground, in pale and deadly hew,
                  But once againe the Greekes 
                     
                        •
                     h'aſſault renue.
               
               
                  And with ſo great a number did 
                        ••
                     ſaile
                  The Caſtle on all ſides, that in the end,
                  The Troyans forces cleane began to ſaile,
                  And were no longer able to defe
                        ••
                     d
                  Themſelues, when no ſucco
                        ••
                      they perceiued,
                  They waxed faint, and ſo at men bereaued
               
               
                  Of all reliefe, they did the beſt they might
                  To ſaue their lines, but Gre
                           •••••
                        
                      valiantly
                  Did enter, and in rage and great deſpight,
                  Kild all that were within moſt furiouſly▪
                  
                  And when the Caſtle ſtrong they had ſo woone,
                  They plaſt their enſignes on the walls, which done
               
               
                  They ranſackt it, and what ſo ere they found,
                  Gold, treaſure, and each other coſtly ware,
                  In packes and fardels they't together bound,
                  And to their ſhips with preſent ſpeed it bare▪
                  
                  And breaking downe the Caſtle, made it plaine
                  And even with the ground, and ſo againe
               
               
                  Returned vnto their ſhips, and when they had
                  Refreſht and eas'd themſelues, and to declare
                  They ioy for victory gaind, great triumph made
                  Their Generall, whoſe chiefe and ſpeciall care,
                  Was to reward each one in his degree,
                  Caus'd all his Captaines to aſſembled bee.
               
               
                  And all the treaſure they as then had wonne,
                  Brought forth & laid in open view, he made
                  To rich and poore like diſtribution:
                  But moſt to them that beſt deſerued had,
                  And ventured life and lim for honors ſake,
                  But he himſelfe no part thereof would take.
               
               
                  As having more deſire to win their hearts,
                  Then t'haue their goods, for he that's liberall,
                  And mongſt his ſouldiers willingly imparts
                  His treaſure, into danger nere doth fall:
                  And bountie wins their hearts, & doth them moue,
                  Their Generals to honor and to loue.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  ¶ How Agamemnon aſſembled all the Nobles 
                        •••
                      chiefe Commanders of the Grecians, where vp
                        ••
                      deliberation taken amongst them, they ſent 
                        〈◊〉
                      and Diomedes, Ambaſſadors onto Priam Ki
                        ••
                      of Troye, to demaund restitution of Queen Helena, and the domages done by Paris in the Temple of Cithera.
                  
               
               
                  THe treaſure dealt among them as you heare,
                  Commandment was by Agamemnon made,
                  That gainſt next day the Princes ſhould appeare▪
                  
                  Before him to conferre, and when they had
                  Tane reſt a while, and that the radiant light
                  Of Phebus gliſtring face, did ſhinemoſt bright
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the earth. The Grecions on the land,
                  And Agamemnon plaſt in royall ſeat,
                  With all his power which bout him then did ſtand,
                  And all the Princes there together met:
                  And placed were each one in his degree,
                  Silence once made, and oportunity
               
               
                  Then offered; The King with princely grace,
                  And pleaſing tearmes, as being eloquent
                  And very wiſe, roſe vp out of his place,
                  And ſhew to them his will and his intent:
                  Th'effect whereof in ſubſtance doth appeare,
                  Hereafter as you preſently ſhall heare.
               
               
                  My Lords (ſaid he) you know and muſt confeſſe,
                  That we of right and meere neceſſity,
                  Compelled are at this time to redreſſe
                  A wrong to vs done by the cruelty
                  Of Troyans, vnto whome we gaue no cauſe,
                  To breake the ancient God of peace's lawes.
               
               
                  True tis that we (as all the world doth know)
                  Are of ſufficient power, force, and might,
                  And are eſteemd and knowne of hie and low,
                  To be the men that able are to right
                  All wrongs whatſoere, & both by ſea & land,
                  T'effect ſuch things as we ſhall take in hand,
               
               
                  Deſpight of all that gainſt vs will reſiſt.
                  Yet I ſuppoſe, and't ever hath been ſeene,
                  That power which in it ſelfe doth not conſiſt,
                  Nor is puft vp with pride, hath alwaies beene,
                  And to the Gods is moſt acceptable,
                  And longeſt doth remaine vpright and ſtable.
               
               
                  For is there any one amongſt vs all,
                  But knows for truth, and can full well expreſſe,
                  What harmes and griefs do oftentimes befall,
                  By envie, pride, and diuelliſh wilfulneſſe?
                  And when by pride men take a thing in hand,
                  The Gods incenſt, their actions do withſtand,
               
               
                  And croſſe all thoſe that are ſuperbious.
                  For truth to ſay, it is avice abhord
                  Of every man, and held moſt dangerous,
                  For pride nought elſe but miſchiefe doth afford▪
                  
                  (Yet muſt we not for pride eſteeme or hold,
                  The valor in a man of courage bold.)
               
               
                  For he that vnto pride his mind doth giue,
                  Or doth converſe with one that's proud in heart,
                  And takes delight with ſuch a man to liue,
                  Can neither will nor chuſe but haue his part,
                  Of all ſuch croſſes as to pride befall,
                  Which commonly deſpiſed is of all.
               
               
                  And nothing doth impaire mans honor more,
                  (Of what eſtate ſo euer that he bee)
                  Then pride. Wherfore let vs the ſame abhore,
                  And from it, as from cruell viper flee:
                  And wholly race it out of heart and mind,
                  And ſo we ſhall the Gods more gracious find▪
                  
               
               
                  Eſpecially when as our quarrel's iuſt,
                  And that we ground it vpon equity,
                  But if that pride and envie ſhould vs thruſt
                  Into a warre without neceſſity;
                  Or lawfull cauſe, but onely of meere hate,
                  The end thereof would proue vnfortunate.
               
               
                  But all you know that we as now are here,
                  With full conſent within the Troyan land,
                  To be revengd for wrongs that long ſince were
                  By Priam done to vs, and for to ſtand
                  Vnto the triall of our cauſe by might,
                  Wherein we know we do nought elſe but right.
               
               
                  And to that end we haue begun t▪nvade,
                  And waſted, ſpoyld, and over-run his lands,
                  Deſtroyd, and rane his Caſtles ſtrong, and made
                  Occiſion of his men with warlike bands:
                  And many other harmes committed haue,
                  (Whereof himſelfe the firſt occaſion gaue.)
               
               
                  So that if he did hate vs heretofore,
                  (As by fore paſſed actions it appeares)
                  I dare well ſay he hates vs now much more:
                  And that if to revenge himſelfe it were
                  Within his power, you preſently ſhould ſee,
                  What ſtrange revenge by him would taken bee.
               
               
                  And yet tis ſure that they full well do know,
                  And heare of our arrivall in their land,
                  Although thereof they ſeeme to make no ſhow,
                  And what by vs is done they vnderſtand:
                  For that as yet it's freſh in memory.
                  So that if they were ſtrong vs to defie,
               
               
                  They would ſoone march to meet vs in the field,
                  Yet certaine tis their towne is huge and great,
                  And by all men invincible is held,
                  And fild with Knights therein together met,
                  Of their allies; ſo that ere we begin,
                  I know we ſhall ſmall vantage gainſt them win.
               
               
                  For he that in a quarrell iuſt doth ſtand,
                  And fighteth to defend his Countre
                        •
                     ,
                  Within a towne in his owne natiue land,
                  And hath great ſtore of faithfull friends that be
                  To him allied, more vantage hath thereby
                  To ayd himſelfe, then hath his enemy.
               
               
                  
                  For oftentimes the Raven doth withſtand,
                  And fights long with the Fawlcon in his neſt,
                  Before the Fawlcon gets the vpper hand,
                  And hath the meanes to flie and take her reſt,
                  While that the Fawlcon doth for her attend,
                  For birds will in their neſts themſelues defend.
               
               
                  I ſpeake not this (and ſo I pray conceaue)
                  To put your valiant hearts in any doubt,
                  Or once your minds of hope for to bereaue,
                  Of bringing this our enterpriſe about,
                  Which is, to ſpoile and vtterly confound
                  The Troyans and their towne, though it abound
               
               
                  With men and meanes againſt, vs to reſiſt,
                  And to defend themſelues for certaine time,
                  For 
                        •
                     re we from our enterpriſe deſiſt,
                  Which now you ſee is meerely in the prime,
                  We make no doubt but to deſtroy them all,
                  And bring them to their ends what ere befall.
               
               
                  But th'only cauſe why I theſe words nowvſe,
                  Is to diſwade you from preſumption
                  And pride of heart, leaſt that you ſhould abuſe
                  Yourſelues herein by indiſcretion:
                  And wiſely in this caſe ſo well provide,
                  That reaſon, and not will, may be your guide.
               
               
                  And ere we ſtirre from hence ſuch order take,
                  That we may reape great commendation,
                  And of our wars a happy end ſoone make,
                  For th'onor of the Grecian Nation:
                  For oft we ſee the want of good foreſight,
                  I ſpeciall cauſe to breed a man deſpight,
               
               
                  When as he vndertaketh any thing,
                  Without forecaſting what thereof may fall,
                  And in the end doth him to ruine bring.
                  It ſtands v
                        •
                     then vpon in mind to call,
                  What iſſue may enſue of our intent,
                  Leaſt that in  fine it maketh vs repent.
               
               
                  You know how firſt King Priamus did ſend
                  To vs to haue his ſiſter Exion,
                  
                  (By faire meanes, and to peace did ſeeme to bend)
                  Who yet is holden by King Tolamon:
                  
                  And how that we with one conſent deny'd
                  His ſmall requeſt, and boldly him defi'd.
               
               
                  Which vnto vs not any vantage brought,
                  But onely was the meanes of our deſpight,
                  And afterwards no little miſchiefe wrought▪
                  
                  For if that we by provident foreſight,
                  Had not deny'd; all harmes had been eſchewd,
                  That after by the Troyans were purſude,
               
               
                  At Cithera, nor yet the treaſure great
                  And coſtly jewels woone by Paris, had
                  Been carried vnto Troye (their regall ſeat)
                  Nor ſlaughter of our men by them been made:
                  Nor yet the woe that Helena procur'd
                  In Grecian land, ſo long therein endur'd.
               
               
                  Nor any wrong to Menelaus been done,
                  If we (I ſay) had well conſidered
                  Thereon, and him reſtored Exion:
                  
                  Nor had we been ſo fooliſhlie miſled,
                  To ſpend our treaſure and our goods in vaine,
                  To come to fetch Queene Helena againe:
               
               
                  With no ſmall coſts or charges to vs all,
                  And dangers great, as you may well ſuppoſe,
                  And yet we know not what may chance befall,
                  Or whether we in fine ſhall win or loſe:
                  Sith that nothing on earth is permanent,
                  But vnto alteration ſtill is bent.
               
               
                  And for that fortune all things can ſubvert,
                  And to a good beginning giue bad end,
                  All dangers therefore from vs to divert,
                  And wiſelie to begin that we pretend▪
                  
                  My counſell is ere further we proceed,
                  To ſend vnto King Priamus with ſpeed:
               
               
                  To will him to make reſtitution
                  Of Helena, as reaſon doth require,
                  And of all other wrongs vnto vs done
                  By Paris, vnto which our iuſt deſire
                  If he conſent▪ we may returne to Greece
                  
                  With honor, and all further troubles ceaſe.
               
               
                  But if he ſeeme this offer to refuſe,
                  And wilfullie reiecteth our demand,
                  Then ſhall we haue occaſion iuſt to vſe
                  All rigour whatſoere within his land:
                  To ſpoyle his towne, and lay it flat on ground,
                  And vtterly both him and his confound.
               
               
                  And two things will our action iuſtifie,
                  The one is, that our quarrell iuſt and right,
                  (Which to be ſo no man can well denie)
                  Will maintaine vs, and boldly for vs fight,
                  And vs and ours will lawfully excuſe,
                  But them condemne becauſe they did refuſe
               
               
                  Our iuſt demand to them firſt offered.
                  The other is, that through the world ſo wide,
                  All men will ſay, that we were iuſtlie led
                  To take revenge, and will hold on our ſide:
                  And them perpetuallie for ever blame
                  Of wilfulneſſe, to their erelaſting ſhame.
               
               
                  
                  And all extreames that by vs ſhall be vs'd,
                  Gainſt woman, child, or man of each degree,
                  For cauſes fore aledg'd will be excus'd
                  I
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     s, and we ſhall wholly freed bee:
                  Though that we kill and ſpoile them every one,
                  And ſhew no mercy vnto any one.
               
               
                  But yet before we enter thereinto,
                  My counſell is, this offer ſhould be made
                  To them, and that with ſpeed the ſame you do:
                  And by this meanes (as I before haue ſaid)
                  We ſhall great praiſe and commendation gaine;
                  Which ſaid, he ſat downe in his throwne againe.
               
               
                  But mongſt the Grecian Princes many were
                  Of cl
                        •
                     ane contrarie minds, and would not grant
                  That any ſhould ſuch meſſage from them beare
                  To Priamus, leaſt he ſhould brag and vant,
                  That they to him had ſent to craue amends,
                  And m
                        •
                     tion made with him for to be friends.
               
               
                  Yet ſuch as more experience ſeemd to haue,
                  To Agamemnons counſell did agree,
                  And to the ſame their free conſents then gaue,
                  That Diomed and Vliſſes ſent ſhould bee,
                  Their minds vnto King Priamus to ſhoe,
                  Who ſtraight without delay to Troye did goe.
               
               
                  At ſuch time as the Sun with radiant light,
                  (Had paſt along the whirling Hemiſphere)
                  At noone-time with his beames exceding bright,
                  Vpon each hill and valley ſhone moſt cleare:
                  And when vnto the towne of Troye they got,
                  They entered therein and ſtaied not,
               
               
                  But ſtraight vnto King Priams pallace went,
                  (For that the ſtreets directlie led them to't,)
                  Not ſhowing any man what their intent
                  As then might be, nor asking leaue to do't:
                  Intending without feare or any dread,
                  In their Embaſſage boldlie to proceed.
               
               
                  (And (truth to ſay) no man did them reſuſe
                  To enter nor to paſſe along the ſtreet,
                  For t'may be that as then they did not vſe,
                  For paſports or ſafe conducts to intreat
                  For meſſengers: but ſuch as in that ſort,
                  To any Prince or Countrie did reſort,
               
               
                  Had leaue to enter freely without doubt.)
                  And at the laſt they came to Ilyon,
                  
                  The which with admiration, round about
                  They viewed well, eſteeming it alone,
                  Surpaſt all others both in breadth and length,
                  Beautie, exceeding richneſſe, and for ſtrength.
               
               
                  And yet they wondred more (thogh't did thē good)
                  Within the court all pau'd with laſper ſtone,
                  To ſee a tree in midſt thereof that ſtood,
                  Which like vnto the Sun for brightneſſe ſhone:
                  But could not iudge it to be naturall,
                  Or made by workemen artificiall.
               
               
                  Or framd by divelliſh inchantation,
                  Or cunning of ſome learnd philoſophie,
                  Or whether t'was but meere illuſion,
                  And did appeare that t'was not to the eie:
                  And long they ſtood much troubled in their mind,
                  To ſee if that they could by reaſon find,
               
               
                  The ground of ſuch a woonderfull deviſe,
                  But t'was too hard for them to comprehend,
                  So that if nere ſo long they ſhould ſurmiſe,
                  Or on the ſame whole yeares in ſtudie ſpend,
                  To find the truth thereof t'was impoſſible,
                  And yet to all mens ſight t'was viſible,
               
               
                  And palpably for to be felt with hand.
                  The ſtocke whereof was gold moſt bright & cleare,
                  Which ſtraight as any Maſt or Palme did ſtand,
                  And did a huge and great proportion beare:
                  The height twelue cubits at the leaſt and more,
                  And many branches great and ſmall it boare.
               
               
                  Which large and wide all ore the place did ſpread,
                  And ſuch a breadth it bare, that round about
                  The court therewith was wholly ſhadowed▪
                  
                  The branches and the leaues thereof throughout
                  The tree in paires together coupled were,
                  The one ol gold, the other ſilver clere.
               
               
                  The fruit it bare was precious ſtones moſt fine,
                  Of colours white, greene, red, and ſaphire blew,
                  Which on the ſame exceedingly did ſhine,
                  And every day the bloſſoms did renue:
                  And on it hung with colours variable,
                  Which to the Grecians ſeemd moſt admirable.
               
               
                  Who having long beheld it, at the laſt
                  Went forward with intent t'effect their charge,
                  And never ſtaid but through the pallace paſt,
                  So long, till that into a chamber large
                  They entered, whereas King Priamus
                  
                  Sat in a throane moſt rich and ſumptous.
               
               
                  Accompanied with his Nobilitie,
                  Who all along the chamber on each ſide,
                  About him ſat with princely maieſtie,
                  On whome the Greeks (which did exceed in pride,
                  With viſage ſterne, and froward countenance,
                  As having then but ſmall rememberance
               
               
                  
                  Of honor) look't moſt boldlie in the face,
                  And without any curteſie or word
                  Once offered, ſat downe and tooke their place,
                  Right oppoſite againſt the counſell bord:
                  And there regarding not the Maieſtie
                  O
                        •
                      
                     Priamus, nor his Nobilitie,
               
               
                  When they had paws'd awhile, with courage bold
                  
                     Vliſſes gan vnto King Priamus,
                  
                  Th'effect of their Embaſſage to vnfold,
                  So ſtoutlie, and with words preſumptuous,
                  That all that were aſſembled did admire
                  His pride, & mus'd what he would then require:
               
               
                  And ſaid, let it as now no woonder bee,
                  That we do vſe no kind of courteſies,
                  Nor honors at our entrie vnto thee,
                  To whome we are moſt deadlie enemies:
                  For where as ranckor and diſdaine takes place,
                  Great follie t'were to ſhew a flattering face.
               
               
                  And truth to ſay, whereas the heart with fire
                  Of envie burnes, and beares a deadlie hate
                  Vnto a man it never doth deſire
                  His welfare, but ſubverſion of eſtate:
                  To him and his, and therefore ile not ſpare,
                  Th'effect of our embaſſage to declare;
               
               
                  As it to vs delivered was in charge,
                  From Agamemnon our braue Generall,
                  Whereof in briefe our duties to diſcharge,
                  We tell thee plaine, and ſo we do to all
                  That here aſſembled are this preſent day,
                  That he hath ſent to thee for Helena.
                  
               
               
                  Whome thou from Grecians forciblie didſt take,
                  And gainſt all right and by meere violence,
                  Broughtſt her to Troye, of whome he wils thee make
                  Deliverie vnto vs, and ſtraight from hence
                  To ſend her to her Lord King Menelaus,
                  
                  Without delay, excuſe, or further pawſe.
               
               
                  He alſo asketh reſtitution,
                  Of all the wrongs and iniuries that were
                  By Paris in the Grecians Country done,
                  When he to rauiſh Helena was there;
                  And thou the ſame not onlie doeſt maintaine,
                  But Paris in his error doeſt ſuſtaine.
               
               
                  Whereof he willeth thee without delay,
                  To make amends, as reaſon doth require,
                  And ſo thou maiſt the Gods from vengeance ſtay,
                  If thou doſt grant to that he doth deſire:
                  (Whereto we counſell thee if thou beeſt wiſe)
                  But if thou ſeemſt this meſſage to deſpiſe,
               
               
                  And wilt refuſe to grant vnto the ſame,
                  Aſſure thy ſelfe, and thou ſhalt find it true,
                  (Wherein none but thy ſelfe ſhall beare the blame,)
                  Both thou and thine hereafter ſhall it rue:
                  Vnleſſe herein ſome order thou doſt take,
                  For nought but cruell death an end ſhall make
               
               
                  Twixt thee and vs of this contention,
                  For thou and thine in fine deſtroid ſhall be,
                  Without all pittie or redemption;
                  And which is more, and ſay I told it thee,
                  Thy towne which now is built ſo huge & ſtrong,
                  Againſt our force ſhall not continue long.
               
               
                  But we will beat it downe & lay't fulllow,
                  And vtterly in great deſpight and rage,
                  The houſes, wals, & towers thereof orethrow,
                  Vnleſſe our angrie moods thou doſt aſſwage:
                  Seeme not therefore our counſell to deſpiſe,
                  But ſhew thy ſelfe herein for to be wiſe.
               
               
                  When Priam heard the Grecians with ſuch pride,
                  Before his face their embaſſage declare,
                  And in a manner ſeemd him to deride,
                  As though for him and his they did not care:
                  (Much mou'd thereat, & yet his furie ſtaid)
                  Vnto Vliſſes ſpake, and thus he ſaid;
               
               
                  I woonder much that thus within this place,
                  You dare preſume to make your prowd demand,
                  And (which is more) ſo boldly to my face,
                  As if that you the power had to command,
                  And me conſtraine your meſſage to obay,
                  And that thereto I durſt you not denay,
               
               
                  Nor yet deny what ere you do require.
                  I tell you plaine it doth offend me much,
                  To heare your prowd and inſolent deſire,
                  And (which is more) mine honor ſo doth tuch:
                  That (truth to ſay) I hardlie can refraine
                  To be reveng'd on you: but ile reſtraine
               
               
                  My wrath as now, and in my bounds will hold,
                  Yet nere the ſooner grant to your requeſt:
                  For know you ſhall, I will not be controld,
                  Sith you and yours I vtterlie deteſt.
                  And brieflie for to anſwere your demand,
                  It doth not with the regall honor ſtand
               
               
                  Of any King, to grant to your deſire,
                  Although he were in great extreamitie;
                  And (truth to ſay) great wrong t'were to require
                  That at his hands, which you demand of me:
                  And hardlie can I thinke (though you proceed
                  To do, as you do vaunt you haue decreed)
               
               
                  
                  You ſhall therein ſo much gainſt vs pre
                        •
                     aile:
                  For if it pleaſe the Gods, I tell you plaine
                  I will ſuch order take that you ſhall faile
                  Of your expected hope, and little gaine
                  Therby, although with vows you haue it ſworne,
                  And ſeeme as now both me and mine to ſcorne.
               
               
                  For your requeſt as everie man may ſee,
                  To aske of me a ſatisfaction,
                  Is without ground of truth or equitie,
                  Sith you your ſelues gaue firſt occaſion,
                  By killing noble King Laomedon
                  
                  My Father, and deſtruction of his towne,
               
               
                  With ſlaughter of his men, and many more
                  Great iniuries, (which if the truth were knowne)
                  All cauſleſſe, you haue done vs heretofore,
                  Which overlong as now were to be ſhowen:
                  For which my heart with griefe is ſo poſſeſt,
                  That while I liue it nere ſhall be at reſt,
               
               
                  Till that I be revenged for the ſame,
                  And for my Siſter Exion (if I may)
                  Whome you (although to your no little ſhame)
                  Led Captiue into Greece, and to this day
                  Still hold her there, not like to her degree,
                  Which you may well ſuppoſe much ſpiteth me.
               
               
                  And yet for all theſe wrongs you aske amends
                  Of me, that not long ſince, to liue in peace
                  (Sent vnto you to th'end we might be friends,
                  And that all former enmitie might ceaſe)
                  To pray you to ſend Exion home againe,
                  Which you not onlie ſeem'd much to diſdaine,
               
               
                  But ſpightfullie my meſſenger abus'd,
                  And threatning him with death for cōming there,
                  My iuſt demand to you then made, refus'd.
                  Wherefore ſith that to me ſuch ſpight you beare,
                  I will not heare nor grant to your requeſt,
                  So much I do your pride and you deteſt.
               
               
                  And die I will with honor in the field,
                  Before that to one point of your demand,
                  In any wiſe I will conſent or yeeld.
                  And to that end I let you vnderſtand,
                  That th'onelie thing that I as now doe crave
                  Is warre, not peace with you and yours to haue,
               
               
                  Sith you gainſt vs haue vs'd ſuch crueltie.
                  And know you ſhall that for your bold attempt
                  To threaten me, you preſentlie ſhould die,
                  But that the law of armes doth you exempt
                  From death, becauſe Embaſſadors you are.
                  Wherefore in haſt t'were beſt for you prepare,
               
               
                  With ſpeed to go from hence out of my ſight,
                  And void the towne aſſoone as ere you may,
                  For that to ſee you heare tis ſuch deſpight
                  And griefe to me, that I can hardlie ſtay
                  From iuſt revenge on you, ſuch is the rage
                  That moues my heart, & by no means will ſwage.
               
               
                  King Priamus this anſwere having made,
                  
                     Diomedes with ſcornfull ſmile then roſe,
                  And in diſdaine ſpake vnto him and ſaid,
                  If that our preſence now (as I ſuppoſe)
                  Be to thy heart ſo great a griefe and paine,
                  And makes thee rage, when as we are but twaine:
               
               
                  Then for a truth we let thee vnderſtand,
                  That thou ſhalt never while thou liu'ſt want woes,
                  To ſee ſo many Grecians in thy land,
                  And all of them thy ſtearne and deadlie foes:
                  Whoſe number are an hundred thouſand ſtrong,
                  That will be here before thy gates ere long.
               
               
                  Againſt whoſe mightie power invincible,
                  Though thou farre ſtronger wer
                        •
                      thē now thou art,
                  Vs to reſiſt it were impoſſible,
                  Wherefore I wiſh thee play a wiſe mans part,
                  And be advis'd, for t'will thee nought availe,
                  To ſtriue gainſt thē, for ſure thou canſt not faile,
               
               
                  Both thou and thine to die by Grecians ſwords,
                  Thy towne deſtroid and all that longs thereto,
                  Although thou ſeemſt to vſe ſuch hautie words,
                  And with thy tong ſpeak'ſt more thē thou canſt do:
                  But better t'were ſuch boaſting ſpeech to leaue,
                  And vnto our good counſell credite giue.
               
               
                  When Diomedes proudlie with diſdaine
                  Had ſpoken thus, ſome Troyans in a rage,
                  Drew out their ſwords, & would him ſtraight haue ſlaine,
                  But Priamus their furies to aſſwage,
                  Roſe vp, and with a countenance ſeuere,
                  On paine of death commanded them t'forbeare
               
               
                  From wronging ſuch as for Embaſſadors were
                  Sent vnto him, or t'offer them offence.
                  For though (ſaid he) a foole will not forbeare
                  To ſpeake without diſcretion, wit, or ſence;
                  A wiſe man muſt from raſh attempts ſurceaſe,
                  And wincking at ſuch follie, hold his peace.
               
               
                  For if a foole ſpeakes vnadviſedlie,
                  And by that meanes doth moue diſſention,
                  A wiſe man ſhould not haſtilie replie,
                  Nor ſhun no kind of indiſcretion:
                  For vnto fooles it properlie belongs,
                  For to bewray their follie with their tongues▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  And wiſe men ſhould be wary what they ſay,
                  And well advis'd in all their actions,
                  And both their hands and tongs diſcreetly ſtay,
                  From giuing cauſe to nouriſh factions:
                  For fooles by cuſtome indiſcreetly ſpeake,
                  And oftentimes into great choller breake.
               
               
                  But wiſemen can diſſemble what they heare,
                  And till that time and place convenient bee,
                  With th'vnadviſed rage of follie beare,
                  Which laſts not long, as commonlie we ſee:
                  And for my part I do you all aſſure,
                  That rather would I wrong my ſelfe endure,
               
               
                  Then to permit the leaſt offence that is,
                  For to be done by any man what ere,
                  (For things which they ſuppoſe to be amiſſe)
                  To any meſſenger that now is here
                  Within my Court, for tis not fit that we,
                  For everie ſmall offence reveng'd ſhould be.
               
               
                  For many times wrongs raſhlie offered,
                  When little cauſe or none to do't there is,
                  Whereof ſome great revenge hath followed,
                  For haſtiemen of woe doe neuer miſſe:
                  Wherefore I charge you everie one ſit downe,
                  And ſee that no man by preſumption
               
               
                  Attempteth for to wrong in any wiſe,
                  Th'Embaſſadors of Grecia hither ſent,
                  Nor furiouſly in malice gainſt them riſe:
                  But let them freelie ſhew the whole intent,
                  And ſcope of their embaſſage whatſoere,
                  And ſit you ſtill, while we with ſilence heare.
               
               
                  With that Aeneas roſe out of his ſeat,
                  (Which next on th'one ſide of King Priam was)
                  And in a furious rage and choller great,
                  Said to the King, with licence of your Grace,
                  I thinke when one without adviſe doth ſpeake,
                  That he not onlie well deſerues a cheake,
               
               
                  But puniſhment, that men by him may take
                  Example, how in open audience,
                  Such vproares and diſſentions they do make,
                  Thereby t'offend your roiall Excellence:
                  And (truth to ſay) it might ſo come to paſſe,
                  That I the bounds of reaſon might ſurpaſſe
               
               
                  In this reſpect, and haſtilie commit
                  A great offence, whereby your royall Grace
                  Might cenſure me to die therefore; but yet,
                  Ift were not for your preſence in this place,
                  I would revenged be vpon theſe twaine,
                  That haue ſo proudlie ſpoken in diſdaine
               
               
                  Of you, (for tis a moſt vnſeemely thing,
                  To heare a foole with great preſumption,
                  (In preſence of a high and mightie King)
                  Take on him without all diſcretion,
                  To ſpeak that which to him might breed offence,
                  And preiudice to his magnificence.)
               
               
                  To teach him how in better ſort to learne
                  To vſe his tongue, and when to hold his peace,
                  And of the perſons better to diſcerne,
                  To whome he ſpeakes, and not with ſuch exceſſe
                  As he hath done, that now before your Grace
                  So prowdly ſpoken hath, to your diſgrace.
               
               
                  For which I counſell him if he be wiſe,
                  Out of your Graces ſight with ſpreed to goe,
                  And not to ſtay long here, vpon ſurmiſe,
                  That what ſo ere preſumption he doth ſhoe,
                  The law of armes is his protection:
                  For if he do he'le feele the ſmartfull ſoone.
               
               
                  Wherewith Diomedes diſdainfully,
                  In proud and hawty words, and yet but few,
                  Did to Aeneas ſodainlie reply,
                  Saying, thy ſpeech ſufficientlie doth ſhew,
                  That without doubt thou art exceeding wiſe,
                  And that the Prince that followeth thine adviſe,
               
               
                  Or vnto thee his ſecrets doth impart,
                  Can never erre, nor do ought that's amiſſe,
                  Becauſe thou of ſo good a iudgement art,
                  That wilfullie without all good adviſe,
                  Prouok'ſt thy Prince the laws of armes to breake:
                  But would to God I might once with thee ſpeake
               
               
                  Alone, when oportunitie doth ſerue,
                  That I might thee requite for thy great skill
                  And curteſie, as thou doſt well deſerue,
                  Which if I liue aſſuredly, I will,
                  And thereof make account, for if we meet
                  In field, with other tearmes I will thee greet.
               
               
                  But wiſe Vliſſes riſing vp then ſpake,
                  And ſeeming Diomedes ſpeech t'excuſe,
                  Vnto him ſaid, now further words to make,
                  Or longer here more arguments to vſe
                  Meere follie t'were for vs: and to the King
                  He ſaid, ſith thou wilt do no other thing,
               
               
                  Nor make no further anſwere then thou haſt,
                  Weele ſtay no longer here, but ſtraight be gone,
                  And make relation (what twixt vs hath paſt)
                  Vnto the Grecian Princes every one:
                  And how we find thee obſtinately bent
                  To hearken, or to grant to their intent.
               
               
                  
                  And ſo without delay to horſe they mount,
                  And to the Grecians armies road in haſt,
                  And there to Agamemnon did recount
                  All what King Priam ſaid, and what had paſt
                  Twixt them in Troye, wherby the Greeks did ſee,
                  The Troyans purpoſe and intent to bee,
               
               
                  Not once to yeeld Queene Helena to ſend
                  To them againe, but valiantly to fight,
                  And gainſt their foes their Citie to defend,
                  And if they could by valour and by might,
                  Driue them frō thence, which though it pleaſd thē not,
                  Yet ſith they ſaw that ſuch had been their lot,
               
               
                  To vndertake that hawtie enterpriſe,
                  And that there was no other remedie,
                  They did conſult what waies they ſhould deviſe,
                  To helpe themſelues in their neceſſitie
                  Of victuals, and all other things beſide,
                  Whereof in haſt they did themſelues provide.
               
               
                  But firſt before I ſhew what meanes they made
                  To helpe themſelues, whil'ſt they fore Troye did lie,
                  I muſt declare what's of Aeneas ſaid
                  By Guido, who for truth doth certifie,
                  His father Duke Anchiſes was, and that
                  He on the Goddeſſe Uenus him begat.
               
               
                  And how that after Troye was cleane defaſt
                  And overthrowen, he ſail'd from thence by ſeas,
                  And having paſt by many Coaſts, at laſt
                  At Carthage did arriue, where for to eaſe
                  Himſelfe he ſtayd, and then tooke ſhip againe,
                  And ſail'd ſo long that with great toyle & paine
               
               
                  His ſhips arriu'd in Italie in th'end,
                  The which by him was wholly conquered,
                  And that Auguſtus Caſar did deſcend
                  From him, that was ſo highlie honored,
                  For many Conqueſts valiantly atchiu'd
                  By him, while on this earthly mowld he liu'd.
               
               
                  And Iuſtine that was Emperour a while,
                  (Within his booke Autentikes cald by name,
                  The Rubrikes of Aeneas did compile
                  In memory of him, becauſe he came
                  So long a iourney into Italie,
                  
                  And conquered it for his poſteritie.
               
               
                  Which long time held the ſame, and did defend
                  The regall ſtate thereof by valiant hand,
                  For Caſar did (aſt's ſaid) from him deſcend,
                  And firſt jmperiall Diadem in that land
                  Did weare: and by his pollicie and wit,
                  Ordaind the civill lawes to governe it.
               
               
                  What further of Aeneas travelling
                  You ſeeke to know: in Uirgill, you may ſee
                  The ſame at large, who writeth everie thing
                  By him atchieu'd, though ſome perſwaded bee
                  That Virgill was long dead and buried,
                  Before his booke was fullie finiſhed.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  ¶ How Agamemnon ſent Achilles, and Thelephus, into the iſland of Meſſa for victuals; and how they of the Iſle withstood the Greekes, and fought with them; in which battaile the King of Meſſa was ſlaine, and Thelephus was made King of Meſſa, by conſent of all the Nobility of the Iſland.
               
               
                  YOu heard how while Uliſſes did ſoiourne
                  With Diomed in Troye, what there had paſt:
                  And alſo what King Priam did returne
                  For anſwere to the Grecians: who in haſt
                  Vpon the ſame a generall counſell call,
                  Where in the full aſſemblie of them all,
               
               
                  King Agamemnon ſpake to them, and ſaid
                  My Lords (as well you know) tis now high time,
                  That care by vs ſhould ſpeedilie be had,
                  (And chiefly now while we are in the prime
                  Of our affaires) for things that needfull are
                  To ſerue our turnes, while we maintaine the war
               
               
                  Gainſt Troye; and firſt, that good proviſion
                  Of victuals ſhould be made, for if we faile
                  Thereof, t'will be our owne confuſion:
                  Which to prevent, and better to prevaile
                  In the enterpriſe which we as now pretend,
                  My counſell is, that preſently we ſend
               
               
                  (If you think't good) vnto an jſle hard by
                  Cald Meſſa, where great ſto
                        ••
                      of victuals are,
                  From whence we may in our neceſſity
                  Our ſelues thereof provide, without all care
                  Of ſending into Greece, and to that end
                  I pray you name whom you will thither ſend.
               
               
                  With which adviſe the Grecians all conſent.
                  Agreed amongſt themſelues that Thelephus
                  
                  And with him ſtout Achilles ſhould be ſent
                  To th'jſle of Meſſa rich and populous,
                  For victuals to ſuffice them and their hoſt,
                  And for to bring it thence, what ere it coſt.
               
               
                  
                  At which time in that fertile Iſland raignd
                  King Tenteran, that valiantly by might
                  The Scepter and the Crowne thereof obtaind,
                  And had with iuſtice, equity, and right,
                  Long ruled in the ſame in peace and reſt,
                  Till Grecians did his quiet ſtate moleſt.
               
               
                  Though ſome men do affirme that Meſſa lies
                  Within the bounds of the Sicilian King,
                  And that the name of Meſſa ſignifies,
                  Aboundance great, and ſtore of every thing
                  Which therein grew, and that it had the name
                  From Meſſena, a Citie in the ſame.
               
               
                  Exceeding rich and plentifull, from whence
                  Great ſtore of ſhips and veſſels laden were
                  With victuals, which they did convay from thence
                  To everie place and Countrie farre and neere:
                  Which for ſuch wares as to that jſle they brought
                  They did excange, and of thoſe people bought.
               
               
                  And ſome men ſay, that Meſſa named was
                  Of Meſſanus a King that rul'd the ſame,
                  Who in his time all others did ſurpaſſe,
                  For riches great, exceeding power and fame:
                  This ſhall ſuffice in breife to let you know
                  What Meſſa was: and now I will you ſhow,
               
               
                  That when the Grecian Princes had decreed,
                  That Thelephus and Achilles ſhould be ſent
                  To Meſſa with three thouſand men; with ſpeed
                  They put to ſeas, and ere long time was ſpent
                  Arriued there, and ſtraight their men did land.
                  But when the King thereof did vnderſtand,
               
               
                  He marched with an army to the ſtrand,
                  And there with horſe and footmen valiantly,
                  The Grecians power by force ſought to withſtand,
                  Giuing the onſet moſt couragiouſlie;
                  And gainſt them did a cruell fight maintaine,
                  Wherein great numbers of their men were ſlaine
               
               
                  On either ſide, and many wounded were,
                  That bleeding on the ground in great diſtreſſe
                  Lay, never likely armes againe to beare:
                  And in ſo great a rage and furiouſneſſe
                  Each partie did againſt the other fight,
                  That long it was ere that perceiue you might,
               
               
                  Advantage twixt them both; ſo equally
                  The battaile went, and at that time was fought:
                  Till in the end the Grecians valiantly
                  Draue backe their foes, but it avail'd them nought:
                  For preſently they were conſtrain'd to run,
                  And backe t'retire with ſpeed againe, to ſhun
               
               
                  The furie of the enemies that were,
                  Three to their one, that cruelly then ſlew,
                  And made to flie in great diſtreſſe and feare,
                  Which at that time they could not well eſchew:
                  But when with angry mood Achilles ſaw
                  His men ſo fiercely ſlaine, and forſt to draw
               
               
                  Backe to the ſtrond in great extremitie,
                  With trenchant blade in hand he entered
                  Amongſt the thickeſt of the enemie,
                  (Where many of his men in field lay dead,
                  And others wounded ſore, away did flie)
                  And there behau'd himſelfe ſo valiantlie,
               
               
                  That in ſhort ſpace he had recovered
                  The field againe, and in moſt furious mood
                  Feld, wounded, and before his feet lay dead,
                  All that he found, or him as then withſtood:
                  And therewithall his men ſo comforted,
                  And by his valor great encouraged,
               
               
                  That where before they fled and loſt their ground,
                  Their enemies were forced to retire
                  And flie to ſaue themſelues, and none was found
                  That durſt withſtand his fierce and furious ire:
                  For who ſo ere he met was ſure to die,
                  And none eſcapt, ſuch was his cruelty.
               
               
                  And ſure if that his valor, worthineſſe,
                  Exceeding force, and courage paſſing bold,
                  Had not prevail'd againſt the hardineſſe
                  Of Tentrans men, without all doubt they would
                  That day in field haue ſlaine the Grecians all.
                  But he like to a ſtrong & puiſſant wall
               
               
                  Withſtood them, & their ranks ſo fiercely brake,
                  That maugre all their power, he made them lie
                  In heaps before his feet, and way to make:
                  And at the laſt when as he did eſpie,
                  King Tenteran a braue and valiant Knight,
                  Like Lyon fierce defend himſelfe in fight,
               
               
                  And here and there the Grecians ſo oppreſt,
                  That many of them by him were fiercely ſlaine,
                  And beaten downe, and that he never ceaſt
                  To overthrow all that he could attaine:
                  He did not ſtay, but with moſt fierce deſire,
                  And heart that burnt with rage as hote as fire,
               
               
                  Made way through thicke and thin, & round about
                  Him kild his foes ſo faſt on every ſide,
                  That at the laſt he found King Tentran out
                  Whereas he fought, and with exceeding pride,
                  Gaue him a blow ſo fiercely on the creſt,
                  That't made his head bend down vnto his breſt.
               
               
                  
                  And then againe his blow redoubled,
                  And with the ſame ſo deepely did him wound,
                  That therewithall moſt grievouſly he bled,
                  And with a thrid blow ſtroke him to the ground:
                  And then from off his head his helmet rent
                  In furious wiſe, with purpoſe and intent
               
               
                  To ſtrike it off, and to that end did heaue
                  His hand on high with bloody ſword to giue
                  The Fatall blow, that ſhould his life bereaue.
                  (So much the ſlaughter of his men did grieue
                  Him at the heart, which he perceiu'd was made
                  By him alone, and that he onely had
               
               
                  Been cauſe thereof.) But ere the blow did fall,
                  Young Thelaphus that did by chance perceiue
                  What he would doe, to him in haſt did call,
                  And ſtepping forth did on his ſhield receaue
                  The ſtroake, and did Achilles friendly pray,
                  At his requeſt his furious mood to ſtay:
               
               
                  And for a while in Knightlie curteſie
                  To grant him life, ſith wounded ſore he lay
                  Before his feet, and ready was to die.
                  For every Knight (ſaith he) his wrath ſhould ſtay,
                  And on his foe ſome pittie ought to haue,
                  When he in humble wiſe doth mercie craue.
               
               
                  To whom Achilles ſaid, I marvaile why
                  You ſeeme to craue that I ſhould mercie ſhow
                  To him, and ſpare his life, who furiouſly
                  With pride (which in his heart did overſlow)
                  Would not vnto our juſt requeſt giue eare,
                  But without cauſe did armes againſt vs beare?
               
               
                  And with diſdaine and meere preſumption,
                  The Grecians in moſt furious wiſe aſſaild,
                  Though now againſt his expectation,
                  He findeth that it hath him nought availd:
                  And he himſelfe is fallen into the ſnare
                  Which for vs (as he thought) he did prepare.
               
               
                  Though we deſeru'd no ſuch thing at his hand,
                  As having no intent him to moleſt,
                  Nor yet by force t'invade him or his land.
                  So that if now he finds himſelfe oppreſt,
                  He can it not deny, but muſt confeſſe
                  His raſh attempt deſerved hath no leſſe.
               
               
                  But Thelaphus againe did him require,
                  Of knight-hood to take pittie on the King,
                  And for that time to grant to his deſire,
                  For while (ſaid he) my father was living,
                  He and king Tentran were confederate,
                  Though here as now he lies in woefull ſtate,
               
               
                  With pale and deadlie face vpon the ground,
                  Expecting when his ſoule ſhall hence depart:
                  And for that heretofore I haue him found
                  To beare a noble mind and Royall heart,
                  When I by chance paſt through his countrey,
                  Where he with all his Lords and chivalry,
               
               
                  (Received and feaſted me moſt Royally
                  In every place where I did ride or goe
                  Within his land.) So that humanitie
                  Binds me the like vnto him now to ſhow:
                  And in my mind his curteſie to beare,
                  Leaſt men ſhould ſay, that to vnkind I weare,
               
               
                  Which might heereafter turne to my diſgrace.
                  Wherefore that I in part may him requite,
                  I you beſeech take pittie on his caſe,
                  And ſpare his life as yo'are a noble knight.
                  Whereto Achilles preſently did yeild,
                  And there before his ſouldiers in the field,
               
               
                  King Tenteran vnto Thelaphus did giue,
                  To do with him as he ſhould thinke it beſt.
                  Who to behold him in that caſe did grieue,
                  And at his heart with ſorrow was oppreſt
                  To ſee there was no other remedie,
                  But that of force he could not chooſe but die.
               
               
                  And when the ſonne vnto the Weſterne part
                  With ſpeed declind, the battaile at an end,
                  And Tenteran did feele great paine and ſmart,
                  Yet no reliefe his woefull ſtate could mend,
                  For that his wounds ſtill more & more did bleed▪
                  
                  His men made all the haſt they could with ſpeed
               
               
                  To beare him thence vnto his court with eaſe▪
                  
                  And to that end they for a litter ſent
                  And layd him in't, and while he paſt the preaſe,
                  
                     Thelaphus and Achilles by him went,
                  And to his Royall Pallace him contraid,
                  Where in his bed when as they had him laid?
               
               
                  
                  Perceiving that he drew vnto his end,
                  For that his vitall ſpiri
                        •
                     s 
                        〈◊〉
                      to faile,
                  And nature vnto him no force could lend,
                  Nor ſurgery, no
                        •
                      Phiſike, ought prevaile,
                  Nor any comfort no
                        •
                      reliefe was left
                  To him, as then of worldly joyes bereft▪
                  
               
               
                  For Thelaphus and Achilles he did ſend,
                  And with a voice moſt feeble, faint, and weake,
                  And ſighs and teares faſt drawing to his end,
                  In woefull wiſe he did vnto them ſpeake,
                  And ſaid, my Lords, health, honor, high degree,
                  All worldly joy, and great proſperitie,
               
               
                  I wiſh vnto you both with all my hart,
                  But ſpecially to thee Prince Thelaphus,
                  
                  Who at this time ſuch favor doth 
                        •
                     mpart
                  To me, and art ſo kind and gratious,
                  That in my paines ſo grieuous and ſo ſtrong,
                  Thou ſeek'ſt my life if't might be to prolong,
               
               
                  But now alas there is no remedie
                  But die I muſt, and can it not withſtand,
                  For as you ſee here proſtrate I doe lie
                  Expecting th'hower, when from deaths cruell hand
                  The fatall blow will come to pierce my hart,
                  And that my ſoule out of my corps ſhall part;
               
               
                  To make an end of all my miſerie,
                  Which ſo much more increaſeth in my hart,
                  To ſee the hower of death approach ſo nie,
                  And that out of this world I muſt depart,
                  And leaue no heires within this Iſle to raigne,
                  The Crowne and Scepter thereof to maintaine
               
               
                  When I am dead, which by that meanes (alas)
                  I feare will ſoone be ſpoyld and ouer-run,
                  Which I full loath would be ſhould come to pas,
                  Sith that at firſt with labour great I won
                  And conquered it, and ever ſince by might
                  And warlike force maintained haue my right
               
               
                  Gainſt all my foes, for many yea
                        •
                     es now paſt.
                  Yet once it had been loſt without recure▪
                  
                  And I from thence had vtterly been chaſt,
                  But that I did the aid and helpe procure
                  Of Hercules the ſtout and valiant Knight,
                  Who by his extreame force and paſſing might
               
               
                  (Which at this day is freſh in memorie,
                  And while the world indures ſhall ever bee)
                  Orecame and vanquiſhed my enemie,
                  And did againe reſtore this Iſle to mee.
                  And while he liu'd the feare of him was ſuch,
                  And every man reſpected him ſo much,
               
               
                  That ſpight of all my foes, I did enioy
                  My Scepter and my Crowne in peace and reſt,
                  And no man durſt by word and deed annoy
                  My quiet ſtate, nor me in ought moleſt.
                  Whereby it doth appeare this little Iſle
                  Belongs vnto the Kingdome of Cicile.
                  
               
               
                  Where Hercules did place two pillars great,
                  (Which at this day are extant to be ſeene)
                  And for perpetuall memorie there ſet,
                  To ſhow how farre he in that land had beene▪
                  
                  Which pillars ſome men cald Columnia,
                  
                  And others did them name Herculea.
                  
               
               
                  Which Iſland once was in ſubiection
                  Vnto the Mores, and long time ſo remaind:
                  But after by the valiant Romaines won,
                  When they th'jmperiall diadem obtaind
                  Of all the world, and by their puiſſance
                  Their names & fames did farre & wide advanc
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  And after many valiant Conquerors
                  Succeeded had each other by degree,
                  And of the Towne of Roome been Emperors,
                  And therein ruld with power and Majeſtie:
                  One Fredericke the ſecond of that name,
                  That ſometime was an Emperor in the ſam
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  And King of Cicile by inheritance,
                  Becauſe he did a great affection beare
                  Vnto that Iſle, and in remembrance
                  Perpetuall of him, therein did reare
                  And make a huge and mightie Tower of bricke,
                  With wal
                        •
                     es that were exceeding ſtrong & thicke.
               
               
                  And cauſe the aire was pleaſant, good, & ſweet▪
                  
                  And that therein great ſtore of flowers were▪
                  
                  Some Authors doe report he named it
                  The new faire land, which name long time it beare▪
                  
                  And was therein by vſe continued,
                  Till that the Emperor Fredericke was dead.
               
               
                  
                  But to returne vnto King Tenteran,
                  
                  Whē he had vſ
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     e ſpeech which you haue heard,
                  And that he did perceiue his life began
                  To draw vnto an end, and therewith feard
                  The ſtroake of death, with pale and deadly cheare
                  To Thelaphus he ſpake as you ſhall heare:
               
               
                  My ſonne (ſayd he) ſith I from hence muſt paſſe
                  And leaue this world, (for neither force, nor might,
                  Intreaty, preſents, pardon, nor yet grace
                  Can ſaue my life) as equitie and right
                  Requires the ſame, here in the audience
                  Of all my Lords, to cleare my conſcience,
               
               
                  I tell thee, that the worthy valiant Knight
                  Thy Father Hercules, once conquered
                  This 
                        ••
                     and by his valor and his might,
                  And when that he therein had ſtabliſhed
                  A perfect peace, and all things quiet were:
                  Becauſe he did to me affection beare,
               
               
                  He freely did aſſigne and giue to me
                  The regall crowne and ſcepter of the ſame,
                  With all the Princely power and dignite
                  That thereunto belong'd, or he could claime,
                  And of him I it held I muſt confeſſe,
                  So that his ſtate therein was nere the leſſe.
               
               
                  And now for loue of him ſith I muſt die,
                  I giue to thee that which from him I had,
                  Which is the Crowne and ſoveraignty
                  Of this ſame Iſle, and likewiſe as he made
                  Me King thereof, I alſo thee create
                  King in my ſtead, to maintaine the eſtate
               
               
                  And dignity thereof while thou do'ſt l
                        •
                     ue,
                  And to thine heires for ever to remaine,
                  (Though) I confeſſe the thing which I thee giue,
                  Before vnto thy ſelfe did appertaine
                  By true deſcent and right paternall line,)
                  As Hercules did giu't to me and mine.
               
               
                  And to that end he ſayd vnto them all
                  That round about him ſtood, I doe declare,
                  That ſith the Gods out of this world do call
                  Me hence without an heire, and that you are
                  Left deſtitute of one to be your guide,
                  (To th'end that you all care ſhould ſet aſide,)
               
               
                  I heere doe make my will and Teſtament▪
                  
                  And by the ſame do grant aſſigne and giue
                  My ſcepter, crowne, and regall ornament
                  To Thelaphus, to hold't while he doth liue,
                  And after to his heires by true diſcent,
                  Which ſith it is my will and my intent,
               
               
                  I pray you all, as ſoone as I am dead,
                  Without delay let it performed be,
                  And ſet the regall crowne vpon his head,
                  And honour him as you haue honord me.
                  And after hauing written what he ſayd,
                  He pawſd a little while, and then he praid,
               
               
                  And hartily deſired Thelaphus,
                  
                  That preſently aſſoone as he was dead,
                  Of Knight-hood for to be ſo courteous,
                  To cauſe his body to be buried
                  With royall pompe and Princely funerall,
                  Fit for a King, and then turn'd to the wall,
               
               
                  And ſuddenly fell Parcas cut in twaine
                  This thred of life, and made him yeild his goaſt.
                  (Which as the Poets in their fables faine,
                  Straight tooke her way vnto Th'lizian coaſt.)
                  Whoſe body feard, and balm'd with
                        •
                     ut delay,
                  King Thelaphus a tombe of Marble gray
               
               
                  Cauſ'd to be made in rich and ſumptuous wiſe,
                  Whereon in golden letters he did place
                  An Epitaph, (the which he did deviſe
                  To ſhow how Tentran died, and what he was,
                  And how he gaue his crowne to Thelaphus,)
                  Whereof th'effect, In verſes ſix, was thus:
               
               
                  Here lies King T
                           •
                        ntrans body in this tombe,
                  Who by Achilles cruelly was kild
                  In fight, but ere of death he had his dombe,
                  By teſtament to Thelaphus he wild
                  And freely gaue the Crowne and Soveraignty
                  Of Meſſa Iſle, and ſo in peace did die.
               
               
                  Which being done, and every other thing
                  Performed with great pompe and royalty,
                  And Thelaphus of Meſſa crowned King
                  By full conſent of the Nobility:
                  And fealtie and homage to him made,
                  As they before to T
                           •
                        ntran promiſt had,
               
               
                  
                     Achilles ſtraight vnto his ſhips did carry
                  All things that he would aske, deſire, or haue,
                  That for the Grecians turnes were neceſſary,
                  As Corne, and Wine, ſuch as the ſoyle there gaue▪
                  
                  Fleſh, fiſh, fruits, fowles of every kind ſuch ſtore,
                  That he could not deſire nor wiſh for more.
               
               
                  And order with King Thelaphus did take,
                  That he ſhould there remaine to rule the land▪
                  
                  And when occaſion ſeru'd proviſion make,
                  Of ſuch things as the Greek
                           •
                        
                      in need did ſtand,
                  That at all times in their neceſſitie,
                  Of victuall they well furniſhed might be.
               
               
                  
                  Though willingly he would haue gone againe,
                  With him to Troy, but that Achilles pra
                        •
                     'd
                  And hartely deſird him to remaine
                  In Meſſa, that he might the Grecians ayd
                  When they in any need ſhould ſtand, & ſtraight
                  With all his ſhips with victualls fully fraught,
               
               
                  He ſayld to Troy againe, and ſoone did land
                  At Tenadon, and there relation made
                  What entertainment they in Meſſa found,
                  And how King Tentran then reſiſted had,
                  And valiantly the Grecians power aſſaild,
                  And without doubt againſt them had prevaild.
               
               
                  (As hauing three men to their one) but he
                  By valor ſlew King Tentran in the field,
                  Who being brought vnto extremitie,
                  And at the point of death, himſelfe did yeild.
                  And how before he died, he did conſent
                  And order tooke by will and teſtament,
               
               
                  That Thelaphus ſhould king of Meſſa be,
                  Whereto the whole Nobility agreed,
                  And Crowned him with great ſolemnitie.
                  And how that he had left him there, when need
                  Requird to make proviſion
                  Of victualls, and of munition.
               
               
                  And laſtly ſhewd what victualls he had brought
                  With him from thence, to ſerue them preſently,
                  Aſſuring them they need not doubt that ought
                  Should want to ayd them in neceſſitie.
                  Wherewith the Greeks well pleaſ'd, did much eſteem
                  
                     Achilles for his valour, thanking him
               
               
                  That he therein had been ſo dilligent,
                  And brought his charge vnto ſo good a paſſe,
                  Which done, he road vnto his tent,
                  Where he with great applauſe receaued was,
                  And welcomed of all his men, as glad
                  That he from Meſſa ſafe retourned had.
               
               
                  But now for that mine Author turnes his ſtile,
                  And leaues the Grecians power at Tenadon.
                  
                  And of the Tr
                           •••
                        ns actions for a while
                  Doth ſpeak▪ to ſhow what they meane time had don
                  To fortifie themſelues againſt their foes,
                  And then at large particularly ſhoes
               
               
                  What force they had procur'd, and ſeverally
                  The names of all the Princes doth declare
                  That came to Troy, and there couragiouſly
                  Their ayd did lend to Prians in the warre.
                  Which he ſo long and valiantly maintain'd
                  Againſt the Greeks, and finally obtain'd
               
               
                  (Although at laſt t'was his deſtruction)
                  Eternall fame, which death could ne're deface,
                  Nor tract of time put in oblivion,
                  But mongſt the rancks of worthies doth him place▪
                  
                  I will them orderly each one declare,
                  And ſhow what ſeveral names & armes they bare.
               
               
                  And firſt he ſaith, three Kings of noble fame
                  Came vnto Troy to ayd King Priamus,
                  
                  Their countries he omits, but doth them name
                  
                     Andraſtrus, Tapor, and King Pandarus,
                  
                  And with them full three thouſand Knights they brought,
                  That valiantly againſt the Grecians 
                     
                        •
                     ought.
               
               
                  And from the Iſle of Coleſon there came
                  Fiue thouſand knights that by foure Kings were led
                  The firſt of them King Carras had to name,
                  (A Prince for valor great much honored)
                  The ſecond called was Ima
                           •
                        ius,
                  
                  
                     Nestor the third, the fourth Amphimacus.
                  
               
               
                  From Licia land with Glaucus Valerius,
                  
                  So there came his ſonne and heire Prince Sarpedon,
                  
                  (Both were alied to King Priamus)
                  Who in thoſe warres great fame and honor won,
                  And with them three thouſand knights did bring,
                  Well furniſh't for the warres of euery thing.
               
               
                  Out of the famous rich Lariſſian land,
                  Two Kings there came to ayd the Troyan,
                  
                  Who with thē brought (the Grecians to withſtand,)
                  A thouſand Knights: and from Licacian
                  
                  The valorous Euphenius their King,
                  A thouſand armed Knights with him did bring,
               
               
                  By Hupon and by Epidus together
                  Fiue hundred Knights to Troy conducted were:
                  King Remus alſo did with him bring thither
                  Three thouſand Knights that ſilver armes did bear
                  Out of Tabaria Iſle, which diſtantlay
                  From Troy, a tedious, long, and dangerous way.
               
               
                  Foure Dukes likewiſe with all their chivalry,
                  And Earles eight (that great experience
                  Had in the warres) came in his cumpany,
                  Who without any manner difference,
                  When as they armed were within the field,
                  Did beare a creſt of Gold vpon his ſhield.
               
               
                  Whereby the King and all that with him came
                  Were known, although beſides thē many a knight▪
                  
                  Vpon their ſhields and pennons bare the ſame,
                  When they did enter in the field to fight.
                  From orientall Thracia the King
                  Cald Pilex, iuſt a thouſand Knights did bring.
               
               
                  
                  And Alchamus a Duke that with him came,
                  A hundred Knights in his conduction had.
                  
                     Pre
                           •
                        em
                           •
                        ſſus a King of worthy fame,
                  Great preparation in Panomie made,
                  Of men and armes to ayd King Priamus,
                  
                  With whom a valiant Duke adventurous
               
               
                  Cal'd Stupex was, and in their company
                  A thouſand Knights, all arm'd and furniſhed
                  With darts and ſpeares, wherewith they vſually
                  Doe fight, and are ſo well e
                        •
                     perienced
                  With them to throw, that when they liſt they can
                  Directly ſtrike and kill both horſe and man.
               
               
                  By nature they are wild and furious,
                  And of moſt cruell, fierce, and angrie mood,
                  Yet valiant Knights, and very ventrous,
                  In fight to ſpill and ſhed their enemies blood.
                  Their coūtries full of woods and deſart ground,
                  And nought but trees & groues therein are foūd.
               
               
                  For howſes very few or none there bee,
                  Their lodging is in woods and groues, whereas
                  Tis ſayd men oft and commonly doe ſee,
                  (When they along and through the ſame do paſſe,)
                  Moſt ſtrange and fearefull ſights of monſters fell
                  Not much vnlike the furious fiends of hell.
               
               
                  As Satyres, Faunes, by cornes and incubus,
                  (And ſuch like ſhapes of dum Gods as we,
                  In Poets bookes of tales incredulous,
                  Doe read within the woods and groues to be,)
                  Which often times put men in ſuch a feare,
                  That they doe ſeeme as out their wits they were.
               
               
                  From Boetine Iſle three Dukes together came
                  In company, all Princes valorous.
                  The one of them Amphimus had to name,
                  The other two Samus and Forcius.
                  
                  And with them full twelue hundred Knights they brought
                  That valiantly againſt the Grecians fought.
               
               
                  From Boetine land which doth ſo much abound
                  With Spices, gummes, fruits, Corne, wine, & ſtore
                  Of rare and holſome roots, which there are found,
                  Whereof no countrie hath the like, nor more.
                  Two braue and valiant Kings together came,
                  That Boetes and Epristius had to name,
               
               
                  And with them iuſt a thouſand Knights there were,
                  And from the land cal'd Paflagonie,
                  
                  The which as ancient Authors witnes beare,
                  So farre remote in th'Eaſterne parts doth lie,
                  That as they ſay, it is impoſſible
                  To travell to▪t, and cal't inuiſible.
               
               
                  Nor that it is not to be ſeen nor found▪
                  
                  But onely for becauſe it is ſo farre,
                  And yet tis ſayd the countrey d
                        •
                     th abound
                  In ſilver, gold, and precious ſtones 
                        •
                     oſt rare,
                  And that vpon a River great it lies,
                  (Which iſſues from terreſtriall Paradiſe.)
               
               
                  By name cal'd Tibris nere to E
                           •
                        phra
                           •••
                        ,
                  
                  Which Philomene a gyant huge and fell,
                  Whoſe admirable ſtature Guydo ſayes
                  (All other men for greatnes did excell▪)
                  A thouſand Knights in ſteele all a
                        •
                     med were▪
                  
                  And every one a goodly ſhield did beare▪
                  
               
               
                  Of Cu
                        •
                     rboilie all guilt and farely ſet
                  With precious ſtones, which forth the Rivers cleare
                  That iſſue out of Paradiſe are fet,
                  And from the Ethiopian land that nere
                  To India lies, came many a valiant man
                  With Perſes, and King Menon (he that wan
               
               
                  So great renowne and honor by his might,
                  And with him valiant Sigamon his brother,
                  Who alſo was a ſtout and hardy Knight.)
                  As Barons, Earles, Dukes, and many other,
                  Beſides three thouſand Knights all arm'd in ſteele
                  Which cauſ'd the Greeks full oft their force to feele.
               
               
                  And from the land of Therdo there came
                  With valorous and wiſe King Theſeus
                  
                  (That ſole and Soveraigne Prince was of the ſame)
                  His moſt renowned ſonne Archilagus.
                  
                  (Who both were of King Pri
                           ••
                        s royall blood.)
                  And iuſt a thouſand valiant Knights and good,
               
               
                  Beſides two Kings of great renowne and fame,
                  And paſſing rich of gold and euery thing
                  That man can wiſh, yet none of them doth name,
                  But ſaith that that they did from Agroſta bring
                  A thouſand valiant choſen Knights to fight
                  Againſt the Greeks, to trie their force and might.
               
               
                  And from Liſſinia land which fa
                        •
                     re did lie
                  From Troy, with prudent King Epiſtrophus,
                  
                  (Whoſe fame throughout the world abroad did 
                        ••
                     ie
                  As knowne to be a Prince moſt vertuous,
                  Diſcret, right wiſe, and provident withall,
                  Well learned in the Arts cald liberall.
               
               
                  In warre approu'd a ſtout and valiant Knight,
                  A counſeller in peace exceeding ſage,
                  And at that time a man of paſſing might.
                  Although as then he was well ſtricken in age,)
                  A thouſand Knights there came in company,
                  The proud and hauty Grecians to defie.
               
               
                  
                  Beſides an Archer ſtrange and monſtrous
                  That with him came, who ſuch proportion had
                  That to behold him it was maruelous,
                  For from his Navill vpward he was made
                  Like man in ſhape, and downeward like a horſe,
                  And therewithall of moſt exceeding force.
               
               
                  His vpward part like man proportioned,
                  Had skin as blacke as cole, and rough as beare,
                  And was with curled haire cleane covered;
                  His eies like to a burning furnace were
                  As red as fier, his face moſt horrible,
                  And looke exceeding fierce and terrible.
               
               
                  His vgly ſhape and diueliſh countenance
                  Was ſuch, it did the Greeks ſo much diſmay,
                  That whenſoere he did himſelfe advance
                  To ſet on them, they fled and ran away,
                  And ſtouteſt of them all for feare did quake,
                  He did ſo great a ſlaughter of them make.
               
               
                  Within his hand a bow he alwaies held,
                  Which he ſo well could vſe and had ſuch skill,
                  That whoſoere he hit to ground he feld,
                  And thouſands of the Grecians he did kill.
                  That they of him were in no little feare,
                  As in the ſtorie you at large ſhall heare.
               
               
                  Thus many Kings and Princes of renowne,
                  From diuers ſtrange and ſeverall countreis
                  Farre diſtant from the famous Troian towne,
                  Aſſembled were therein, as enemies
                  Profeſt againſt the Grecians, and to lend
                  Their ayd vnto King Priamus their friend.
               
               
                  Who with them brought well furniſh't for the warr,
                  Thirty two thouſand Knights adventurous,
                  (Beſides their Squiors) that armes & pennons bare
                  And ſhow'd themſelues in field couragions
                  Againſt their furious foes, and to conclude
                  There nere was ſeene ſo huge a multitude
               
               
                  Of Knights and Princes great aſſembled
                  Within one towne, not counting thoſe that came
                  From India, nor ſuch as were borne and bread
                  In Troy, and dwelt as then within the ſame.
                  Which were ſo many and ſo great a number,
                  That for to thinke theron twould make men wōder.
               
               
                  And more, if that it be conſidered right,
                  It is moſt ſure that ſince the worlds creation,
                  Or Phoebus on the earth did caſt his light,
                  There ne're was ſeen in any Nation
                  So many Kings and Princes met together,
                  As on both ſids at that ſame time were come thither
               
               
                  For all the flower of chiualry was there,
                  Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earles, Barons, Knights, & Squien,
                  And all their power of men that armes could beare,
                  With full intent and reſolute deſires,
                  Within the towne, for to defend their right:
                  Without the towne, to win it if they might.
               
               
                  Let them that read and doe peruſe this booke,
                  Conſider for what cauſe this warre began,
                  And if without vnpartiall eies they looke,
                  They ſhall perceiue that many a valiant man,
                  For ſmall or no occaſion loſt his life,
                  In that ſo needleſſe, ſtrange and bloody ſtrife.
               
               
                  For truth to ſay, for nought this warre began,
                  And nought there was on either ſide obtain'd,
                  For though the Greeks the towne of Troy then wan,
                  Yet if it be conſidered what they gain'd,
                  The ſtoryſhewes that when that all was don,
                  Their reckoning made, they loſt more thē they won.
               
               
                  For many thouſands of them there were ſlaine,
                  And loſt their liues before the towne of Troy,
                  
                  And neuer did returne to Greece againe,
                  The honor of their victory to enioy.
                  And thoſe that liu'd and backe to Greece did goe,
                  Did after end their daies in griefe and woe.
               
               
                  And on each ſide the flower of Chivalry,
                  Moſt woefully did end their fatall daies,
                  With hundred thouſands in their company,
                  And altogether (as the ſtorie ſayes)
                  That bloody quarrell then did vndertake,
                  For nought, but for a ſillie womans ſake.
               
               
                  Great pittie t'was ſo many Knights ſhould die,
                  And headlong run vnto deſtruction,
                  To end their daies in extreame miſerie,
                  For ſmall, or rather no occaſion:
                  Bettet it were at firſt to end or ceaſe,
                  A quarrell of no moment, then t'encreaſe
               
               
                  In malice, and reuenge for nought to take,
                  For wiſe men ſhold forecaſt what harmes might hap
                  nd ſeeke an end of ſmall debates to make,
                  Ere that they fall in wauering fortunes lap,
                  And ſo procure their owne decay perforce,
                  And after wiſh they had tane another courſe.
               
               
                  It is a vſe mongſt men when fier doth take
                  In any houſe or place, to ring a bell,
                  Or els ſome other noyſe or ſigne to make,
                  Thereby to warne ſuch as about them dwell,
                  To lend their ayd in that extremitie,
                  And ſpeedily to ſeeke for remedie
               
               
                  
                  Before it doth increaſe to greater fier,
                  T'were then too late and folly in a man
                  That comes to helpe, to aske or to inquire
                  Which way the fier in the howſe began,
                  And to neglect the quenching of the ſame,
                  When time doth ſerue for which he thither came
               
               
                  For danger doth require no delay,
                  And he that's wiſe doth commonly forecaſt
                  Such dangers as may fall in time, to ſtay,
                  For tis too late when as the time is paſt.
                  But now ile leaue the Troians for a while,
                  And to the Grecians armie turne my ſtile.
               
               
                  You heard that while the Grecians did abide
                  At Tenedon, how that they all decreed
                  To ſend to th'iſle of Meſſa, to provide
                  Such victualls as their puiſſant hoaſt ſhould need,
                  While they made warre within the Troian laud,
                  And how Achilles tooke that charge in hand.
               
               
                  Now while that he was gone and ſtaied there,
                  The noble King Palamides ariued
                  At Tenedon, with thirtie ſhips that were
                  All fild with valiant Knights the which reuiu'd
                  The Grecians hearts, as glad to ſee him there,
                  For that not any one of them but were
               
               
                  Sore grieued that he ſtaied ſo long behind,
                  As one they much eſteem'd and honoured,
                  And many of them great fault with him did find
                  That he had not at Athens muſtered.
                  Suſpecting him of partialitie,
                  But he to cleare himſelfe, and ſatisfie
               
               
                  Their minds, declard in open audience,
                  The cauſe whie he to Athens did not goe,
                  According to his promiſe and pretence,
                  And for to proue the ſame to them did ſhow,
                  That ſickeneſſe onely had procur'd his ſtay,
                  And forſt him to abſent himſelfe away,
               
               
                  So long from them, where with they ſatisfied,
                  Excuſed him for that which he had ſhowne,
                  And for becauſe they much on him relied,
                  And honoured him as ſecond vnto none.
                  Mongſt all the Greeks for bounty, power, & wit,
                  As being one for all attempts moſt fit:
               
               
                  For whatſoere he once did vndertake,
                  Moſt valiantly he would the ſame effect,
                  And ſpight of all that could reſiſtance make.
                  Nere leaue it off, nor any wiſe neglect,
                  Tell that he had acchieu'd his enterpriſe.
                  And in regard they knew him to be wiſe,
               
               
                  And of the greateſt reputation
                  Amongſt the Greeks that then aſſembled were,
                  They did intreare and pray him to be one
                  Of thoſe that ſit in counſell for the warre:
                  Which he accepting, they ſtraight waies agreed
                  For to beſiedge the towne of Troy with ſpeed.
               
               
                  But mongſt thē queſtiō grew what time they might
                  Vnto the towne of Troy moſt ſafely goe,
                  Some ſayd they thought it beſt when it was night
                  In ſecret wiſe to hoyſe their ſayles, that ſo
                  Without reſiſtance of the enemy,
                  They might take land with moſt ſecuritie.
               
               
                  But others ſayd great dangers might enſue
                  To them to ſayle the River in the night,
                  And ſpecially becauſe they hardly knew
                  The ready courſe, and that by chan
                        •
                     r they might
                  For want of light out of the channell ſtray,
                  And ſo caſt both their ſhips and men away.
               
               
                  Thus being of contrary minds they ſtayd,
                  And for that time made no concluſion,
                  But put it off and ſtill the ſame delaid,
                  And tooke not any reſolution,
                  What they would doe, but lay ſtill where they were,
                  As if their hearts had been poſſeſt with feare.
               
               
                  Till valiant Diomedes (grieu'd to ſee
                  Them lie ſo long at reſt in Tenadon,
                  
                  And that they could not mongſt themſelues agree,
                  Nor fall to any reſolution,
                  For to beſiege the towne of Troy with ſpeed,
                  As they at firſt and firmely had decreed)
               
               
                  Sayd vnto them, my Lords whoſe worthy fame,
                  Throughout the world both farre & neare doth flie
                  I cannot chuſe but needs I muſt you blame,
                  And diſcommend your great prolixitie,
                  That let the time thus paſſe as you haue don
                  For now a yeare is almoſt over-run,
               
               
                  And yet you ſtir not hence in any wiſe,
                  But ſtill lie here and giue your enemies cauſe
                  To thinke you do't for feare and cowardiſe,
                  And which is worſe, allow them time to pauſe
                  On their affaires, and at their libertie
                  Taugment their ſtrength, with opportunitie
               
               
                  Vs to withſtand and valiantly reſiſt,
                  Whereof aſſure your ſelues they will not faile,
                  For they not any day nor howre haue miſt
                  To ſeeke for ayd againſt vs to prevaile,
                  And bar their gates & make their walls moſt ſtrong,
                  For to withſtand aſiedge both great and long.
               
               
                  
                  And which is more, they haue their ſpies to ſee
                  And hearken what we doe here in our hoaſt,
                  And doe affirme and boldly ſay, that wee
                  Dare not effect the thing whereof we boaſt:
                  And longer that we in this ſort ſtill lie,
                  It giues more courage to our enemie.
               
               
                  But if we firſt had held another courſe,
                  Ere they had knowne thereof, and ventured
                  To land our men before their towne by force,
                  We had the ſame long ſince round compaſſed,
                  And ſtraight beſidge with this our puiſſant hoaſt,
                  And done that, which ere tis done, more wil coſt.
               
               
                  For be aſſurd ere we approacht the ſtrand
                  T'vnſhip our men, the
                        •
                     le iſſue out amaine,
                  With all their power our landing to withſtand,
                  And valiantly the fight gainſt vs maintaine,
                  By force and ſtrength ere we the ſhoare ſhall get,
                  To driue vs thence, if that they can vs let.
               
               
                  Whereas long ſince we might with eaſe haue got
                  The victory, but now by our delay
                  We muſt take that which fortune doth alot,
                  And with more loſſe to vs, doe what we may.
                  For now the time's delaid, it is moſt ſure
                  More danger vnto vs it will procure.
               
               
                  What ſhould I ſay, but tell you in good troth
                  That our delay and cowardiſe will bee
                  The cauſe of our great danger, which full loath
                  And ſorry I would be in heart to ſee.
                  And if therefore my counſell you will take,
                  I thinke it beſt that preſently you make
               
               
                  All ſpeed you can for to be gone from hence,
                  And ere the Sunne in morning doth appeare,
                  Hoyſe ſayles and put to Sea, (with full pretence
                  And courage bold, cleane void of any feare.)
                  To Sayle to Troy, and there land openly,
                  What ere falls out, for know aſſuredly
               
               
                  Without reſiſtance by the Troians made,
                  (Who valiantly will iſſue, vs to beard)
                  There is no landing for vs to be had,
                  And yet you muſt not therefore be afeard:
                  But ſet all feare and cowardiſe aſide,
                  And ſtoutly whatſoere fals out abide.
               
               
                  Which ſayd, the Greeks conſulting therevpon,
                  Determined with courage bold to make
                  What haſt they could, and preparation
                  For to be gou, and ſtraight their courſe to take
                  Vnto the towne of Troy, as doth appeare,
                  And in the Chapter following you ſhall heare.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  ¶ How the Grecians landed before Troy, where they were valiantly fought withall by the Troians.
                  
               
               
                  WIthin the former Chapter you did heare,
                  How that the Greeks in counſell being ſet,
                  With full and whole conſents agreed were,
                  All ſcuſes ſet apart, nought ſhould them let,
                  With ſpeed vnto the towne of Troy to ſayle,
                  And there the Troians valiantly t'aſſaile:
               
               
                  And that end to the next day they begun
                  To go abord their ſhips, with courage bold,
                  And when they had all things prepard and don
                  That needfull were, they did a counſell hold,
                  T'ordaine among themſelues, and to agree
                  How many ſhips ſhould in each ſquadron bee.
               
               
                  And which of them in for moſt ranke ſhould goe,
                  What courſe they ſhould vpon the Seas obſerue,
                  How they would land that no man might it know,
                  (Thereby their men from danger to preſerue,)
                  Whereto they did aſſigne a ſpeciall marke,
                  And ſo when as by ſinging of the Larke,
               
               
                  (Which commonly is fore the Sun doth riſe
                  At dawning of the day,) they did awake
                  And put Sea in braue and warlike wiſe,
                  And to the towne of Troy their courſe did take.
                  And firſt a hundred ſhips well furniſhed,
                  With ſtore of men and armes the way did lead;
               
               
                  Whoſe pennons and rich ſtreamers to behold,
                  Which on the ſeas did ſhow moſt cleare and bright
                  When they did them againſt the Sun vnfold,
                  Gaue vnto all that ſaw them great delight.
                  For nere before vpon the waues ſo greene,
                  The like triumphant ſight had not been ſeeene▪
                  
               
               
                  An other hundred more ſayld orderly
                  In rancks, to ſecond them that went before,
                  (Whoſe ſayles moſt proudly in the wind did flie,
                  And ſpread abroad) wherein there was great ſtore
                  Of valiant Knightts wel arm'd with ſword & ſpeare,
                  The Troians to withſtand without all feare.
               
               
                  
                  Next afder them in order brauely ranck't,
                  The reſt of their huge Navy followed,
                  The which on either ſide was ſtrongly flank't
                  With ſquadrons of great ſhips well furniſhed
                  With valiant Knights, whoſe number was ſo many,
                  That like to it had nere been ſeen of any
               
               
                  Vpon the Seas, and ſayling ſo together,
                  (Aſſiſted by Neptune and Eolus,
                  
                  That ſent them both faire wind & pleaſant wether,)
                  Their voiage was to them ſo proſperous,
                  That in one tide a ſight of Troy they had,
                  Whereto with all their ſayles hoyſt vp they made
               
               
                  Whoſe waving when the Troiaus did behold,
                  And ſaw that they drew nere vnto the ſtrand,
                  And by their countnance well perceiu'd they would
                  Deſpight of them (if that they might) take land.
                  In haſt they arm'd themſelues, which having don
                  They mounted on their horſes, and did run
               
               
                  As faſt as ere they could vnto the ſtrand,
                  Attending neither Earles, Prince, nor King
                  To be their guide nor over them command,
                  But furiouſly out of the gates did fling.
                  And in ſo great a number to behold,
                  That whē the Greeks thē ſaw, their harts were cold,
               
               
                  And ſtouteſt of them all was much diſmaid,
                  To find ſo many Troians on the land
                  (Well arm'd) that all moſt reſolutely ſtayd,
                  With courage bold their comming to withſtand.
                  Whereby they knew and certainely did ſee,
                  No landing for them there as thou to bee:
               
               
                  Vnleſſe that with the Troians they would fight,
                  And valiantly adventure for to land,
                  Or els like cowards take themſelues 
                        •
                     o ſlight,
                  And fall into their deadly, enemies hand:
                  For other refuge for them none there was,
                  But through the Troians ſword
                        •
                      & pikes to paſſe.
               
               
                  Which when King Pr
                           •
                        theſilaus did behold,
                  (Who of an hundred ſhips the conduct had)
                  He ſayd, that in deſpight of them be
                        •
                     ould
                  Set foot on land, and to that end 
                        •
                     e made
                  His ſhips and men in readines to venter.
                  By force, vpon the ſame ſtrand to ente
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  But when his Ships ſet forward to ariue
                  As nere vnto the ſhoare as well they might,
                  The wind did in their ſayles ſo ſtifely driue,
                  That on the land by force i
                        •
                      did them ſmight.
                  And ſome of them vpon the gittie ſtroke,
                  Which preſently in many peeces broke,
               
               
                  And moſt part of the men and ſhips were drown'd,
                  And ſcattered here and there contuſedly,
                  So that but very few of them were found
                  To make reſiſtance gainſt the enemy.
                  And thoſe that ſcapt & ſau'd theſelues frō hurt,
                  And got to land, all clad with mire and durt:
               
               
                  And for a while their enemies withſtood,
                  Were by the Troians ſlaine ſo cruelly,
                  That all the Sea was ſtained with the blood
                  Of Grecians, that vpon the ſands did he
                  Dead bleeding, and ſore wounded to the death,
                  Attending th'end to yeild their vitall breath.
               
               
                  And at that time the arrowes flew ſo faſt
                  And thicke into the aire, that all the skie
                  Did ſhow as if it had been ouercaſt
                  With ſome darke cloud, and ſtill and furiouſly
                  The Troians fought and euermore renew'd
                  Their number, and the Grecians ſo purſu'd,
               
               
                  And for the time ſo hotly them aſſayld,
                  That what defence ſoever they could make
                  Availd them not, for Troians ſtill prevaild,
                  And valiantly conſtraind them to giue backe.
                  With loſſe of many men and great diſgrace,
                  And finally perforce to leaue the place,
               
               
                  Whereas they fought with much extremitie,
                  And griefe to ſee their landing proue 
                        •
                     o bad,
                  Vnfortunate and dangerous to be,
                  And yet for all that they indured had,
                  They fainted not, but ſtill continued
                  The fight on ſhoare: for they were ſeconded
               
               
                  By freſh ſupply of men that entered
                  Next them, and with three hundred ſhips arriu'd
                  Vpon the ſhoare, where being ankored,
                  When as they had the wearied Greeks reuiu'd
                  That faintly fought ſcarce able to withſtand
                  The Troians force, they did begin to land,
               
               
                  Firſt placing all their croſoowe ſhot before,
                  And next to them their archers orderly,
                  And ſuch as pikes and other weapons bore,
                  On either ſide, with full intent to try
                  The Troians might, and brauely to adventure,
                  Deſpight of them vpon the ſhoare to enter.
               
               
                  Where twixt them at the firſt the fight was hot,
                  And dangerous, till that the Greeks let flie
                  Their arrowes out their bowes and cro
                        •
                     bowe ſhot,
                  As thicke as hayle, and with them furiouſly
                  The Troians ſlew: and firſt then to withdraw
                  Themſelues aſide, which when the Grecians ſaw,
               
               
                  
                  They left their ſhips, and 
                        ••
                     uing out amaine,
                  Vpon the Troians valiantly did ſet,
                  And by that meanes did win the ſhoare againe,
                  Which for that time the Troians could not let,
                  Though they with howes & arrowes fiercely ſhot
                  To driue them backe, but it availd them not.
               
               
                  And then the fight moſt hotly did renew,
                  When as the noble King Prothſaulus
                  
                  Did enter mongſt the Troians, and purſue
                  Them with a courage ſtout and valorous.
                  And in the thickeſt of the preſſe did ſlay
                  Them down ſo taſt, that each man gaue him way
               
               
                  And ſhun'd his blowes, ſo many of them were ſlaine
                  And wounded ſore, whereby the Greeks diſmaid,
                  Began to be incouraged againe,
                  For had not he by force the Troians ſtaid,
                  Without all doubt they had before them fled,
                  And at time that been wholly vanquiſhed.
               
               
                  But what availd his valor and his might,
                  Or courage bold, when as ſeaven thouſand men,
                  Were forced on the Grecians ſide to fight,
                  Againgſt an hundred thouſand Troians, then
                  Allready on the ſtrand them to aſſayle,
                  That wonder t'was they could ſo long prevayle
               
               
                  Againſt ſo huge and great a company,
                  With ſo few men; but ſure you muſt ſuppoſe
                  It was becauſe they ſaw no remedie,
                  (For at their backs the Sea did them incloſe,
                  And fore their face ſtood the enemie,
                  So that they thought it beſt for them to die:
               
               
                  And cowardly with ſhame their liues to looſe)
                  For running backe they muſt of force be drownd,
                  And ſo reſolu'd, they fought againſt their foes
                  As long as any way or meanes they found
                  To ayd themſelues, though t'was more then they might,
                  (For other refuge their was none in ſight.)
               
               
                  But all the force they vſd did them no good,
                  The Troians were ſo many and ſo ſtrong,
                  And ſlew them (ſo that men might ſee their blood,
                  Vpon the ſhoare in ſtreames ran downe along,
                  And at the laſt draue them vnto the ſtrand,
                  Whereas they were conſtrained there to ſtand,
               
               
                  (Wext weary, and in great diſtreſſe, and griefe,)
                  Fighting to ſaue their liues (moſt deſperately,)
                  And there had all been ſlaine without reliefe,
                  Or put vnto ſome great extreamitie,
                  Had not Prothenor and ſtout Archelaus
                  
                  Set foot on land like Knights chivalrous,
               
               
                  And ayded them, but with great difficultie,
                  The Troiaus ſhot ſo faſt and did a
                        •
                     ſayle
                  Them on all ſides with extreamecruelty,
                  Yet at the laſt the Grecians did prevaile,
                  And mauger all their might the ſhoare they wan,
                  And then with valant courages began
               
               
                  The Troians hard and freſhly to purſue,
                  In furious wiſe and with great cruelty,
                  And then againe the battle did renew,
                  So hotly, and with ſuch hoſtilitie,
                  That all the ſtrand was died into a red,
                  With blood of thoſe that on each ſide lay dead.
               
               
                  And therewithall Duke Neſtor entered
                  The battaile with his Knights in order plaſt,
                  And proudly and in haughty manner led
                  Them to aſſaile the Troians in great haſt:
                  At which time many a valiant Knight was ſlaine
                  And wounded ſore, and horſes in the plaine
               
               
                  Lay dead, and many maſterleſſe did runne
                  About the field, and then the arrowes flew
                  So thicke and cloſe, that for a time the Sunne
                  Did ſeeme Ecclipſt, ſo darke the aire did ſhew,
                  And many Pikes and Lances broken were,
                  And many ſteeds their maſters way did beare
               
               
                  Sore bleeding dead, amaiſd, and in a ſound,
                  The aire alſo with noiſe and crie was fild
                  Of men that lay halfe dead vpon the ground,
                  And ſtill they fiercely wounded, hewd, and kild
                  On either ſide, and though it grew to night,
                  Yet would they not ſurceaſe nor end the fight.
               
               
                  Sohotly on the other did purſue,
                  For Prothenor and Archelaus nere left
                  The Troians with their Trunchan blades to hew,
                  Till many of them they had of life bereft,
                  In hope at laſt the victory to get,
                  So much their minds vpon reuenge were ſet.
               
               
                  And therewith fierce King Agalus did land,
                  To ſuccour and relieue the Grecians,
                  
                  And with him King Attailu
                           •
                        
                      with a band
                  Of valiant Knights, that charg'd the Troians,
                  
                  (To whom they were inveterate enemies,)
                  On every ſide and in moſt furious wiſe,
               
               
                  Kild, wounded, hewd, & beat them downe ſo faſt,
                  That for to ſaue their liues they were compeld
                  To ſound retreat, and flie away in fiaſt,
                  So many of them were ſlaine within the field.
                  And more had bin, had not new troups come down
                  Of fieſh and valiant Troians from the towne.
               
               
                  
                  All richly arm'd, and every one his ſhield,
                  Wherein they bare deviſes ſeverall,
                  Who were no ſooner entred in the field,
                  But on the Grecians valiantly they fall:
                  (With hearts that burnt as hot as any fier,
                  With envic, hatred, wrath, and furious ire,
               
               
                  To be reveng'd on them for wrongs forepaſt.)
                  And at that time ſo many of them they kild,
                  And charged them ſo hotly and ſo faſt,
                  That to conclude, the Grecians left the field:
                  And were compeld to flie vnto the ſtrand,
                  To whoſe reliefe Uliſſes then did land.
               
               
                  Who valiantly (withall the company
                  He brought with him, and thoſe that were on land
                  Before he came, and by the enemy
                  Had forcibly been driuen to the ſtrand.)
                  With courage bold the Troians did aſſaile,
                  And did ſo much againſt them then prevaile,
               
               
                  That where before they had the vpper hand,
                  He made the Troians forcibly retire
                  With all the ſpeed they might, and leaue the ſtrand.
                  And with moſt burning rage and furious ire:
                  Purſued, draue, and chaſt them to the plaine
                  Before the towne, where many of thē were ſlaine
               
               
                  And wounded ſore, and like a Lyon ſtrong
                  That ſeeks for prey, with gliſtring ſword in hand
                  He entred mongſt the thickeſt of the throng,
                  Where all he met, or durſt againſt him ſtand,
                  He wounded, kild, and from their horſes threw,
                  That glad was he, that could his blowes eſchew,
               
               
                  Till Philomen the ſtrong and valiant King
                  Of Paſlagon, did enter in the field
                  With all the Knights that he to Troy did bring,
                  To ayd the Troians gainſt the Greeks, beheld
                  
                     Uliſſes ſuch a maſſacre to make
                  Of them. In hand a mighty lance did take,
               
               
                  And brauely ſetting ſpurres vnto his horſe,
                  In furious wiſe did run at him ſo faſt,
                  That with one blow which was of mighty force,
                  Both man and horſe vnto the ground he caſt.
                  But preſently Uliſſes roſe againe,
                  And mounting on his horſe, road through the plaine.
               
               
                  And on the Troians ſet ſo furiouſly,
                  That many of them as then by him were ſlaine;
                  Which when as King Philomen did eſpie,
                  He tooke a lance and ran at him againe
                  So mightily, and ſuch a blow him gaue,
                  Therewith, that it his ſhield in ſunder claue,
               
               
                  And pierſt his armor through, but bur
                        •
                      him not,
                  And yet the blow vnto the ground him ſtroke,
                  But preſently vpon his horſe he got,
                  And in his hand a mighty lance he tooke,
                  And therewith at King Philomen did run
                  So ſwiftly, that ere he the blow could ſhon,
               
               
                  He pierſt cleane throgh his ſhield and armor bright
                  And in his breſt did giue him ſuch a wound,
                  That ſideways from his horſe he fell, and light
                  Vpon his head, which firſt did touch the ground,
                  And therewithall moſt grieuouſly he bled,
                  Wherewith his men ſuppoſ'd he had been dead,
               
               
                  And tooke him vp and layd him on a ſhield,
                  Whereon with danger great they did him beare
                  Cleane through the Grecians hoaſt out of the field,
                  Whereof when as the Troian Knights did heare,
                  They were abaſht, becauſe they did beleeue
                  He had been dead, and for him much did grieue:
               
               
                  For if that mighty Philomen had not
                  Been wounded ſo by fierce Vliſſes hand,
                  Without all doubt the Grecians had not got
                  So eaſily out of their ſhips to laud,
                  Nor yet ſo many Troians had been ſlaine,
                  As then lay dead both on the ſtrand and plaine.
               
               
                  For while that they the fight did long maintaine,
                  And valiantly the Grecians did aſſaile,
                  And ſought to driue them to the ſtrand againe,
                  Ere that they could by force therein prevaile,
                  More Grecians in great number got to land,
                  And forcibly the Troians did withſtand.
               
               
                  Conducted by foure Kings of great renowne,
                  The firſt King Agamemnon (generall
                  Of all the Greeks,) and proud King Thelamon,
                  
                  King Thoas, and King Menclaus (cauſe of all
                  That deadly warre) at whoſe aproach you might
                  Behold the death of many a valiant Knight.
               
               
                  And at that time the broken lances flew
                  Into the aire, and clouen ſhields did lie
                  Vpon the ground, and then they did renew
                  The fight ſo hotly, ſtrong, and furiouſly:
                  That in ſhort ſpace the ſtrand, and all the plaine
                  Lay full of Knights, and men that then were ſlain.
               
               
                  And though the Greeks at that time did abide
                  Great loſſe of Knights, yet cauſe they were ſo ſtrōg,
                  The greateſt loſſe fell on the Troians ſide,
                  Who nere the leſſe fought valiantly and long,
                  And held the Grecians 
                     
                        ••
                     ort for all their might,
                  Till that the valiant, fierce, and worthy Knight
               
               
                  
                  
                     Protheſilaus, (Who all that day had fought
                  Couragiouſly, and many Troians ſlaine,
                  And with his ſword in cruell wiſe had wrought
                  Them great deſpight, both on the ſtrand, & plaine)
                  To reſt himſelfe, and take the ayre did ride
                  Out of the field vnto the water ſide,
               
               
                  Where when he did off from his horſe alight,
                  And ſaw his men he dead vpon the ground,
                  Who at their landing had been ſlame in fight,
                  And others by the raging waues then drownd.
                  He could not chuſe out weepe to thinke thereon,
                  And for a while ſat muſing ſtill alone,
               
               
                  And more he them beheld, the more he grieu'd,
                  Till at the laſt (when he by proofe did find
                  That by 
                        •••
                      griefe they were no whit relieu'd,
                  Nor he himſelfe the q
                        •
                     uetter in mind.)
                  Such ſu
                        ••
                     a
                        •
                     ne ire
                        ••
                     s valiant heart poſſeſt,
                  That from that time he could not be in reſt,
               
               
                  But vow'd to be revenged if he might,
                  And to require their deaths vpon his foes,
                  Orels as it becomes a valiant Knight
                  Couragiouſly his life with them to loſe;
                  And 
                        •
                     o reſolu'd, Ieapton his horſe againe,
                  And furiouſly road ſtraight vnto the plaine,
               
               
                  And entring mongſt the thickeſt of his foes
                  Aſſayled them, with trenchant blade
                        ••
                      hand,
                  And valiantly beat downe and kild all thoſe
                  That met with him, or durſt againſt him ſtand.
                  And in ſhort ſpace he did ſo many ſtay,
                  That every man was glad to run away▪
                  
               
               
                  Like ſheepe before the wolfe, their hues to ſaue,
                  But he ſtill wounded, kild, and beat them downe,
                  And like a ſtout and valiant Champion draue,
                  And followed them all moſt vnto the towne:
                  And by that meanes the Greeks then victors were
                  And Troians fied before them in great feare.
               
               
                  Till Perſius King of Ethiopia,
                  
                  Out of the towne with many a valiant Knight
                  Came ryding in great baſt, and made them ſtay,
                  And then began a freſh and furious fight,
                  Wherein great ſtore of Grecians then were ſlaine,
                  And many of them lay wounded on the plaine.
               
               
                  The Troians at that time ſo ſiercely fought,
                  When by the Ethiopian Knights they were▪
                  
                  Relieu'd, ſo that where as before they ſought
                  To flie away, to ſaue their liues in feare:
                  They made the Greekes looſe all the ground again
                  Which they before had won vpon the plaine.
               
               
                  And with their horſe and foot-men did aſſaile
                  Their enemies ſo ſtrongly and ſo cloſe,
                  That all the Greekes could doe, might not prevaile,
                  But that at laſt they were conſtrain'd to loſe
                  Their ground, and backe vnto the ſtrand to flie
                  In great deſpaire, and much extremitie▪
                  
               
               
                  And without doubt had there been drown'd & 
                        ••••
                     
                  
                  Had not the valiant King Palamides
                  
                  With new ſupply refreſhed them againe,
                  (And thereby did their heavy hearts appeaſe▪)
                  Who at that time with all his Knights tooke l
                        ••
                     d,
                  Where hauing horſed them vpon the ſtrand,
               
               
                  And ranckt his men, he entred valiantly,
                  With ſo great force amongſt the Troians,
                  
                  And them aſſaild with ſuch dexterity,
                  (That where before they ſlew the Grecians
                  
                  And draue them downe before them to the ſho
                        ••
                     ,)
                  He kild and wounded many of them ſo ſore,
               
               
                  And kept them to't ſo cloſe, that neither ſide
                  As then advantage had, and ſo it held
                  Vntill that King Palamides eſpied
                  Stout Sigamond in middeſt of the field:
                  Who all that day moſt like a valiant Knight,
                  Behau'd himſelfe againſt the Greekes in fight,
               
               
                  Couragiouſly, and beat them downe ſo faſt,
                  That glad they were to ſhun his blowes and flie,
                  And by his proweſſe only where he paſt
                  Great ſtore Grecians ſlaine by him, did lie.
                  To whom he road and furiouſly when as
                  Amongſt the thickeſt of the Greeks he was,
               
               
                  He gaue him with his lance ſo great a wound
                  Into his ſide, that being deadly hurt,
                  He fell off from his horſe vnto the ground,
                  And there all groueling in the mire and durt,
                  (His armor with his blood cleane covered read)
                  He left him mongſt the Troians pale, and dead.
               
               
                  And forth he road and kild, and wounded ſore
                  All thoſe he met, or that before him ſtood,
                  And like vnto a wild and cruell Bore,
                  With ſword in hand, dyed, in the Tr
                           •••••
                        
                      blood.
                  He made them leaue the water ſide againe,
                  And draue them all before him to the plaine.
               
               
                  Where with his Knights that ſtill about him 
                        ••••
                     
                  
                  He did aſſayle them in ſuch furious wiſe,
                  And by his valor put them in ſuch feare,
                  That mongſt them there was heard great noyſe and cr
                        ••
                     
                  
                  Of thoſe that wounded ſore could not withſtand,
                  The blowes of fierce Palamides ſtrong hand.
               
               
                  
                  Who all that day had fought ſo valiantly,
                  And wounded, kild, and brauely beaten down
                  The Troians, that at laſt he made them flie
                  In all the haſt they could vnto the towne:
                  With cries and ſhouts, and in great feare & doubt,
                  Whereat Prince Hector mou'd, in haſt came out
               
               
                  With countenāce fierce, (like Mars the god of warr
                  As beeing of all Worthies, worthieſt
                  That ever any earthly woman bare,
                  And of all men the ſtrong'ſt and hardieſt.
                  For as the Sun with beames moſt cleare & bright
                  Excells the ſtarres, ſo did this worthy Knight
               
               
                  Surpaſſe all other Knights that ever were.
                  And ſure it was a moſt delightfull ſight
                  To ſee him arm'd, ſo brauely he did beare
                  Them, when he road into the field to fight:
                  Wherein he was a Load-ſtone, and a guide
                  (To all and every Knight both farre and wide.)
               
               
                  Who entring richly arm'd into the field,
                  Vpon a luſty, ſtrong, and goodly ſteed,
                  Did for his armes beare on a golden ſhield,
                  Three furious Lyons paſſant as I read.
                  (But what the colours were I doe not know,)
                  The which did make a faire and gallant ſhow
               
               
                  Vpon the breſt of that moſt worthy Knight.
                  When as with all his troopes he entered
                  Amongſt the Greeks, at whoſe aproach the ſight
                  Of him alone abaſht them all, he led
                  Them through the thickſt of them ſo furiouſly,
                  And therewithall ſuch mightie blowes let flie:
               
               
                  And kild, beat downe, and wounded them ſo faſt,
                  That no man could his mightie force withſtand,
                  And in deſpight of all the Greeks he paſt
                  Couragiouſly with gliſtring ſword in hand,
                  And ſevered all their rancks, and neuer left
                  Till hundreds of their liues he had bereft.
               
               
                  Still ryding too and fro throughout the field,
                  And beat and bare downe all that in his way
                  He found, and at the laſt as he beheld
                  
                     Protheſilaus, (who valiantly that day
                  Kild and purſued the Troians furiouſly,
                  And beat them downe with extreame cruelty.
               
               
                  (Such mortall hatred vnto them he had,)
                  And to his valiant chivalry tooke heed,
                  And ſaw what ſlaughter of his men he made,
                  He was ſo mou'd, that ſtraight he turn'd his ſteed
                  To him, and with his bloody ſword he gaue
                  Him ſuch a blow, that it in ſunder claue
               
               
                  His helmet and his head, and did not reſt
                  But paſt through every ſinew, bone, and vaine
                  That were within his body and his breſt,
                  And forcibly did cut him cleane in twaine,
                  And with that fatall blow and deadly wound,
                  His body in two parts fell to the ground
               
               
                  On each ſide of his horſe. Which done, he road
                  Amongſt the Grecian Knights couragiouſly,
                  And bath'd his trenchant ſword within their blood.
                  So that as farre as ere they could him ſpie,
                  They fled to ſaue their liues, for none durſt ſtand
                  To feele the waight of his victorious hand.
               
               
                  They feard it ſo, and more did it admire,
                  It t'was ſo ſtrong and of ſuch paſſing might,
                  And for that cauſe they askt, and did inquire
                  What Knight he was that did ſo brauely fight:
                  Suppoſing that in all the world ſo round,
                  A worthier Knight was not for to be found,
               
               
                  Vnleſſe it were Prince Hector. And at laſt
                  They felt too well by proofe that it was he:
                  (Who in his daies all other Knights ſurpaſt,
                  As th'onely Myrror of all chivalry.)
                  For none of all the Grecians durſt adventer
                  Againſt him hand to hand in fight to enter.
               
               
                  Of all that day ſo terribly he beat
                  And draue them downe before them to the ſtrand
                  Sore wearied, wounded, breathleſſe, and all wet,
                  Cloſe to the Sea, whereas he let them ſtand.
                  And like a moſt triumphant Knight went backe
                  To Troy againe, his reſt a while to take.
               
               
                  Who being gone, the Greeks ſomewhat releaſt
                  Of former feare, perplexitie, and griefe,
                  Began againe to vow and to proteſt,
                  If fortune would vouchſafe them ſome reliefe,
                  With valiant hearts to venture life and lim
                  Vpon their foes▪ the field againe to win.
               
               
                  The which from morning that the fight begon,
                  With great and extreame labor, loſſe, and paine,
                  Eight times that day they valiantly had won,
                  And loſt the ſame as many times againe.
                  For as Dame fortunes ſlippery wheele turn'd round,
                  So they that day did win, and loſe there ground.
               
               
                  But Hectors valiant entry in the field,
                  Was th'onely thing that did them moſt diſmay,
                  Who ſpight their hearts 
                        ••
                      ſuch a bay them held,
                  That none of them before his face durſt ſtay:
                  For he alone, with ſword in hand did driue
                  Them to the place where firſt they did ariue.
               
               
                  
                  And cloſely held them there with great deſpight,
                  As long as he did in the field remaine,
                  Which was till that it gan to draw to night,
                  At which time he returnd to Troy againe.
                  But then more Greeks vpon the ſhoare ariu'd
                  With cruell fierce Achilles, which reuiu'd
               
               
                  And comforted the Grecians hearts ſo well,
                  That they againe aſſaild the Troians,
                  
                  And by Achilles ayd (which did excell
                  In valor all the other Grecians,)
                  They beate them backe and draue them to the plaine,
                  And by that meanes did win the field againe.
               
               
                  In which conflict Achilles did purſue
                  The Troians in ſuch wiſe, that he onely
                  For his part many hundreds of them ſlew,
                  And at that time had in his company
                  Three thouſand knights in gliſtring armor bright
                  Who likewiſe were ſo hot and fierce in fight,
               
               
                  That with their Prince (th'only champion
                  Of all the Greeks) they 
                        •
                     lew their foes ſo faſt,
                  And cruelly not ſparing any one,
                  That many of the Troians fled in haſt
                  To ſaue their liues, ſuch was their rage and ire
                  Which in the Grecians hearts, did burne like fire,
               
               
                  Againſt the Troian Knights, but ſpecially
                  
                     Achilles tooke great pleaſure and delight
                  To beate them downe, and to behold them lie
                  In heapes vpon the ground, and with deſpight
                  That day to die and bath his ſword in blood,
                  (Which in the plaine ran like vnto a flood.)
               
               
                  Such hatred in his heart he did conceiue,
                  And ſtill increaſt it with ſuch cruelty,
                  That nothing but their deaths could it bereaue
                  Out of his mind, the which to ſatisfie
                  He never left with all his Knights ſo faſt
                  To kill, beat downe, and wound them: that at laſt
               
               
                  With dreadfull noyſe and cries he made them run
                  Vnto the gates of Troy, where while they fought
                  To ſaue their liues, and therewithall to ſ
                        •
                     un
                  His fierce and cruell blowes, it holp them nought.
                  For that meane time the Grecians got to land
                  Withall their power and force, and from the ſtrād
               
               
                  Marcht with ſo great a multitude of men,
                  That th'onely ſight of them did terrifie
                  The Troians fearefull hearts, but much more when
                  They ſaw that with moſt great extremitie
                  They could not chuſe but muſt perforce abide,
                  A hard and cruell fight on every ſide.
               
               
                  Which by the Grecian Knights couragiouſly
                  Was giuen, ſo that with hearts diſcouraged
                  And cleane diſmaid, they were conſtraind to 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Into the towne, where as they entered:
                  
                     Achilles did ſo hotly them purſue,
                  That many of them before the gates he ſlew.
               
               
                  And at that time made ſuch occiſion
                  And ſlaughter of the Troians, that at laſt
                  It would haue been their whole deſtruction
                  And vtter overthrow, if that in haſt
                  The worthy valiant Knights and chivalrous,
                  
                     Paris, Deiphobus, and young Troielus,
                  
               
               
                  With many Troian Knights in company,
                  Had not come forth, to ayd them in their need,
                  Who gainſt the Grecians fought ſo valiantly,
                  That in ſhort ſpace deſpight of them they freed
                  The Troians from diſtreſſe, and did conſtraine
                  The Grecians to retire in haſt againe
               
               
                  Backe from the walles: for worthy Troielus
                  
                  So valiantly himſelfe that time did quite,
                  And ſhewd a heart ſo ſtout and valorous,
                  That whoſoere with ſword or launce he hit,
                  He did him either wound, caſt downe, or ſlay,
                  And cauſd the Greeks for feare to make him way,
               
               
                  And by that meanes the Troians ſuccoured.
                  At which time when Lucina cleare and bright,
                  Shewd forth her face, and day ſurrendred
                  Her place vnto obſcure and glooming night:
                  
                     Achilles with the Greeks road to his tent
                  To reſt himſelfe, the Troians likewiſe went
               
               
                  Into the tow
                        •
                     e of Troy, where as in haſt
                  Their gates were ſhut and barricadoed ſure
                  And round about their walles great watches plaſt
                  That able were long gainſt their foes t'indure.
                  Meane time King Agamemnon wiſely choſe,
                  And pointed out a place for to incloſe
               
               
                  His army, and intrencht it round about
                  With ditches, walls, and paliſadoes ſtrong,
                  And for each Prince and Captaine quartred out
                  Their lodgings, and their courts of guard, & moog
                  Them did appoint his officers to ſee,
                  That every man in order plaſt ſhould bee
               
               
                  Within the ſame, and preſently they made
                  Their tents, and rich pavilions to be pla
                        •
                     ſt
                  And ſpeedily ſet vp, and ſuch as had
                  No tents wherewith to ſhrowd themſelues, in haſt
                  Built cabins, ſhades, and cotages to keepe
                  Themſelues from wind and weather, & to ſlepe
               
               
                  
                  And reſt therein, and all that night vnſhipt
                  Their horſes, and their furniture for warres,
                  And no occaſion, time, nor hower ore-
                        ••
                     ipt
                  Their victualls to vnlade, and to prepare
                  All other things, and to their tents to carry,
                  That which for ſuch a ſiedge was neceſſarie.
               
               
                  Which don, their ſhips in warlike wi
                        •
                     e they plaſt
                  Within the Port, and then with cables ſtrong▪
                  
                  Vpon the land to getties made them faſt,
                  With full intent to hold a ſiedge ſo long,
                  And puiſſant, before the tovne of Troy,
                  
                  That in the end they would it cleane deſtroy,
               
               
                  And vtterly deface▪ which to effect,
                  Each one with vowes proteſted for his part
                  While life ſhould laſt all danger to reiect,
                  And with a courage ſtout and noble heart,
                  There to remaine and reſolutely lie,
                  Till t'were perform'd, or valiantly to die.
               
               
                  And ſo with burning fiers bright and cleare,
                  And minſtrels that both loudly plaid and ſong,
                  That night they held a watch by ſuch as were
                  Freſh▪men, and had not fought all that day long,
                  Appointing new ſupplies for to relieue
                  And ſecond them, if th'enemies ſhould giue
               
               
                  Them battaile, or aſſaile them in the night.
                  And ſuch as at their landing wounded were,
                  And thoſe that all that day had held the 
                        ••
                     ght,
                  And valiantly the Troyans force did beare,
                  Did reſt, and in their tents and cabin
                        •
                     s ſlept,
                  While others in the campe ſtraight watches kept.
               
               
                  And ſo till that with clouds of crimſon die,
                  The ſun began in th'orient to apeare,
                  And ſpread his beames throughout the Criſtall ſkie
                  The valiant Greekes abandoning all feare,
                  Incamped layd attending the euent
                  Of doubt full wa
                        •
                     re, with full and whole intent,
               
               
                  T'effect their wills, what ere to them befell:
                  Where for a night ile leaue them in the field,
                  And orderly at large vnto you tell,
                  What further courſe on either ſide was held
                  During the ſiedge without, and eke within
                  The towne. And ſo my third Booke ile begin.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR.
            THE THIRD BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  I Shewing the firſt battayle fought between the Troians and the Grecians after they had planted their ſiedge before the Towne; wherein Hector behaved himſelfe moſt valiantly aboue all others.
               
               
                  
                     WHen with avading, pale,
                  and deadly light,
                  
                     Auroraes face lay
                  covered ore with ſhade
                  Of th'obſcure cold, and darke,
                  and glooming night.
                  And in her cheekes a ruddy colour had,
                  As bluſhing ſore for ſhame for to be ſeene,
                  Becauſe that ſhe too long 
                        •
                     n bed had beene
               
               
                  With Phoebus her moſt deare and choſen Knight,
                  For which ſhe was ſo much abaſht, that ſhe
                  Did for a while abſent her ſelfe from ſight
                  Of any man, vntill ſuch time as he
                  With Flego
                           •
                        te his luſty ſteed had gon,
                  And ſwiftly mounted boue the horriſon.
               
               
                  And with his radiant beames moſt bright & cleare
                  Had comforted her heart, with ſhame oppreſt,
                  And made her change her ſad and heauy cheare.
                  That is, when Titan mounting in the Eaſt,
                  The dawning of the day once paſt, did riſe
                  And ſhew his face within the chriſtall skies.
               
               
                  
                     Hector the moſt renowned champion,
                  Who for his valor great (ſurpaſſing all
                  That euer liu'd,) the chiefe command in towne
                  Next Priam had, and alſo Generall
                  Of all the Knights aſſembled at that time
                  Within the ſame: When day was in the prime
               
               
                  Commanded all that in the towne then were,
                  Both Princes, Kings, Knights, ſquiers, & every one
                  That able was to fight and armor beare,
                  Without exception vnto any one;
                  In haſt to meet him with their troopes of men
                  Before Dianaes Temple, which as then
               
               
                  Stood in the midſt of Troy, within a plaine
                  Of great and ſpacious breadth, wherein he ment
                  To muſtar them, and alſo to ordaine
                  Such battailes as he would ſhould forth beſent
                  That day againſt th'incamped Greeks to fight,
                  To driue them thence againe, if that he might.
               
               
                  In this faire plaine in midſt of Troy ſo ſet
                  At his command, in braue and warlike wiſe,
                  The Troian Princes all together met,
                  Each with ſuch ſtanderds, pennons, and deviſe
                  As vſually in battaile they did beare,
                  And on their coats of Armes, & ſhields did weare.
               
               
                  
                  To tell what armes each Prince & Knight then had,
                  Would be ore long and tedious to declare,
                  Moſt ſure it is▪ each one prouiſion made
                  Of every thing that's needfull for the warre:
                  Each ſeverall people, Province, Land, or nation,
                  Bearing ſuch armes as was their ancient faſhion.
               
               
                  Some had their Canvas Caſſocks or their Iacks,
                  That plated were with ſteele, & ſome then came
                  With ancient Almaine rivets on their backs,
                  Their ſleeues of male and goriets of the ſame:
                  Some coats of male, ſome caps of ſteele did weare,
                  And in their hands a bill or holberd beare.
               
               
                  Some in their compleat armes were brauely clad,
                  With Poldrons, & with Vanbras, & what more
                  Thereto belond'g, and on their heads they had
                  Their Caskets, with their Beavers cloſe before,
                  Throgh which (being ſhut) they might their foes be hold,
                  And let thē fall to breath when as they wold.
               
               
                  Some gantlets had, ſome not to overlade
                  Themſelues with armes the eaſier to fight,
                  Had quilted Iacks that were of Canvas made,
                  And covered ore with ſilke moſt braue to ſight:
                  Some Iepons had, ſome hauberions, and ſome
                  Into the field with Caſſocks long did come
               
               
                  Downe to their knees, & in their hands did beare
                  Round Targets made of bone or elſe of wood,
                  The which all ore with Leather covered were:
                  And ſome their enemies furious force withſtood
                  With ſhields of ſteele, of length frō head to foot.
                  Some with their bows & arrows fiercely ſhoot.
               
               
                  Some with their ſwords, ſome with their darts in hād
                  Some with a foure ſquar'd headed Pollax fight;
                  And ſome with Croſ-bows & with Pikes do ſtand
                  Prepar'd to ſhow their valor and their might:
                  And every one deſiring for to doo't,
                  Stood ready there on horsbacke, or on foot,
               
               
                  After the manner of his Country.
                  And while they ſtaid each one his armes did mend,
                  In every place whereas neceſſitie
                  Requir'd the ſame, the better to defend
                  His body: but in tearmes of Art to ſhow
                  What there vnto belongs, or let you know
               
               
                  More touching this▪ I muſt my ſelfe excuſe,
                  And pardon craue if therein I do miſſe;
                  For ſure tis not the thing which I doe vſe,
                  A Pen (and not a Pike) my weapon is:
                  Tis want of skill breeds imperfection
                  In me, to make a right deſcription
               
               
                  Thereof, in marſhall tearmes as ſome men could,
                  But vnto him that's wiſe I will referre
                  My ſelfe herein, and pray him that he would
                  His cenſure mildly in this caſe deferre:
                  And ſuch defects as he ſhall iuſtly find,
                  To winke thereat, and beare them in his mind.
               
               
                  When Hector had them all well viewd, and ſaw
                  What power aſſembled in the field there was,
                  With ſpeed he did each one command to draw
                  Aſide, and then in ranks he did them place;
                  Which done, in marſhall wiſe he did ordaine
                  His battailes orderly within the plaine.
               
               
                  And then he caus'd the gate Dardanides
                  
                  To be vnbard, and to be opned wide,
                  Intending thereat gainſt his enemies
                  To ſalie forth, and valiantly to bide
                  A battaile whatſoever did befall.
                  And then his Baſtard brother he did call;
               
               
                  That had to name Cincinabor the ſtour,
                  And valiant Glaucus Prince of Licia Land,
                  To whome (by him) of purpoſe choſen out,
                  He did appoint the leading of the band:
                  Which firſt that day againſt the Greeks in field
                  Should fight, to which they willingly did yeeld.
               
               
                  And in that wing a thouſand knights there were,
                  Which purpoſely he choſe out of them all,
                  And did command them valiantly to beare
                  The forefront of the battaile, and to fall
                  Couragiouſly vpon their Grecian foe;
                  Which ſaid, out at the gate he bad them go
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  Who with their banners ſpred that ſhined bright,
                  Their armors and their ſheilds that gliſtered
                  Againſt the Sun, did make a goodly ſight,
                  When they vpon the enemie were led.
                  But leaſt that they ſhould be oppreſt by might,
                  And overlayd by multitudes in fight;
               
               
                  To ſecond them, he did appoint a band
                  Of valiant Knights that iuſt a thouſand were▪
                  
                  Commanding it in readines to ſtand
                  To ſuccour them, and Grecians force to beare
                  If need requir'd. The charge whereof he gaue
                  Vnto the King of Thrace ſtout and braue.
               
               
                  And with him ioynd his Son Ar
                           •••
                        ag
                           ••
                        ,
                  
                  A Prince endowed with good qualities,
                  For he was wiſe and very vertuoues
                  Strong and moſt hardy gainſt his enemies:
                  Thoſe two the ſecond wing together 
                        ••
                     d,
                  And valiant 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      followed.
               
               
                  
                  The battaile that next after iſſued
                  Out of the towne againſt the enemie,
                  By Hector was commanded to beled,
                  By two braue Kings of worthie memorie:
                  The one the Phrigian King cald Zantippus,
                  
                  The other ioynd with him cald Alcanus.
                  
               
               
                  In it three thouſand knights well arm'd there were,
                  All reſolutelie bent to trie their might
                  Againſt the Greekes, and everie one did beare
                  A ſeverall armes, which was no ſmall delight
                  To thoſe that ſtood to ſee them paſſe, arraid
                  So gallantly, with banners broad diſplaid.
               
               
                  Then Hector cald his brother Troyelus,
                  
                  (A Knight of great deſert and worthy fame,
                  And one that was ſo ſtout and valorous,
                  That every man extold him for the ſame:)
                  To whome he gaue the charge and goverment
                  Of thoſe that he within the third wing ſent.
               
               
                  That day againſt the Greekes wherein there was
                  Three thouſand braue gallant & Knights, that were
                  All yong and of couragious hearts, ſuch as
                  At other times him company did beare:
                  Who as he paſſed forward, Hector ſtaid,
                  And lovingly ſpake vnto him, and ſaid.
               
               
                  Brother (quoth he) my care of thee is ſuch,
                  (Moou'd therevnto by perfect amitie)
                  That though I know thy valor to be much,
                  (And therein take a great felicitie)
                  For every man for it doth thee commend,
                  And ſhall do till this mortall world doth end.
               
               
                  Yet when I thinke vpon thy valiantnes,
                  And cald to mind thy yong and tender yeares,
                  Which commonly are given to wilfulnes,
                  I fall into a thouſand kind of feares;
                  Leaſt that thy courage fierce and violent,
                  Should make thee of thy life ſo negligent,
               
               
                  By over great preſumption of thy might
                  And pride of heart, that it would thee perſwade,
                  With eaſe to ſhun what ere on thee ſhould light,
                  And out of all extreamities to wade:
                  Regarding neither hurt nor ſafety,
                  If once thy youthfull bloud ſhould moued be.
               
               
                  Repoſing truſt in fortune mutable,
                  Which turns her wheele now vp, then downe again,
                  And evermore is croſſe and variable
                  In warre: when men thin
                        ••
                      honour to obtaine.
                  Which cauſeth me full oftentimes to wake
                  When I ſhould ſleepe, and care for thee to take.
               
               
                  Fearing thy great and haſtie wilfulneſſe.
                  But deare and louing brother I thee pray,
                  What ere befals thee in thy hardineſſe,
                  To haue regard vnto thy ſelfe this day:
                  And following of thy enemies, take care,
                  Thou entreſt not into their troopes ſo farre,
               
               
                  That thou canſt not relieue thy ſelfe againe.
                  Let reaſon rule thy hote and furious mind,
                  And bridle thy affection with her raine,
                  Leaſt thou an vnexpected danger find.
                  And giue our enmies cauſe to laugh and geere,
                  At thy ſo great misfortune, brother deare.
               
               
                  And ſo beſeeching Mars the God of warre,
                  This day and evermore thee to defend
                  From all miſhap, and of thee to haue care.
                  Againſt thy Grecian foes I doe thee ſend
                  To trie thy force, wiſhing with heart to thee,
                  As to my ſelfe, triumphant victorie.
               
               
                  To whome this valiant, fierce, and hardy Knight
                  Young Troyclus, (whome no adverſitie,
                  Could ever daunt) with heart moſt fierce & light,
                  Made anſwere with moſt great humilitie:
                  And yet with countnance glad & ioyfull cheare.
                  Saying my Lord, and my good brother deare;
               
               
                  Ift pleaſe the Gods I will to you obay,
                  And what adviſe ſo ere of gentleneſſe
                  To me you giue, and ſhall command or ſay,
                  I will the ſame fulfill with readineſſe:
                  For tis not my deſire nor my intent,
                  T'infringe one point of your commandement,
               
               
                  But willingly with heart t'effect the ſame,
                  As farre as in my power it lyeth to doe;
                  So loath I am for to incurre the blame,
                  Of any diſobedience ſhewed to you.
                  And truth to ſay, my heart it ſore would grieue,
                  And therewithall of Hector tooke his leaue.
               
               
                  And forth he road ſo like a valiant Knight
                  Amongſt his men, and entred in the field
                  With ſo great grace, that t'was a goodly ſight
                  To looke on him, who on an axure ſhield,
                  Three Lyons paſſant on't did brauely beare,
                  And gainſt the Greeks road forward without feare
               
               
                  Young Troylus gone, Prince Hector did ordaine
                  The fourth ward, and the conduct thereof gaue
                  To Hupon and Andelius brethren twaine,
                  Both Knights couragious, valorous and braue:
                  This Hupon of Lariſſe land was King,
                  And many men with him to Troys did bring,
               
               
                  
                  To ayd them in their wars that were ſo long,
                  And ſure he was a very valiant Knight,
                  Of ſtature huge and tall, and paſſing ſtrong,
                  And no man was like vnto him for might,
                  In all the great and ſpacious Troyan towne,
                  But onely Hector that braue Champion.
               
               
                  And gainſt his foes he was ſo fierce and fell,
                  That he of them brought many to the ground,
                  Who ſpight their hearts did try his force too well.
                  
                     Hector with theſe two brethren forth did ſend
                  His baſtard brother cald Dimarechus,
                  
                  A ſtout and valiant Knight adventurous.
               
               
                  And to them, to conduct with ſtandards braue,
                  And to be led when they ſhould come in field,
                  Twice ſure and iuſt three thouſand men he gaue,
                  All Knights well horſt & armd with ſpeare & ſhield:
                  Who taking leaue of Hector curteouſly,
                  Road forward to the field couragiouſly.
               
               
                  The fift ward which next orderly did ſtand,
                  (Into the field againſt the Greekes to goe)
                  Was giuen vnto the King of Ceſoyne land,
                  (Whoſe name it ſeemes the Author did not know)
                  And to his Brother cald Pollidamas.
                  
                  Thoſe people named Ceſoynes did ſurpaſſe
               
               
                  The common ſort of men, for ſtature tall,
                  Proportion, ſtrength, and great dexterity;
                  For which they were admir'd & prais'd of all
                  That them beheld and marked earneſtly:
                  The colour of the ſhield the King then boare
                  Was only gules, and nothing in it more.
               
               
                  Who when his charge of Hector he had had,
                  His leaue he tooke, and with his brother road
                  Couragiouſly before his Knights, that made
                  A gallant ſhow when they in order ſtood.
                  Meane while Prince Hector ceaſt not paines to take,
                  The ſixt ward with all ſpeed he could to make,
               
               
                  Which he vnto King Protemenſe gaue,
                  (Who both in force and wiſedome did excell)
                  And to a Duke cald Sterepes, to haue
                  The conduct of the people that did dwell
                  In Poenie land, and them to guide that day,
                  Which people vſe of cuſtome (as men ſay)
               
               
                  Their enemies in furious wiſe t'aſſaile,
                  Onely with bowes and arrowes ſharpely ground,
                  On horſebacke, without armes or coate of male,
                  And thē cleane throgh their armors ſore to wound:
                  And Hector with thoſe people alſo ſent,
                  His Brother Deiphobus to th'intent
               
               
                  They might ſecuritie into the plaine
                  Where they ſhould fight, & ſo they went their way.
                  But ere they paſt, Prince Hector did ordaine
                  A band of men to goe with them that day
                  Well arm'd into the field, (leaſt they ſhold venter,
                  Among the Greekes ſo nakedly to enter)
               
               
                  And be orethrowne) which band of men he tooke
                  Out of thoſe Knights that from Agreſta came,
                  And that they ſhould the better to them looke:
                  And for to be conductors of the ſame,
                  He did appoint two valiant Kings to ride
                  Along with them, and by them to abide
               
               
                  During the fight againſt the Greeks that day;
                  The one of them King Eſdras had to name,
                  The other was King Philon, but to ſay
                  Where they did dwell, or frō what place they came
                  I cannot, for mine Author doth not ſhow,
                  Becauſe (as I ſuppoſe) he did not know:
               
               
                  Or elſe I thinke he had it cleane forgot.
                  He ſaith that rich King Philon ſumptuouſly
                  Apparelled, ſat in a Chariot,
                  The which was made of pure white Ivory;
                  With wheeles of Heban wood moſt finely wrought,
                  Which wood out of the Indian land is brought.
               
               
                  And as men ſay is hard as any ſtone,
                  His Charet within was all inchaſt with gold,
                  And precious ſtones and pearles vpon the bone,
                  And was ſo rich and ſumptuous to behold:
                  That as I thinke the like was never ſeene
                  Before, nor ſince within the world t'haue beene.
               
               
                  Two Knights this Chariot drew, & ſome did rid
                        •
                     
                  
                  About it ſtrongly arm'd with ſpeare & ſhield,
                  For to defend their King on every ſide;
                  So he and Eſdras road into the field,
                  Accompanied with ſtout Pithagoras,
                  
                  That one of Hectors baſtard brethren was.
               
               
                  Who of that wing to haue the chiefe command,
                  Of purpoſe ſent him out with them to goe.
                  The battaile that next ready plaſt did ſtand,
                  
                     Hector vpon Aeneas did beſtow:
                  Which had no other Knights within the ſame,
                  Then thoſe that with Ewphemy thether came
               
               
                  So farre out of their natiue Country,
                  For Hectors ſake to ayd King Pri
                           ••••
                        ,
                  
                  The which were Knights of great activity;
                  Good horſemen, and exceeding valorous:
                  Who being brauely horſt and furniſhed,
                  Their Coronell Aeneas followed.
               
               
                  
                  And went out of the towne couragiouſly,
                  As if each one God Mars himſelfe had been;
                  
                     Hector meane time the eight ward orderly
                  Ordained had, and rank't it out, wherein
                  No other Knights nor men but Perſians
                  
                  (That thither came to ayd the Troyans)
               
               
                  By him were plaſt; which wing he did command
                  Vnto his brother Paris to obay
                  As Captaine over them; and when they ſtand
                  All ready to ſet forward on their way,
                  
                     Hector, his brother Paris kindlie ſtaid,
                  And louingly ſpake vnto him, and ſaid:
               
               
                  Brother, the thing that I of thee require,
                  And which for thine owne good to thee I moue,
                  Is, that I doe thee heartilie deſire,
                  (If thou thine owne ſecuritie doſt loue)
                  When thou this day in field againſt thy foe
                  Shalt fight, ſee that thou ventreſt not to goe
               
               
                  Too farre amongſt the thickſt of them, leaſt they
                  Intrappe thee vnawares, as ſure they will,
                  If that they can by any meanes or way,
                  For their inveterate hatred to thee ſtill
                  Encreaſeth more, and doth their hearts embrace
                  So ferventlie, that nothing can it race
               
               
                  Out of their minds, but thy deſtruction.
                  Which to prevent, be thou not far from me
                  In any wiſe, leaſt when thou art alone,
                  They ſhould ſome hurt or miſchiefe do to thee,
                  Before that I could come to thy reliefe,
                  Which vnto me would be no little griefe.
               
               
                  Keepe therefore neere to me at any hand,
                  That I may ayd and helpe thee in diſtreſſe,
                  And doubt not but we ſhall our foes withſtand,
                  How furiouſly ſo ere on vs they preſſe:
                  To whome his brother Paris anſwere made,
                  And ſaid, that he in mind reſolued had
               
               
                  Vnto his heſts in all things to obay.
                  And ſo his leaue of Hector hauing tane,
                  Withall his Knights in order road his way
                  Out at the gate, while Hector did ordaine
                  The battaile that the ninth & laſt ſhould be,
                  Wherein he plaſt the flower of Chivalrie.
               
               
                  For in the ſame fiue thouſand Knights there was
                  Moſt worthy men, and of moſt great renowne,
                  And ſuch as for their valor did ſurpaſſe
                  All other Knights that were within the towne:
                  And all of them right Troyans by diſcent,
                  Borne in the towne. This battaile Hector men
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  Should by himſelfe into the field be led,
                  And of his baſtard brethren choſe out ten
                  To ride with him, whome he much honored,
                  As knowing them to be right valiant men;
                  And ſuch as for their proweſſe & their mights,
                  Of all men were eſteemd moſt hardie Knights.
               
               
                  And when he had his battailes made & plaſt
                  In order, as before I haue ſet downe,
                  And all of them one after other paſt,
                  In braue and warlike wiſe out of the towne:
                  Like Mars himſelfe for courage and for for
                        ••
                     
                  
                  He mounted vp vpon his gallant horrſe
               
               
                  Cald Galathe, (the which is ſaid t'haue been
                  The goodlieſt horſe for ſtature, ſhape, and haire,
                  Swiftneſſe and ſtrength, that ever had been ſeen
                  In any place, and therewithall ſo faire
                  An
                        •
                      tractable, that with a reine of twiſt,
                  A man might rule and turne him as he liſt.)
               
               
                  And thereon richlie arm'd from top to toe,
                  (Which gliſtred like the Sun it was ſo bright,)
                  Road through the towne with ſuch a gallant ſhoe,
                  That all men to behold him tooke delight:
                  Vnto the place where Priams▪
                      Court did hold,
                  And there from point to point vnto him told,
               
               
                  What battailes and what men he had ſent out
                  Into the field againſt his Grecian foe,
                  And fifteene hundred valiant Knights and ſtout,
                  I haue (ſaid he) ordaind with you to goe:
                  That ſhall attend your royall Maieſtie,
                  And gard your perſon where ſo ere you be.
               
               
                  And likewiſe all the footmen that do ſtay
                  Within the towne, excepting no degree,
                  Commanded are to waite on you this day,
                  With whome I humbly pray your Maieſtie,
                  Out of the towne into the field to goe,
                  And there your ſelfe in warlike wiſe to ſhoe,
               
               
                  Not far off from the place where we ſhall fight,
                  But ſuffer none of them to go aſide,
                  Nor leaue their ranks, but there with all your might,
                  Betweene vs and the towne I pray you bide,
                  In order ready preſt vs to relieue,
                  Whereof if need require we ſhall you giue
               
               
                  Adviſe, for that ſtill twixt vs men ſhall goe,
                  T'advertiſe you with all the ſpeed we may
                  Of our eſtate, and vnto you to ſhoe,
                  What likelihoode on either ſide this day
                  (By ayd of Mars the God of warre) may be,
                  Againſt their foes to haue the victorie,
               
               
                  
                  For you ſhall be our Caſtle and our wall
                  To ſuccour vs in our extreamity,
                  Beſides all this (which is the principall)
                  You muſt take heed and very carefull be,
                  That th'enemie in ambuſh doth not lurke
                  Behind the towne, & treaſon gainſt vs worke.
               
               
                  While we to fight on this ſide buſied are
                  Againſt our foes, whereof in any wiſe,
                  Let me intreat your Grace to haue a care,
                  That to prevent and worke by good adviſe:
                  That our affaires may fall out happilie,
                  And ſo we may obtaine the victorie
               
               
                  Againſt our foes. If they intrap vs not
                  By vnexpected fraud or violence,
                  The which I hope ſhall neuer be our lot.
                  Let theſe my words (ſaid he) be no offence
                  Vnto your Grace I humbly you deſire,
                  Sith all is for our good which I require.
               
               
                  Wherewith the King well pleas'd and ſatisfied,
                  With countenance benigne and chearfull heart,
                  When he had paws'd a while, to him replied.
                  
                     Hector (ſaid he) ſith that my truſt thou art
                  And ſole ſupport, what euer thou doſt ſay,
                  Or ſhalt deſire, I will it not denay.
               
               
                  For next the Gods in thee I do repoſe
                  My welfare, hope, and my ſecuritie,
                  And by thy ſtrength and power againſt our foes,
                  I onely do expect our ſafetie:
                  And therefore do commit into thy hand,
                  The ſole command and rule of this my land.
               
               
                  And as thou doſt ordaine ſo ſhall it be,
                  For no man ſhall thy will in ought denie,
                  And to the Gods I humblie pray for thee,
                  To ſaue and keepe thee from adverſitie:
                  And that thou maiſt returne with victorie,
                  That ſo th'eternall praiſe and memorie
               
               
                  Of thee may be enrold by trump of fame,
                  Throughout the earthlie globe both farre & neare,
                  Perpetuallie for th'onor of thy name;
                  And ſo farewell (ſaid he) mine own Son deare.
                  And Hector taking leaue no time delaid,
                  But went vnto his Lords that for him ſtaid.
               
               
                  As he that was their valiant Generall,
                  The verie root of perfect nobleneſſe,
                  The ground of ancient Knighthood, & withall
                  The liuelie patterne of true hardineſſe,
                  Valor and ſtrength almoſt invincible,
                  For that as much as it was poſſible,
               
               
                  For nature to adorne a man withall
                  Was found in him, and therewithall he wa
                        •
                     
                  
                  Indowed with a Grace maieſti
                        •
                     all,
                  Yet meeke, and did in gouernment ſurpaſſe,
                  For vpright iuſtice, temprance, policie,
                  Wiſedome, diſcretion, ſence, and clemencie.
               
               
                  The armes which then this Troyan Chāpion bore
                  Triumphantly vpon his warlike ſhield,
                  And ſtandard both (as Guido ſaith) was or
                  A Lyon rampant gules, which in the field
                  Was ſo well known & fear'd, that th'enemie
                  From it as from deaths pi
                        ••
                     cing dart did 
                        •••
                     e.
               
               
                  And through the ſtreets in order braue did ride,
                  With trumpets, and with drums that loudly playd,
                  And diuers warlike inſtruments beſide,
                  As penons rich and enſignes faire diſplaid:
                  And many people flockt in heaps about,
                  To view and ſee thoſe warlike troops go out.
               
               
                  Thus Hector with couragious heart and mind,
                  Like Mars himſelfe into the field did ride,
                  And though the battaile which he led, behind
                  The reſt aid goe, yet would he not abide
                  With it, but through the ba
                        •••
                     s all did paſſe,
                  And never ſtaid till he the for moſt was▪
                  
               
               
                  And at the head of all his troopes did ſtand,
                  Not once abaſht ſo many Greeks to find,
                  In battaile rankt 
                        ••
                     th ſheild and ſpeare in hand
                  Him to aſſaile, but with a valiant mind,
                  No whit of them nor their great force affeard,
                  Reſolud to be the firſt that would them 
                        •
                     eard.
               
               
                  Meane while the Ladies gallant, fine, and gay,
                  (Within the towne of moſt and great'ſt account,
                  As freſh beſeene as flowers in month of May,
                  Vpon the wals and towers of Troye did mount:
                  And round about Queene Helena the faine,
                  And Policene King Priams daughter, there
               
               
                  Did ſtand to ſee and to behold the fight,
                  Although of them the greateſt part did feare▪
                  
                  And were abaſht in heart at ſuch a ſight
                  Of armed men as then aſſembled were:
                  That ſome of them of very tenderneſſe,
                  Some of meere loue, and ſome of kindneſſe▪
                  
               
               
                  Amas'd and pale in face and countnance were,
                  Leaſt they ſhould looſe their louer o
                        •
                      their Knight;
                  And ſome their faces hid for extre
                        •
                     me feare,
                  And durſt not looke vpon the armor brigh
                        •
                     ,
                  In which their feare ile leaue them for a while,
                  And to the Greekes direct my wearied ſtile.
               
               
                  
                  And of them make a briefe relation,
                  How they that day their battailes did ordaine.
                  But firſt I muſt with exclamation
                  Cry out, and of dame Ignorance complaine,
                  That dares preſume ſo boldly in my light
                  To ſtand, and with her ſhadow dim my ſight.
               
               
                  For ſhe it is that onely makes me erre,
                  For want of marſhall tearmes and phraſe to write
                  Of battailes, and of things concerning warre,
                  When as I would in order them indite:
                  And of an armie pitcht in field ſhould ſpeake,
                  But Cha
                           •
                        cer's dead, and can me neither cheake,
               
               
                  Nor counſell giue how to direct my phraſe,
                  Who did in perfect Rethoricke excell
                  All other Rethoritians in his daie
                        •
                     ,
                  For he had drunke and taſted of the well
                  Of Hellicon, which on Pernaſſus ſtands,
                  Wherein as yet I nere could dip my hands.
               
               
                  Nor once get leaue to mount vpon the hill,
                  To ſee the ſame, one drop thereof to taſt,
                  Although it was full ſore againſt my will,
                  But tis too late to call backe time that's paſt:
                  And ſith tis ſo, I do not greatly care,
                  (Though rude I be) vnto you to declare,
               
               
                  In ſimple tearmes, ſuch as my wit doth yeeld,
                  (Which, to ſay truth, are ruſticall and plaine)
                  What order Agamemnon in the field
                  That day did take, his battaile to ordaine
                  On Grecians ſide, as having no intent,
                  That any man ſhould find him negligent,
               
               
                  For t'was no time as then for him to ſleepe.
                  Therefore with all the ſpeed he could deviſe,
                  He did prepare that day the field to keepe,
                  (As he was valiant, politicke, and wiſe:)
                  Againſt his foes, twentie ſix battailes great,
                  Which he in ranks moſt orderly did ſet.
               
               
                  The government whereof he did commit
                  Vnto ſuch puiſſant Kings and Princes braue,
                  As he for valor thought to be moſt fit
                  To take that charge, the firſt whereof he gaue
                  Vnto a Prince of honor great and fame,
                  Which G
                           •
                        id
                           •
                        
                      ſaith, Patroclus had to name.
               
               
                  Which was compos'd of Myrmidons moſt ſtrong
                  And puiſſant Knights that came from Theſſalie,
                  
                  And onely to Achilles did belong,
                  And with them ioynd the ſame to fortifie
                  Such Knights as he himſelfe did thither bring,
                  All ſtrongly arm'd. And with this valiant wing,
               
               
                  He was the firſt that on the Grecians lide
                  Began the fight againſt their enemie,
                  The cauſe why he the Myrmidons did guide,
                  Was, for becauſe Achilles then did lie
                  Sore wounded in his tent, and came not out
                        •
                     
                  
                  That day, for that his Surgions were in doubt
               
               
                  If he ſhould ſtirre, his wounds that were ſo ſore
                  And very greene, would feſtar, ranckle, bleed,
                  And trouble and torment him more and more,
                  Which to prevent, it was by them decreed
                  To keepe his bed, and for to eaſe his paine
                  To lie therein, till they were whole againe.
               
               
                  And ſo vnto Patroclus did commend
                  His Knights, becauſe he was of royall bloud,
                  And his aſſured, true; and perfect friend,
                  Exceeding rich, and much eſteemd for good:
                  And great diſcretion, wit, and curteſie,
                  And one in whom he wholly did relie.
               
               
                  For twixt them both there was ſuch entire loue,
                  Affection great, and perfect amitie,
                  That nothing could out of their hearts remoue,
                  The conſtant and aſſur'd fidelity:
                  Which mutually they did t'each other beare,
                  Whereby their hearts together linked were,
               
               
                  And knit in one as they were bound together,
                  For will and wealth was one betwixt them both,
                  And what ſo ere the one did, or the other,
                  It was confirmd on either ſide, as loath
                  To moue diſlike, or diſcontentment breed
                  Twixt them, that had reſolu'd & full decreed,
               
               
                  To liue & die true friends in heart & mind,
                  Which to their ends they ſtrictly did maintaine.
                  The ſecond ward to Menon was aſſignd,
                  (Who in that war great honor did obtaine)
                  And to the worthy King Idumenes,
                  
                  To whome was ioynd a Duke cal'd Meneſtes.
                  
               
               
                  With full three thouſand men well furniſhed,
                  And all th' Athenian Knights in armour bright.
                  The third by King Aſcalaphus was led,
                  And Philomene his Son a worthy Knight,
                  Who both in proud and ſtately wiſe together,
                  Conducted thoſe that frō 
                     Cuman came thither.
               
               
                  King Archelaus the fourth ward did command,
                  And with him was Securidan the ſtout;
                  And Prothenor, who with that warlike band,
                  All three together valiantly went out
                  Againſt their foes: & had within the ſame,
                  None but the Knights that from Bo
                           •
                        tia came.
               
               
                  
                  King Menelaus a worthie Prince, was made
                  Conductor of the ward next following,
                  (And lift in tal
                        •
                     ) which in it onlie had
                  The Knights which he did thither with him bring
                  From Sparta, and the Iſles about the ſame,
                  Who likewiſe (as his ſubiects) thither came.
               
               
                  And of the battaile next and ſixt, the King
                  
                     Epiſtrophus was chiefe Commander made,
                  And with him ſtout King Gelidus, to bring
                  The ſame into the field, which in it had
                  The Knights that came out of the famous Iſle,
                  Which by the Geeekes is called Fordeſsle.
                  
               
               
                  The ſeventh battaile next enſuing, led
                  By worthie famous Thelamon Aiax King
                  Of Salamine, was onely furniſhed
                  With Knights that he vnto the ſiege did bring:
                  And with them were foure Earles of high degree,
                  Whoſe names I find (the ſtorie ſaith) to bee
               
               
                  
                     Theſeus the firſt, the next was Doxeus,
                  
                  
                     Polixarie the third, the fourth was he
                  That all men called ſtout Amphimacus.
                  
                  The eight ward Agamemnon did decree,
                  Should by the King cald Thoas forth be led,
                  With many Knights well arm'd and furniſhed.
               
               
                  The ninth ward Cileus Aliax did command.
                  The tenth was led by King Philoctetes.
                  
                  Th'eleaventh (the which next orderly did ſtand)
                  The moſt renowmed King Palamides,
                  
                  (King Naulus ſon of whome the Greeks did make
                  So great account) into his charge did take.
               
               
                  Before the twelfth Duke Neſtor (full of pride
                  And melancholy humors in his mind)
                  A very ſtout and valiant Knight did ride.
                  The thirteenth to King Honux was aſſign'd,
                  (That was Ma
                           •
                        berethes Son by true diſſent)
                  Who with it to the field moſt proudly went.
               
               
                  The fourteenth battaile that day for to guide,
                  The ſubtill King Ullſſes was ſent out.
                  And with the fifteenth ward to field did ride
                  King Humelus a worthy Prince and ſtout.
                  The ſixteenth vnto Duke Caribulus,
                  
                  A Knight of great account and valorous,
               
               
                  Committed was to lead: and in that band
                  The Knights of King Protheſalus did go,
                  (Whom Hector ſlew that day the Greeks did land)
                  T'incourage them to be reveng'd. And to
                  King Rodus was aſſignd the ſeventeene.
                  The eighteenth to the King of Occe
                           •
                        ene.
                  
               
               
                  And of the nineteenth ſtout King Zan
                           ••
                        ppus
                  
                  Of Lidia, leader was. The tweentith band
                  Commanded was by King Amphimacus.
                  
                  
                     Philoctetes King of Lariffia Land,
                  The one and twentith band with him did lead.
                  The two and twentith by King Diomed.
                  
               
               
                  The three and twentieth Agamemnon gaue
                  Vnto Aeneas King of Cyparie,
                  
                  The leading and command thereof to haue,
                  That day againſt their Troyan enemie.
                  And with the foure and twentith ward did ride
                  
                     Prothecatus a King▪ the ſame to guide.
               
               
                  King Carpenor of Carpadie was made
                  Conductor of the fiue and twentith band,
                  A noble Prince that great experience had
                  In warre and peace both on the ſea and land:
                  And valiantly himſelfe he did defend,
                  Vntill the Troyan warres were at an end.
               
               
                  The ſix and twentith battaile, and the laſt,
                  That was ſent out againſt the enemie,
                  King Agamemnon Generall of the hoaſt,
                  (A puiſſant Prince of great authoritie)
                  Reſerued for himſelfe, and in it led
                  Great ſtore of armed knights well furniſhed.
               
               
                  The battailes thus ordain'd, the Greeks were led
                  In order to the field, where as they ſtaid
                  Each Prince and chiefe Commander at the head
                  Of every band, with enſignes rich diſplaid,
                  And ſtreamers wavering in the wind, that ſhone
                  In braue and warlike wiſe againſt the ſun.
               
               
                  At which time many a creaſt and helmet faire,
                  And richly gilt and graven, there were ſeene,
                  Wherein great ſtore of ſtrange deviſes were,
                  And plumes of feathers, yellow, red, and greene,
                  Blacke, blew, and white, with other colors more:
                  And ſome that day for loue of Ladies bore
               
               
                  Their favors on their Creſts for to be ſeene,
                  And to encourage them that day to fight,
                  Couragiouſly as if that they had beene
                  In preſence and before their Ladies ſight:
                  And dolefull noyſe of Drums & trumpets ſhrill,
                  Which with a fearefull ſound the aire did fill,
               
               
                  As meſſengers and ſignes of ſhedding bloud,
                  Were 
                        •
                     eard in every place throughout the Campe,
                  And prancing ſteeds with fierce and furious mood,
                  Vpon the ground their feet did beat and ſtampe:
                  And neigh and ſome at mouth on either ſide,
                  Attending ſignes of battaile with great pride.
               
               
                  
                  Both Greeks and Troyans longing ſore to trie,
                  Their knightly force and valors in the field,
                  Each one that day againſt the enemie,
                  And readie preſt with furious looke beheld
                  Their deadly foes there ſtanding in the place,
                  Which from each other was but little ſpace.
               
               
                  Till that the battailes firſt in order ſet,
                  On either ſide remou'd and forward went,
                  And in moſt furious wiſe together met,
                  Where Hector that in heart was diſcontent:
                  And formoſt on the Troyans ſide did ſtand
                  Vpon his horſe, with mighty Lance in hand.
               
               
                  Whoſe wrath and ire by no meanes could aſſwage,
                  (Like fierce and cruell Lyon that for pray
                  With hungry mood doth hunt) in furious rage,
                  Againſt the Greeks firſt onſet gaue that day:
                  And ran ſo faſt vpon his gallant ſteed,
                  That with his ſpurs he made his ſides to bleed.
               
               
                  His Knightly heart ſo much was ſet on fire,
                  With mortall wrath and hate revenge to take.
                  Which when the Greeks did ſee, with great deſire,
                  They alſo for their parts like haſt did make
                  T'advance themſelues, and firſt without abode,
                  
                     Patroclus that the formoſt of them rode.
               
               
                  In proud and hautie manner ſpurd his horſe,
                  T'encounter Hector fiercly in the field,
                  And with a ſpeare that was of mightie force,
                  Road vnto him, and hit him on the ſhield,
                  So great and ſtrong a blow, that with the ſame
                  He pierſt it through (with ſuch a force it came)
               
               
                  But hurt him not at all, for that it brake,
                  Yet with the point through plate & male did paſſe,
                  And did a hole within his harnas make,
                  But neither breſt nor skin of his did race:
                  And though with moſt great violence it came,
                  Yet could he not ſtirre Hector with the ſame.
               
               
                  Nor make him once out of his ſadle riſe,
                  Nor backeward nor yet forward for to yeeld,
                  Nor yet t'incline himſelfe in any wiſe
                  Vpon his horſe, ſo faſt thereon he held:
                  But Hector vnto his confuſion,
                  Moſt like a ſtrong and puiſſant Champion,
               
               
                  Caſt downe his ſpeare, & with his ſword in hand,
                  In furious wiſe vnto himſelfe he ſwore,
                  That ſpight of all that durſt or would't with ſtand,
                  
                     Patroclus at that time ſhould die therefore:
                  And therewith ſuch a blow vnto him gaue,
                  That with the ſtrength thereof his head he claue
               
               
                  In ſunder to the breſt, and then againe,
                  A ſecond blow him gaue withall his force,
                  Which finally his body claue in twaine,
                  Wherewith Patroclus tell off from his horſe,
                  With pale and deadly face vpon the ground,
                  As he that had receau'd his mortall wo
                        •••
                     
                  
               
               
                  In preſence of his men, and in the ſight
                  Of all the Greekes, and then without delay,
                  
                     Hector off from his horſe with ſpeed did light,
                  (And like a Lyon fell that ſeekes for pray)
                  Determin'd in his heart that burnt like fire
                  Againſt his Grecian foes, with great deſire
               
               
                  To ſpoyle Patroclus of his armes that were,
                  So gallant, rich, and ſumptuous to behold,
                  As being ſet with precious ſtones moſt cleare
                  In chaſt, and richly gilt with pureſt gold:
                  For then great Lords and Princes vs'd to beare
                  Moſt ſumptuous arms whē as in field they were▪)
               
               
                  And to that end while he was buſied,
                  With couetous deſire to take his pray,
                  (In ſight of all the Greekes) his horſe he led,
                  In one hand by the reine, and thought to lay
                  The body of Patroclus on the ſame,
                  But ere't was done King Menon thither came.
               
               
                  And with three thouſand Knights inclos'd him round,
                  Who all together hotely him aſſail'd,
                  Whereas ſo great reſiſtance then he found,
                  That of his purpoſe at that time he faild:
                  And forced was to let Patroclus lie,
                  For to reſiſt the force of th'enemie.
               
               
                  Which cauſed him in boyling rage to fall,
                  To whome King Menon fell and furious,
                  The ſpake and ſaid in preſence of them all,
                  O greedy Wolfe and Tygar ravinous,
                  O Lyon fierce and beaſt inſatiable,
                  Whoſe avarice is moſt vnreaſonable
               
               
                  Vpon this prey, as now thou ſhalt not feed,
                  Go ſeeke elſewhere for other carrion,
                  For fifty thouſand men haue all decreed,
                  This day to worke thy ſole deſtruction:
                  And that they may in their intent prevaile,
                  Thy hatefull pride at once they w
                        •
                     ll aſſaile.
               
               
                  And then in furious wiſe on him they ſet,
                  With Launces, ſwords, and other weapons more▪
                  
                  And on him as vpon an anvile beat.
                  On every ſide, behind, and eke before:
                  With full pretence his horſe from him to take▪
                  
                  And what ſo ere reſiſtance he could make.
               
               
                  
                  For all his valor, force, and puiſſant might,
                  He was conſtraind to fall vpon his knee,
                  But like a moſt couragious hardy Knight,
                  By paſſing ſtrength and magnanimitie,
                  Deſpight of all the Greeks, he did by force
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      vp againe vpon his gallant horſe.
               
               
                  And to King Menon road with furious mood,
                  And heart poſſeſt with extreame cruelty,
                  (Wherein his ſole delight and pleaſure ſtood)
                  And without doubt had ſlaine him preſently:
                  If that three thouſand knights chivalerous,
                  With Theſeus, Glaucus, and Archilagus,
                  
               
               
                  Had not in time to reſcue him come thither,
                  Who all with one conſent and great deſpight,
                  Agreed to follow Hector, and together
                  In furious wiſe to kill him if they might:
                  But nere the leſſe who ſ
                        •
                     ere did him aſſaile,
                  Was ſurely kild, for nought could him prevaile
               
               
                  Againſt his puiſſant arme and trenchant blade,
                  So that the Greeke that met with him that day,
                  Need take no care for ranſome to be made
                  To ſaue his life, for ere he ſcapt away,
                  He was moſt certaine without doubt to die,
                  So that for feare, each one from him did flie.
               
               
                  Whereby he had the meanes to breake the preaſe
                  Of thoſe that did encloſe him round about,
                  And where ſo ere he road he did not ceaſe,
                  To kill and beat them downe till he got out,
                  And made a path before him ſmooth & plaine,
                  Vntill he came vnto the place againe,
               
               
                  Whereas the body of Patroclus lay,
                  To ſpoyle him of his armor if he might,
                  And fore him on his horſe to beare't away,
                  In view of all the Greeks to their deſpight:
                  And at that time had ſurely had the ſame,
                  But that King Idumeus thither came.
               
               
                  And with him broght two thouſa'd knights of 
                        
                           •
                        ree
                           •
                        ,
                  
                  (Where he was King) that did incloſe him round,
                  And valiantly on all 
                        •
                     ides on him ſet,
                  While he vnarm'd Patroclus on the ground:
                  And to them came a king cald Merion,
                  
                  (Although at laſt to his confuſion.)
               
               
                  And ere that Hector could about him looke,
                  Deſpight of all his valor and his might,
                  His gallant horſe perforce from him they tooke,
                  Whereby he was compeld on foot to fight:
                  But yet his knightly heart they could not feare,
                  For with his ſword he ſlew all that were neare,
               
               
                  Or him withſtood: and at that time began
                  To hacke and hew the Greeks on euery ſide,
                  And t'cu
                        •
                      off armes & legs of horſe and man,
                  That none of them before him durſt abide:
                  For he in little ſpace had fifteene ſlaine,
                  Of thoſe that forcibly would him haue tane.
               
               
                  And ſuch a ſlaughter gan amongſt them make,
                  That many of thē ſhrunke back & would not ſtay,
                  Meane time they did Patroclus body take,
                  Which Merion on his horſe did beare away
                  Vnto his tent with ſad and heauy cheare,
                  And ſtill the Greeks with Hector fighting were.
               
               
                  Who all the while vpon his feet did ſtand,
                  And ſome of them that neer'ſt on him did preſſe,
                  He made to feele his ſtrong and heauy hand:
                  Yet what ſo ere he did they would not ceaſe,
                  Nor leaue t'encloſe him round on euery ſide,
                  Preſuming in their hearts with hawty pride,
               
               
                  In th'end at ſome advantage him to take,
                  Suppoſing that he could not long ſuſtaine
                  Their puiſſant force, or from their hands eſcape,
                  Nor likely was, his horſe to get againe:
                  From which they ſought by all means him to let,
                  And therefore all at once vpon him ſet.
               
               
                  And ſpecially amongſt them there was one,
                  More earneſt and more buſie then the reſt,
                  (Whoſe name as Guid
                           •
                        
                      ſayth was Carion)
                  That Hector in moſt furious wiſe oppreſt:
                  And ſtill inforſt himſelfe, and would not ceaſe
                  T'aſſaile him when he was in moſt diſtreſſe.
               
               
                  Environed by Greeks on euery ſide,
                  Till that by chance a valiant Troyan knight,
                  (Who all the while with Hector did abide,
                  When he on foot enclos'd with Greeks did fight)
                  Two darts in hand did take, whereof the one
                  He did directly caſt at Carion.
                  
               
               
                  Which with ſuch force ſtroke him into the ſide,
                  That with the blow it claue his heart in twaine,
                  And ſtayd not there, but forcibly did ſlide
                  Out through his armes at th'other ſide againe:
                  And with that mighty, great, & fatall wound,
                  He preſently fell dead vpon the ground
               
               
                  Before an hundred knights, who all together
                  With him had vo
                        •
                     'd & ſworne with great deſpight,
                  The death of Hector by one meanes or other.
                  The ſecond dart this worthy Troyan knight,
                  Caſt at a Grecian Knight, that in the field
                  Gan Hector to approach, and through his ſhield
               
               
                  
                  And armor bright did ſtrike him to the heart,
                  And then vnto the Troyans he did call
                  And cry alowd, to come from every part,
                  With ſpeed vpon the Grecian Knights to fall:
                  That had incloſed Hector round about,
                  And without danger great could not get ou
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               
                  Wherewith the valiant hardy C
                           ••
                        cibere,
                  
                  (One of King Priams Baſtard childeren)
                  And diuers other Troyan Knights that were
                  At his command, in haſt did come, and when
                  They ſaw that Hector midſt the Greekes vnhorſt,
                  S▪vnequally to fight on foot was forſt,
               
               
                  With fury great together they did ſet
                  Vpon the backes of thoſe that him enclos'd,
                  And vnawares by that meanes did them let
                  Of that pretence which mongſt thē they ſuppos'd,
                  For preſently when they the Troyans ſaw,
                  Three hundred of their Knights did them withdraw.
               
               
                  With ſodaine feare abaſht and fled away,
                  When thirtie of their men had firſt been ſlaine,
                  And Hector maugre all that durſt ſay nay,
                  Vpon his gallant horſe got vp againe:
                  And entring in the thickeſt of the preaſe,
                  In furious wiſe did ride and neuer ceaſe
               
               
                  To kill and ſlay with bloudy ſword in hand,
                  And mercileſſe to cut and hew in ſunder,
                  All thoſe that gainſt him in the field durſt ſtand,
                  (That to behold his valor it was woonder)
                  And only for becauſe they did him ſtay,
                  And hinder from Patroclus armes that day.
               
               
                  And therefore in moſt cruell wiſe he ſhed
                  The bloud of many a worthy Grecian Knight,
                  Who in great feare and terror from him fled,
                  But he on whom with trenchant blade he light,
                  Was ſure to die, for t'was to him much good,
                  To ſee his ſword died red with Grecians blood.
               
               
                  And on them in ſuch ſort reveng'd to be,
                  For that like Lyon fierce that hunts for pray,
                  He did ſo kill and follow them, that he
                  The Grecians pride did much abate that day:
                  For as they fled the bloud in ſtreames was ſeene,
                  Run from their wounds along vpon the greene.
               
               
                  Till Meneſtes the Duke of Athens came,
                  With iuſt three thouſand Knights well furniſhed,
                  And richly arm'd, and all of them the ſame,
                  That he from Athens brought: the which he led
                  Of purpoſe to the left ſide of the field,
                  Where Troyelus that time the fight then held.
               
               
                  With none but Phrigian Knights, and all that day,
                  (Like to a ravening Wolfe that greedilie,
                  With open mouth doth follow after pray,)
                  Did kill and ſlay the Greekes ſo cruelly,
                  That they were glad to flie & ſhun his ſight.
                  And while he was moſt earneſt in the fight
               
               
                  Againſt his foes (with ſtout King Za
                           •
                        tip
                           ••
                        ,
                  
                  That did himſelfe moſt valiantly behaue)
                  And with another King cald Alchanus,
                  
                  (That likewiſe was a hardy Knight & braue)
                  Who with their trenchāt blades all three did wound
                  And kill ſo many Greeks, that all the ground
               
               
                  Whereas they fought was couered ore with blo
                        ••
                     ,
                  And bodies of the Greeks whom they did ſlay,
                  But ſpecially yong Troyelus that road
                  That day vpon a horſe of color baye,
                  (Such havocke of them made, that well was he
                  That from their fierce & cruell blows went 
                        •••
                     e.)
               
               
                  
                     Meneſtes that with furious looke beheld,
                  What ſlaughter on the Grecians then was made
                  By Troyelus that day within the field,
                  Such wrath and cruell ire in heart he had:
                  That with a mightie ſpeare coucht in his reſt,
                  He ran and hit yong Troyelus in the breſt
               
               
                  So puiſſantly, and with ſo great a force,
                  That maugre all his might and valor great,
                  At vnawares he threw him off his horſe,
                  In midſt of all his foes that him beſet
                  Cleane round about; where he on foot did fight,
                  And like a hardy, fierce, and valiant Knight,
               
               
                  Moſt brauely did aſſaile his enemies,
                  And them alſo with valor great withſtood,
                  Although he was in great extreamities,
                  And danger of his life, for that he ſtood
                  Amongſt the horſes feet, almoſt ore-run,
                  And found no way how he the ſame ſhold 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  For round about him enemies he ſaw,
                  That hotely him aſſaild on every ſide,
                  And by no meanes he could himſelfe withdraw
                  From thence, nor long their puiſſant force abid
                        ••
                     
                  
                  For Meneſtes ſtill more vpon him preſt,
                  And gaue him not the means to breath, nor 
                        •••
                     t,
               
               
                  In hope at laſt he ſhould be overcome.
                  And ſtill the nomber of the Greeks increaſt,
                  And ſuch as wearied were, gaue others roome
                  To fight, whereby with multitudes orepreſt,
                  And with exceeding toyle ſore wearied,
                  They tooke him and as priſner forth him led▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  Till that a valiant Knight of Troye that ſtood,
                  And ſaw him by the Greeks ſo led away,
                  Sore grieu'd and much abaſht in furious mood,
                  Vnto the Troyan Knights did ſpeake, and ſay:
                  O worthy Phrigian Knights whoſe honors ſpread
                  Throughout the world, & long hath flowriſhed,
               
               
                  For ſhame let it not now ecclipſed be,
                  And meerely by your fault and negligence,
                  That ſtay ſtill here as in a maſe, and ſee
                  Not how the Greekes by force and violence
                  The gallant Knight Prince Troylus haue taken,
                  Without reliefe, as't were, by you forſaken.
               
               
                  Which will redownd to your perpetuall ſhame,
                  For if the flower of worthines be led
                  Away by force and not relieu'd, the blame
                  (And worthily) will turne vpon your head:
                  For if with ſpeed you do him not relieue,
                  Men will report, and verily belieue,
               
               
                  That onely by your meanes it came to paſſe,
                  That Troyelus this day had this miſchance,
                  And by the Grecians priſoner taken was▪
                  
                  Let vs then to that end our ſelues advance,
                  And valiantly our honors herein ſaue,
                  That no diſcredite we thereby may haue.
               
               
                  Wherewith the worthie King cald Alchanus,
                  
                  Was ſo much moou'd in heart, that preſentlie
                  (Like to a Lyon fierce and furious)
                  He tooke a ſpeare in hand, and ſodainlie
                  Did ſpur his horſe as faſt as ere he might,
                  And after road, till that he had a fight
               
               
                  Of thoſe that yong Prince Troyelus priſner led,
                  And with his ſpeare ran at a Grecian Knight,
                  And pierſt him to the heart, that he fell dead
                  Vpon the ground, and then againe did ſmite
                  Another Grecian Knight with ſuch a force,
                  That he not onlie caſt him off his horſe,
               
               
                  But with his mightie Launce did pierce him cleane
                  Through's body, ſholder bone, & armor ſtrong,
                  So that the ſteely point thereof was ſeene
                  Out at his backe at leaſt a handfull long:
                  And then the Phrigian Knights as thicke as haile,
                  Came riding downe, & did the Greeks aſſaile,
               
               
                  With ſo great courage and dexterity,
                  That maugre all reſiſtance they could make,
                  They did procure Prince Troyelus liberty,
                  And him out of their hands by force did take▪
                  
                  And help't him to his horſe againe with ſpeed,
                  Whereof as then he had no little need.
               
               
                  And with them alſo was King Za
                           ••
                        ippus,
                  
                  Who when he ſaw Duke Meneſtes, with ſpeed
                  (And with a noble he
                        ••
                     t and valorous)
                  In furious wiſe he ſpurd his luſty ſteed▪
                  
                  And run at him with ſpeare in hand ſo faſt,
                  That with the blow through ſheild & male he paſt.
               
               
                  With ſo great force, that without doubt he had
                  Been ſlaine, if that his armes had not been good▪
                  
                  But Meneſtes was furious, wood, and m
                        •
                     d,
                  And raging, fre
                        ••
                     ing, 
                        ••
                     ming, chaſing ſtood:
                  And like an Aſpen lea
                        •
                     e with anger ſhooke,
                  Becauſe the Troyans Troyelus from him tooke,
               
               
                  Deſpight of him and all his Chivalty;
                  And foming like a Bore at mouth did ba
                        •
                     le,
                  And to th▪ 
                     Athenian Knights aloud did cry,
                  To will them on the Troyan Knights to fall:
                  And be reveng'd on them for that diſgrace,
                  Before that they ſhould ſtir out of that place.
               
               
                  Wherewith they all at once with fury great,
                  The Troyans did aſſaile right valiantly,
                  And for their parts they likewiſe did not let
                  To fall vpon the Greekes couragiouſſie:
                  And then began a fierce and furious fight,
                  And did ſo fiercely one the other ſmight.
               
               
                  That fire out of their ſheilds & armes did fly,
                  And ſparkle all abroad in fearefull wi
                        •
                     e,
                  And many a valiant Knight that day did die,
                  And in the field caſt our moſt dolefull cries:
                  Of life or death they tooke as then no heed,
                  For that they had determin'd and decreed,
               
               
                  Each other to deſtroy, confound, and kill,
                  And furiouſly to worke their enemies bane,
                  And at that time the battailes that ſtood ſtill
                  On every ſide, came downe into the plaine:
                  And with moſt pale and deadly faces met,
                  And on each other valiantly did ſet.
               
               
                  With hote and burning jre, ſo that as then,
                  Nought elſe but blows of Launces, ſword, & dar
                        •
                     ,
                  Were heard and ſeene within the field, and men
                  Did ſhout and cry alowd, and on each part,
                  The fight began in ſuch ſort to renew,
                  That many a man in fine the ſame did rew.
               
               
                  For Hector like a moſt renowned Knight,
                  So furiouſly ſtill on the Greekes did ſet,
                  And with moſt puiſſant blows and paſſing might,
                  Did kill, beat downe, & maime all thoſe he met
                        •
                     
                  
                  And mercileſſe, with extreame cruelty
                  Did them confound, that pitty t'was to ſee.
               
               
                  
                  And Meneſtes with heart repleat with ſpight,
                  Becauſe his priſ▪ner Troyelus had beene tane
                  So forcibly from him, and that in fight
                  His men had then ſo many of them been ſlaine:
                  Where ſo ere he road in furious wiſe did ſlay,
                  Beat downe, & wound, & fore him draue away
               
               
                  The Troyan knights, that he might take revenge,
                  For th'iniuries that they to him had done,
                  And as he round the field about did range,
                  (Like Wolfe for prey) and here and there did run
                  In furious wi
                        •
                     e to kill his enemies,
                  He met a Troyan knight cal'd Miſeres.
                  
               
               
                  (Who in deſpight of all his Chivalrie,
                  His priſ▪ner worthie Troyelus had tane
                  By force from him that day, and ſet him free,
                  And ſome of his Athenian knights had ſlaine)
                  And knowing him againe by th'armes he bare
                  Vpon his ſhield, before he was aware.
               
               
                  And ere of him he once tooke heed or care,
                  He ſpurd his horſe, & ran at him in haſt,
                  (And mongſt the ranks of Troyans that were there)
                  Him to the ground out of his ſaddle caſt.
                  Then to the field on Troyans ſide there came
                  A valiant King that Hupon had to name,
               
               
                  That with him full two thouſand knights did bring,
                  Who on the Greekes in furious wiſe did ſet,
                  And to encounter them, for Greekes a king
                  Cald Prothenor, couragiouſly did meet:
                  And Archelius the noble warrior,
                  That of Boetia Land was Governor.
               
               
                  Who with the ayd of valiant Prothenor,
                  
                  The Troyans did aſſaile as cruelly,
                  As he had been a Tygar or a Bore,
                  And Prothenor himſelfe couragiouſly,
                  Did alſo many a Troyan fiercely ſlay.
                  But Hupon by his valor great did ſtay
               
               
                  Their furious moods, and through his Chivalry,
                  Not only did the Troyans then defend,
                  But in moſt cruell wiſe, and furiouſly
                  Brought many Grecian knights vnto their end.
                  And thus twixt them the fight then equall was,
                  Till that the worthy knight Polidamas
                  
               
               
                  
                     Anthenors ſonne, (that valiantly did ride
                  Before his knights) amongſt the Greekes did enter,
                  And brauely them aſſaild on every ſide,
                  And by that meanes did breake their ranks aſunder:
                  And cruelly kild many a Grecian knight,
                  For they could not reſiſt againſt his might,
               
               
                  He was ſo hardy, ſtout, and furious.
                  And for to ſecond him the worthy king
                  Cald Remus, that of knights chivalerous,
                  Three thouſand to the field with him did bring▪
                  
                  Into the battaile came, and there did fight
                  So valiantly, and with ſuch force and might,
               
               
                  That all the Troyan knights that him beheld,
                  Tooke great delight, & were exceeding glad,
                  To ſee him kill & chaſe the Greekes in field,
                  And that ſuch havocke of them there he made:
                  Whereby as then great noyſe of ſtrokes & cries,
                  Within the field was heard and gan to riſe.
               
               
                  And while king Remus in this ſort ſtill 
                        •
                     ights,
                  And on the Greeks in furious wiſe did ſet,
                  King Menelaus with all his Spartane knights,
                  Into the battaile proudly came, to let
                  And to reſtraine king Remus in his courſe,
                  And to that end ſet ſpurres vnto his horſe,
               
               
                  And valiantly vpon king Remus ſet,
                  And Remus likewiſe gainſt him road as faſt,
                  And with their ſpeares ſo furiouſly they met,
                  That each the other to the ground did caſt:
                  For in their courſe they did ſo fiercely run,
                  That neither of thē each others blows could ſhun.
               
               
                  Meane time the valiant knight Pollidamus
                  
                  (Who onely ſought to honor to attaine,
                  As he that was both ſtout and valorous)
                  Met with Queene Helens Nephew in the plaine,
                  That was a mighty Duke cald Mereus,
                  
                  A Prince both gallant, yong, and vertuous.
               
               
                  Moſt richly arm'd and of good carriage,
                  And for his time a ſtout and valiant knight,
                  (For he was then but twenty yeares of age)
                  Yet much renownd for valor and for might:
                  But by hard fortune it fell out (alas)
                  That this braue Troyan knight Pollidamas,
                  
               
               
                  Ran at him with a ſpeare ſo furiouſly,
                  That piercing through his armes and coat of male,
                  He ſtrake him to the heart, and ſodainly,
                  He fell downe dead with color wan and pale:
                  Which when as old King Menelaus beheld,
                  And ſaw him lie dead groueling in the field,
               
               
                  That ſometime Nephew was to Helena
                  
                  His wife, he fell into ſo great a rage,
                  That preſently he made no more delay,
                  But in ſome part his choller to aſſwage,
                  He ran at ſtout King Remus in deſpight,
                  And with his ſword ſtroke at him with ſuch might
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the head, that he could not ſuſtaine
                  Himſelfe vpright, but fell vnto the ground,
                  Wherewith his Knights ſuppoſing he was ſlaine,
                  For that the blood did run out of his wound.
                  (And he as dead vpon the ground did lie,)
                  They tooke him vp, and with him gan to flie
               
               
                  As faſt as ere they could, and would not ſtay
                  Till that the valiant Knight Pollidamas
                  
                  Vnto them went, and ſtopt them in the way,
                  And by no meanes would ſuffer them to paſſe,
                  Except thoſe that by him appointed were,
                  King Remus to the towne of Troy to beare.
               
               
                  Then to the field on Grecians ſide there came,
                  King Celides a valiant Prince and ſtout,
                  Whom Dares doth report t'haue had the name
                  Amongſt the Greeks, and all the world throughout.
                  T'excell all men without exception,
                  For beauty, ſhape, and good proportion,
               
               
                  Behauiour, grace, and countenance bening,
                  For every part of him was moſt exact,
                  And finely made, ſo that not any thing
                  To grace a man withall, in him there lackt,
                  For nature had him fram'd of ſuch a mold,
                  That all men did delight him to behold.
               
               
                  Which made the gallant Amazonian Queene,
                  (For paſſing beauty held to be the flower,)
                  To loue him ſo when once ſhe had him ſeene,
                  That ſhe did chooſe him for her Parramour,
                  And loued him ſo deerely at the heart,
                  That from her thought he neuer could depart.
               
               
                  Who being as I ſayd a gallant Knight,
                  As ſoone as ere he entred in the field,
                  And ſaw whereas Pollidamas did fight
                  Againſt the Greeks, and at a bay them held;
                  He ſet his ſpurres vnto his horſes ſide,
                  And in moſt furious wiſe to him did ride,
               
               
                  And with his ſpeare did giue him ſuch a blow,
                  That with the ſame (which came with paſſing might
                  Off from his horſe he did him overthrow,
                  But to requite him for't the Troian Knight
                  
                     Pollidamas with pale and furious face,
                  Ere Celides departed from the place,
               
               
                  Drewout his ſword and ſmot him on the head
                  So cruelly, and with ſo great a might
                  That he therewith off from his horſe fell dead
                  Vpon the grrund, vnto the great deſpight
                  Of all the Greeks, that could him not relieue,
                  For which in heart they ſore did fret and grieue.
               
               
                  And while the Greeks and Troians thus did fight,
                  And each the other kild in euery place
                  Throughout the field: Hector the valiant Knight,
                  Like Lyon fierce, before him did them chaſe,
                  And furiouſly did wound, beat downe, and ſlay
                  The Greeks ſo faſt, that forſt to giue him way,
               
               
                  Like ſheepe before the greedy woolfe they fled.
                  For gainſt his trenchant blade no Greeks durſt ſtād,
                  For with the ſame their blood ſo faſt he ſhead,
                  That glad was he that could eſcape his hand.
                  And at that time ſuch vengance he did take
                  On them, that they compeld were to forſake
               
               
                  The field whereas he fought, yet would he not
                  Leaue off to kill, and chaſe them, till in fine
                  As he road here and there it was his lot,
                  Among the valiant Knights of Salo
                           •
                        ine.
                  
                  T'incounter with King Theſeus in the way,
                  That many a Troian Knight had ſlaine that day.
               
               
                  And as to him in haſt he gan to ride,
                  The valiant Knight King Tentar thither came
                  With ſpeare in hand, and while he lookt aſide,
                  In furious wiſe ran at him with the ſame.
                  And with the blow cleane through his armes did pierce
                  And wounded him, but while with courage fierce,
               
               
                  
                     Hector to be reueng'd for that deſpight
                  (On Tentar,) turnd his horſe about in haſt,
                  He wiſely road as faſt as ere he might,
                  Till he out of his furious ſight was paſt,
                  Wherewith his heart was ſoe poſſeſt with ire,
                  That in his breaſt it burnt as hot as fire.
               
               
                  And when he felt his wound to ake and ſmart,
                  He did within himſelfe ſo rage and fret,
                  That for to eaſe the coller of his heart,
                  What Greeke ſoeuer after that he met,
                  Or that durſt be ſo bold him to withſtand,
                  Was ſure to die by his victorious hand.
               
               
                  And mongſt the reſt one ſpeciall there was
                  That proudly and of purpoſe him withſtood,
                  Whom with his ſword (which through his arms did
                  He claue vnto the heart with furious mood, (paſſe)
                  At which moſt puiſſant ſtroke the Greeks did trēble,
                  But neretheleſſe they did in troopes aſſemble,
               
               
                  And him incloſed round on every ſide,
                  Vpon him ſuch a fierce aſſault to make,
                  (Which they ſuppoſd he could not long abide,
                  That at the laſt by force they would him take.
                  And more and more there number ſtill increaſt,
                  Which on all ſides t'aſſayle him neuer ceaſt.
               
               
                  
                  So that to all mens 
                        •
                     ight by likelihood
                  He could not from their hands eſcape aliue.
                  And while in ſo great danger there he ſtood,
                  And ſtill with them did 
                        ••
                     ght
                        ••
                     nd brauely ſtriue,
                  Like to a Lyon fierce and furious.
                  The worthy Grecian King cald Theſeus,
                  
               
               
                  Of curteſie and of meere gentleneſſe,
                  In heart was mou
                        •
                     d to ſee him in that caſe,
                  And pitying his heard and great diſtreſſe,
                  As fearing what in fine might come to paſſe,
                  Becauſe he ſtood in danger of the wracke,
                  In kind and friendly manner to him ſpake.
               
               
                  Oh valiant Knight, and root of hardineſſe,
                  Oh ſpring of man-hood, ſtocke of Nobleneſſe,
                  And th'onely patterne of all worthineſſe,
                  Why art thou now ſo careleſſe in diſtreſſe?
                  To ſaue thy life by Knightly prouidence,
                  When as thou ſeeſt thou canſt not make defence
               
               
                  Againſt ſo huge a number of thy foes.
                  Mongſt whom thou art in danger to be ſlaine,
                  For they on every ſide doe thee incloſe,
                  And haue all meanes of ſuccour from thee tane.
                  And yet thou wilt not helpe thy ſelfe at all,
                  But ſtaiſt to ſee the worſt that may befall.
               
               
                  For which all men in heart may well complaine,
                  To ſee that ſuch a worthy valiant Knight,
                  Who by his valor Knight-hood doth maintaine,
                  And vnto Marſhall men is th'only light.
                  And as it were th'v pholder of their law,
                  Will not himſelfe from danger now withdraw.
               
               
                  But wilfully thy life wilt rather looſe.
                  Great pitty t'were that thou ſhouldſt here be ſlaine
                  Withdraw thy ſelfe therfore whilſt thou maiſt choſe
                  For if thou dieſt not now thou wilt be tane,
                  Thy proweſſe great compelleth me to pray
                  Thee, that in this diſtreſſe thou wilt not ſtay.
               
               
                  Which words whē 
                     Hector heard, & knew they came
                  Out of a heart repleat with curteſie▪
                  
                  He bow'd his head, and thank't him for the ſame,
                  As to his friend, and yet his enemy.
                  And then perforce and mauger all the might
                  The Greeks could vſe, moſt like a valiant Knight
               
               
                  With bloody ſword in hand he brake the preſſe,
                  And through the thickſt of them did brauely ride,
                  And got from them, and ſtill he did not ceaſe
                  To kill, and beat them downe on euery ſide.
                  And in his way Pollidamas he found,
                  That valiantly ſtood fighting on the ground,
               
               
                  Againſt two Greecian Kings, whereof the one
                  Was Menelaus, a worthy valiant Knight,
                  The other fierce and furious Thelamon,
                  
                  Who likewiſe was a Prince of paſſing might.
                  And Thelamon ran at him with ſuch force,
                  That with his ſpeare he threw him on his horſe.
               
               
                  And forcedihim gainſt both of them to fight,
                  On foot, that they reuenge on him might take,
                  And with moſt furious blowes they did him 
                        ••
                     a
                        ••
                     e
                  Vpon his creſt and helmet, which they brake.
                  And then the beauer from his face they 
                        •••
                     e,
                  And when that it vncouered was and bare,
               
               
                  And by that meanes he could it not defend▪
                  
                  With that aduantage which on him they had,
                  They tooke him ſuddenly and did him ſend
                  Vnto their tents, and him a priſoner made.
                  But when as Hector did behold and ſee
                  
                     Pollidamas in ſuch extremitie,
               
               
                  With full intent to ſuccour him in haſt,
                  He ſpurd his horſe and furiouſly did ride
                  T'oretake the Greekes, and whereſoere he paſt
                  With ſword in hand made way on every ſide,
                  Till in the end he got vnto the place
                  Whereas diſtreſt Pollidamas then was,
               
               
                  Cleane ſuccourleſſe, and without remedy,
                  Or hope of ayd from Troians in that caſe,
                  Till that he did on Hector ſet his eie,
                  That thirty Greeks had ſlaine in little ſpace,
                  And made them giue him way for all their pride,
                  For none of them durſt fore his ſword abide.
               
               
                  Nor gainſt him ſtand, ſo that by valor great
                  And Knightly force, he made them all to flie,
                  And by that meanes Pollidamas did ſet
                  Free from their hands, againe at libertie.
                  Then to the field came King Epistrophus
                  
                  With many worthy Knights and valorous.
               
               
                  And with him Menelaus and Thelamon,
                  
                  And each of them great ſtore of Knights likewiſe,
                  Who with their troopes of Greeks all joynd in one,
                  The Troians did aſſaile in furious wiſe.
                  (To get themſelues an everlaſting name
                  Of honour and of glory by the ſame.)
               
               
                  And with their power of Greeks that were ſo ſtrong,
                  They draue the Troians fore them in the field,
                  And entring mongſt the thickeſt of the throng,
                  Gainſt them a hard and furious fight they field:
                  Deſpight of all their valor and their might,
                  Or Hectors Knightly proweſſe that did fight
               
               
                  
                  So valiantly as then, and with ſuch force
                  (That none but he himſelfe could euer do't,)
                  But cowardly the Greeks did kill his horſe,
                  And then he was conſtraind to fight on foot:
                  Which vnto them procur'd but little good,
                  For there was none that then about him ſtood
               
               
                  But he did kill, and wound them grieuouſly.
                  And though by them he was incloſed round,
                  And on all ſides aſſayled furiouſly,
                  He made them to recule and giue him ground▪
                  
                  And on his feet ſo fiercely fought that day,
                  That none of them durſt hand vpon him lay.
               
               
                  For if they did they were aſſur'd to die.
                  And when his valiant brethren him beheld,
                  And ſaw him fight on foot ſo furiouſly,
                  Incloſd by Greeks in midſt of all the field,
                  And to defend himſelfe gainſt them ſo well,
                  (As any rauening Tyger fierce and fell,
               
               
                  That furiouſly doth fight to ſaue her whelp.)
                  They all together brake into the preaſe,
                  And Hector on all ſides began to helpe,
                  And firſt vpon King Thelamon did ceaze.
                  (For him gainſt Hector buſieſt then was found,)
                  And gaue him many a great and bloody wound.
               
               
                  While that a valiant Knight cald Dixdaron,
                  
                  Among the Grecian troopes did boldly ride,
                  And there a gallant horſe by force he won,
                  Which hauing got, he did not long abide
                  B
                        ••
                      brought it vnto Hector where he ſtood
                  Among the Greeks all bathed in their blood.
               
               
                  Whereon in haſt he mounted gallantly,
                  And mongſt the Greeks like Mars himſelfe did ride
                  And many of them did kill ſo furiouſly,
                  That at that time he did abate their pride.
                  Then Deiphobus entred in the field,
                  And brauely gainſt the Grecians battaile held,
               
               
                  With th'archers of Bohemie which he brought
                  With him to field, whoſe arrowes feathers were
                  With Peacocks gliſtring tailes, wherwith they fought
                  And did ſo fiercely ſhoot, that in great feare
                  To ſhun the ſame the Greeks retired backe,
                  And Troians by that meanes did courage take.
               
               
                  And then Deiphobus valiantly did race
                  And beat King Tentrans helmet from his head,
                  And with his ſword did wound him in the face
                  So cruelly, that in a manner dead
                  Hefell of from his horſe with extreame paine,
                  And then the Troians furiouſly againe
               
               
                  Aſſaild the Greeks, and put them to a ſtand,
                  And once againe were maſters of the field.
                  But Theſeus with the Knights at his command
                  Withſtood them ſtill, and them too hardly held,
                  Till Hectors baſtard brother Quintiline,
                  
                  Whoſe armes as cleare & bright as ſun did ſhine.
               
               
                  And the moſt valiant King cald Modern
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
                  Aſſayled, and with extreame crueltie,
                  Together fell vpon King Theſeus,
                  
                  Who neretheleſſe with great agilitie,
                  Againſt them both himſelfe did long defend;
                  But notwithſtanding all his force, in th'end
               
               
                  They brought him vnto ſuch extremitie,
                  That without doubt they had him ſurely flaine,
                  If Hector (mou'd thereto by curteſie,)
                  Had not with ſpeed cri'd out to them amaine,
                  To pray them for his ſake their hands to ſtay▪
                  
                  And ſaue his life, whereto they did obay.
               
               
                  And for that time aſſayled him no more,
                  For Hector cald to mind what curteſie
                  To him was ſhowne the ſelfe ſame day before
                  By Theſeus, in his hard extremity,
                  And therefore with the like did him require,
                  As tis the part of every courteous Knight.
               
               
                  For which King Theſeus thankt him hartely,
                  As glad he had eſcapt by ſuch a chance.
                  Then in the field King Thoas valiantly
                  On Grecians ſide his ſtandard did aduance,
                  And with him King Philoctetes came thither,
                  Who with thē broght great ſtore of knights together
               
               
                  And with that great and new ſupply of men,
                  The Troians did aſſayle, and Thoas ran
                  (At one of Priams baſtard children,)
                  Whom Guido 
                     
                        •
                     aith was cald Caſſibelian,
                  
                  And to him gaue ſo great and ſore a wound,
                  That he therewith fell dead vpon the ground.
               
               
                  Which blow when Hector ſaw, he grieued ſore,
                  And for his brothers death great ſorrow made,
                  And to himſelfe he did proteſt, and ſwore
                  That he would neuer reſt till that he had
                  Reveng'd his brothers death if that he might
                  Vpon the Greeks, and then with great deſpight,
               
               
                  He entred mongſt the thick'ſt of them in haſt,
                  And furiouſly all thoſe that in his way
                  Did ſtand, he kild, or maymed ſore, did caſt
                  Them off their horſes backes, and all that day
                  So valiantly did fight againſt his foes,
                  That many a 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      thereby his life did loſe.
               
               
                  
                  Then to the field Duke Neſtor proudly brought
                  Fiue thouſand valiant Knights in armor bright,
                  That furiouſly againſt the Troians fought.
                  And on the Troians ſide the worthy Knight
                  King Eſdras, with a courage ſtout and bold,
                  And Philon in his ſtately chaire of gold,
               
               
                  With all the valiant Knights and chivalry,
                  (That for to ayd King Priam thither came)
                  Out of Agreſta land with Iacony
                  
                  The Prince and heire thereof, and with the ſame
                  Couragiouſly vpon the Grecians ran,
                  At which time many a braue and worthy man
               
               
                  Was fiercely ſlaine and maim'd on euery ſide,
                  And from the men that on the ground lay dead
                  And wounded ſore, with gaſhes long and wide,
                  The field all ore was died in colour red,
                  With ſtreames of blood that men therin might wade,
                  Such ſlaughter at that time twixt them was made.
               
               
                  At which time Philon fought moſt furiouſly,
                  And did by valor great the Troians ayd,
                  And many a Greeke that day did cauſe to die.
                  But while thus fighting valiantly he ſtaid,
                  At vnawares he was incloſed round,
                  And ſodainly himſelfe in danger found:
               
               
                  For that the Greekes ſo compaſt him about,
                  That he vnlikely was from them t'eſcape,
                  For by no meanes he could from thence get out,
                  But that in th'end they would him either take,
                  Or kill outright, but that Prince Iacony
                  
                  Vnto King Eſdras loudly gan to cry,
               
               
                  Saying, my Lord, by our great negligence
                  King Philon at this time will ſure be ſlaine,
                  For gainſt ſo many Greeks ther's no defence,
                  But that he muſt needs die, or els be tane,
                  If we relieue him not if that we can,
                  And ſo in haſt they altogether ran,
               
               
                  And in deſpight of all the Greeks by force,
                  They did releaſe King Philon from their hands;
                  Who glad thereof, did mount vpon his horſe
                  And road with them vnto the Troian bands:
                  That then with all their power, force, and might,
                  With Hector that moſt brave and worthy Knight,
               
               
                  
                     Deiphobus, and Pollidamas, and other
                  Couragious Troian Knights that had decreed
                  With one conſent, and valiantly together
                  The Grecians freſhly to aſſayle with ſpeed,
                  Of purpoſe, if convenient meanes they found,
                  With all their puiſſant power t'incloſe thē round.
               
               
                  That few of them ſhould ſcape with life from thēce,
                  And to that end did fiercely them aſſaile,
                  And did compell the Greeks with ſmall defence,
                  (For that as then their courages did fayle.)
                  To looſe their ground, and to retire with ſpeed,
                  And finally were driuen into ſuch need,
               
               
                  That mauger all their might they had that day,
                  Been vtterly brought to confution,
                  And forced in the end to run away,
                  If that King Menelaus and Thelamon,
                  
                  When as they ſaw them faint and halfe afraid,
                  Had them not then incouraged and ſtaid,
               
               
                  And made them once againe themſelues defend,
                  Till that Aeneas and Duke Eufrenus,
                  
                  Againſt the Greeks did valiantly deſcend
                  With other troopes of Knights chivalrous,
                  And freſhly them againe did ſore oppreſſe:
                  And Hector alſo by his worthineſſe,
               
               
                  Like Lyon fierce with ſterne and cruell face,
                  Did put them to ſo great extremitie,
                  That like to ſheepe that cruell woolfe doth chaſe,
                  They were compeld with feare from him to flie.
                  As glad his ſtrong and trenchant blade to ſhun,
                  And from it for to ſaue their liues, to run.
               
               
                  The which when valiant Aiax did eſpie,
                  He had in heart ſo much compaſſion,
                  To thinke vpon the great extremitie,
                  With cruell ſlaughter and confuſion,
                  (The which the Greeks as then did feele and find)
                  That when he turn'd his backe & look't behind.
               
               
                  And ſaw ſo many Grecian wings that ſtaid
                  And were in order preſt within the field,
                  Which banners large and pennons faire diſplaid,
                  And all that while the cruell fight beheld,
                  And ſaw how Hector had the Greeks in chaſe,
                  Yet ſtirred not one foot out of their place.
               
               
                  (Although in them the flower of chivalry
                  On Grecians ſide there was, that able were
                  The Troians to withſtand, and valiantly
                  To be reveng'd on them, and for to beare
                  The furious charge of their fierce enemies.)
                  In all the haſt he could, to them he hies,
               
               
                  And loudly vnto them for helpe did crie,
                  Whereatin haſt the wearied Greeks to ayd,
                  They marched forward gainſt the enemy,
                  With enſignes rich and pennons braue diſplaid.
                  And when they and the Troians fiercely meet,
                  The earth did ſhake and tremble with the feet
               
               
                  
                  Of horſes, that in furious wiſe did fling,
                  And gallop in the field, and then did riſe
                  An
                        ••
                     eous noyſe wherewith the ayre did ring
                  O huge and mighty ſtrookes, and fearefull cries
                  On either ſide, and many a Knight was ſeene
                  With deadly wounds lie gaſping on the greene.
               
               
                  Then Aiox gainſt Aeneas fiercely ran,
                  And he gainſt him as willingly did ride;
                  (For twixt them both ſuch enmitie as than,
                  And hatred great there was on either ſide▪
                  
                  That nought but death their furies could aſſwage,)
                  And did together meet in such a rage,
               
               
                  That with the blow that each the other hit
                  Moſt puiſſantly withall their force and might,
                  Each other to the ground they brauely ſmit.
                  And vp againe they roſe on foot to fight,
                  And there a valiant combat twixt them tride,
                  Where as they both great danger did abide
               
               
                  Amongſt the horſes feet vpon the ground.
                  Till that Philocletes that brauely fought
                  That day on Grecian ſide, had Aiax found
                  And him another horſe to mount on brought,
                  And did aſſayle the Troians valiantly
                  That other wiſe had had the victory
               
               
                  Againſt the Greeks, but that Philocletes
                  
                  Withall his Knights them man fully withſtood.
                  And firſt of all as th'Author Guido ſaies,
                  At Hector with a ſpeare he fiercely roade,
                  Which with the blow in many peeces brake,
                  But ſtird him not off from his horſes backe,
               
               
                  For though he had receiu'd ſo great a ſtroke,
                  (That well might haue orethrown avaliant Knight
                  He ſat as ſtif and ſturdy as an oke,
                  And with his ſpeare Philocletes did ſmite
                  Through armor, ſhield, and body, that withall
                  Sore wounded to the grouud he made him fall.
               
               
                  That off his life his Knights were much in doubt.
                  Then to the field King Humerus, and eke
                  
                     Uliſſes came, and with cen thouſand ſtour
                  And valiant Knights, and many a worthy Greeke,
                  
                  The Troians did aſſaile ſo furiouſly,
                  And with great multitudes of new ſupply
               
               
                  Vpon them ſet, that in deſpaire and feare,
                  And wearied with ſo long and cruell fight,
                  They gan for to recule, and readdy were
                  To turne away and take themſelues to flight,
                  It Paris had not come with more ſupply
                  To reſcue them, and at his entery
               
               
                  Into the field, the King of Frizia met,
                  (That vnto King Uliſſes was of kin,)
                  And in ſuch furious wiſe vpon him ſet,
                  That without more adoe he ran him in
                  Through armor, ſhield, and bodie, with his ſpeare
                  Whereat the Greeks full ſore abaſhed were.
               
               
                  And for his death Uliſſes grieved ſo
                  That in a rage and with extreame deſpight,
                  He did a ſpeare at Paris fiercely throw
                  To pierce his heart, but it to low did light▪
                  
                  Yet neretheleſſe it went with ſuch a force,
                  That with the ſtrength thereof it kild his horſe,
               
               
                  And he thereby fell flat vpon the ground,
                  Wherewith Uliſſes fiercely did aſſayle,
                  Him as on foot he ſtood when he him found
                  Among the horſes feet, but he did faile,
                  For Troylus brauely met in the beard
                  And furiouſly with ſhorpe and trenchant ſweard,
               
               
                  Wrought him ſo ſtrong and puiſſant a blow,
                  That in his face a cruell wound he made,
                  From whence the blood like to a ſpring did flow▪
                  
                  But King Uliſſes nought therewith diſmaid,
                  Made ſmall or no account thereof at all,
                  And to revenge himſelfe did fiercely fall
               
               
                  On Troielus, and with his ſword did race
                  His helmet from his head, and to him gaue
                  A deepe and cruell wound vpon the face,
                  Wherewith the Greeks began againe to haue
                  More courage, and were in good hope to ſee
                  The Troians ſhortly brought t'extremite,
               
               
                  And cleane orethrowne, they were ſo ſore oppreſt,
                  If Hector with a valiant troope of men,
                  And Deiphobus, Paris, and the reſt
                  Of his moſt ſtout and worthy bretheren.
                  And Troielus likewiſe for all his wound,
                  (That euer more a valiant Knight was found.)
               
               
                  Had not together ioind, and fiercely ran
                  Vpon the Grecian troopes, and firſt of all
                  
                     Hector the moſt renowned Knight began,
                  With ſword in hand ſo furiouſly to ſall
                  Vpon the Greeks, and with ſuch cruelty
                  To kill them, that from him they all did flie,
               
               
                  (Like to the ſillie fearefull ſheepe in field,
                  That from the rauening woolfe themſelues do hide
                  And run away for feare they ſhould be kild.)
                  For none of them before him durſt abide,
                  For ſtill he did them fiercely hac and new,
                  And more and more the ſlaughter did renew.
               
               
                  
                  So that as then their harna
                        •
                     les were ſtaind
                  With drops of blood, (which he that day did ſhed)
                  As thicke as if that blood from skies had raind,
                  And ſtill like vnto ſwarmes of bees they fled
                  Before his face, and by no meanes would ſtay,
                  For glad was he that got out of his way.
               
               
                  And as the ſtory ſaith of him that day,
                  He alwaies was the foremoſt in the field,
                  And at the head of all his troopes did ſtay,
                  T'abate the Grecians pride, till he beheld
                  The Knights that to the battaile he had brought
                  Were ſcattred and cleane out of order fought.
               
               
                  And when he had fought valiantly and long,
                  And ſaw the Greeks did ſtill renew their force,
                  And by that meanes began to wax more ſtrong:
                  In haſt he clapt his ſpurres vnto his horſe,
                  And to his Troian Knights againe repair'd,
                  Who at that time in manner all diſpair'd,
               
               
                  For want of him, but when they did him ſee,
                  Full ſoone againe they were all comforted,
                  And with great ſignes of ioy and amitie,
                  With all their hearts him gladly welcomed,
                  Which at their hands he thankefully did take,
                  And vnto them in courteous wiſe he ſpake.
               
               
                  And praid them in their valiant minds to way,
                  And wiſely to conſider and forecaſt
                  What iniurie the Greeks from day to day,
                  Vnto them did, and had done long time paſt.
                  And how that if the victory ſhould fall
                  That day to them, they might bid farewell all
               
               
                  The Troians honor, glory, and renowne:
                  For then (ſayd he) nought els would be our lot
                  But th'overthrow of vs, and of our towne,
                  And all the ancient honor we haue got
                  Vnto our ſelues, and our poſteritie,
                  (In former times,) would cleane Ecclipſed be.
               
               
                  Vuleſſe this day you ſhow your ſelues like men,
                  That well deſerue the honor you haue got,
                  Wherefore I hartely pray you all, that when
                  Againſt your Grecian foes you fight, giue not
                  The ſmalleſt cauſe for them in any wiſe,
                  T'vpbraid you with the fault of cowardiſe.
               
               
                  But valiantly aſſayle them all together,
                  And ſhrinke not backe for feare leaſt you ſhold die.
                  For die you muſt at one time or at other,
                  Whereto they all conſented willingly.
                  And without more delay paſt through a vale,
                  And vnawares vpon the Greeks did fall.
               
               
                  Where Hector ſpard not one what ere he was,
                  But kild and manned all without remorſe
                  That with him met, whereſoeuer he did paſſe,
                  And mauger all their pride and might did force
                  Them to recule, and flie out of his 
                        •
                     ihgt,
                  Till that the moſt renownd and valiant Knight
               
               
                  King Theas, to the field came in againe,
                  And furiouſly vpon the Troians ran,
                  (Who that ſame day in cruell wiſe had ſlaine
                  King Priams baſtard ſonne Caſſibelan.)
                  But as he buſied was on them to ſet,
                  By fortune he with all his brethren met.
               
               
                  Who all at once and with one full conſent
                  Incloſed him on every ſide, and were
                  Vnto his vtter ruine wholy bent,
                  And hauing throwne him off his horſe, did teare
                  His Helmet from his head, and ment to 
                        ••
                     ight
                  It off, if that the fierce and valiant Knight
               
               
                  
                     Meneſtes Duke of Athens had not been,
                  Who with his Knights came riding haſtily,
                  And him out of the danger he was in
                  Set free, and to procure his liberty,
                  With ſpeare in hand directly as a line,
                  He tooke his courſe and ran at Quintiline,
                  
               
               
                  That buſi eſt was King Theas to haue ſlaine,
                  And with the ſtrength and puiſſance of his blow,
                  (Which Quinteline as then could not ſuſtaine,)
                  Cleane off his horſe he did him overthrow.
                  And made his brethren alſo to withdraw
                  Themſelues from him, the which when Paris 
                     
                        •
                     aw
               
               
                  He bent his mighty bowe, and fiercely ſhot
                  At Meneſtes, and hit him in the ſide
                  Vpon a rib, which though it kild him not,
                  He had a wound thereby both large and wide
                  Which hurt him ſore, and grieuouſly did bleed,
                  And yet thereof he tooke but little heed,
               
               
                  Cauſe he as then was bent ſo earneſtly
                  To ayd King Thoas ſtanding on the ground,
                  Amongſt the horſes feet, and like to die,
                  His body bleeding ſore with many a wound.
                  And without helmet bare vpon his head.
                  But Meneſtes cleane void of feare or dread
               
               
                  Deliuered him from that extremitie
                  And ſau'd his life, when out of hope he was.
                  But Hector full of wrath and enmitie,
                  (As he that for his valor did ſurpaſſe
                  All whatſoere,) made ſuch deſtruction
                  Of Greeks that day, as he road vp and downe.
               
               
                  
                  That all men ſore abaſht from him did flie,
                  For they vpon his face did feare to looke.
                  Whoſe valor when King Humerus did eſpie,
                  Into his hand his mighty bow he tooke,
                  And 
                        •
                     yming right ſhot Hector in the face.
                  But ere that he could get out of the place,
               
               
                  
                     Hector for to requite him for his paine
                  Ran ſtraight at him and gaue him ſuch a blow,
                  That with his ſwor
                        •
                      he claue his head in twaine.
                  Whoſe death when as the Grecian knights did know
                  They blew a horne, which made ſo great a ſound,
                  That preſently there were together found
               
               
                  Seuen thouſand Knights, that all on Hector fell
                  And him in cloſ'd, but he without abode
                  (As one that did in valor great excell,)
                  Deſpight of all their power through them road,
                  And 
                        •
                     lew all thoſe that in his way he met,
                  Or that durſt venter him therein to let,
               
               
                  And never ſtaid, but haſtely did ride
                  Vnto the place where Priam all that day
                  Did with his troope without the towne abide,
                  (Whereas he purpoſely with them ſtill lay,
                  Till by adviſe from Hector he did know,
                  When he with them into the field ſhould goe.)
               
               
                  And comming to his father did him pray,
                  That with three thouſand Knights he wold him ayd
                  And gainſt the Grecians goe without delay,
                  Who preſently with all his Knights did ride
                  Into the field, and there the Greeks aſſaild
                  Moſt valiantly, and gainſt them ſo prevaild:
               
               
                  That in ſhort ſpace ſo many of them were ſlaine
                  And overthrowne by Priam furiouſly,
                  That at that time the field and all the plaine
                  Were covered with dead Greeks, and they did flie
                  With ſpeed before his face, as glad to get
                  Away from him, ſo hot on them he ſet.
               
               
                  And then as Hector valiantly did ride
                  Throughout the field the Troians to relieue:
                  And Alax likewiſe on the Grecian ſide,
                  Some ayd and ſuccour vnto them to giue,
                  Like Lyons ſtrong, they both together met,
                  And on each other did ſo fiercely ſet,
               
               
                  That with their mighty ſpeares and puiſſant force,
                  Th'incountred ſo magnanimiouſly,
                  That each the other brauely did vnhorſe,
                  And gainſt their willes vpon the ground did lie.
                  And at that time King Menelans did fall
                  Vpon a worthy Troian Admirall,
               
               
                  And kild him with his ſword, and ſo began
                  A cruell 
                        •
                     ight and ſlaughter to renew
                  On either 
                        〈◊〉
                      And C
                           •
                        lyd
                           •••
                        us than
                  Infurious wiſe King Thoas nephew ſlew.
                  And Madan like a ſtout and valiant Knight,
                  With ſword in hand ſo cruelly did ſmght
               
               
                  A Grecian King cald Cedeus in the eies,
                  That with the blow, one eye he cleane ſmote out.
                  And Sardellus a Troian Knight likewiſe,
                  As he from place to place did range about,
                  Vpon a Grecian Lord ſo fiercely f
                        •
                     ew,
                  (Whom Guydo nameth not) that he him 
                        •
                     lew.
               
               
                  And at that time Margariton a Knight
                  O
                        •
                      
                     Troyans ſide, with wrath and furious ire,
                  Moſt valiantly with Thelamon did fight.
                  And he alſo with him with like deſire.
                  But Thelamon did ſmight him to the ground,
                  And gaue him with his lance a deadly wound.
               
               
                  And Pha
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        ll the worthy Troian Knight,
                  With ſpeare in hand and fierce and furious mood,
                  King Prothenor off from his 
                        •
                     orſe did ſmight,
                  And thus King Priams ſonnes as then withſtood
                  The Grecians in ſuch wiſe, that all that day
                  Moſt cruelly they did them wound and 
                        •
                     lay.
               
               
                  (To be reueng'd on their inveterate foes)
                  And by that meanes in that moſt furious fight,
                  Great ſtore of Grecian Knight is their liues did looſe.
                  And then King Anglas with his ſpeare did ſmight
                  
                     Meneſtes Duke of Athens on his ſhield,
                  But neretheleſſe ſtill on his horſe he held.
               
               
                  And for becauſe no lance as then he bare,
                  With ſword in hand he did to anglas go
                  And with it furiouſly his beauer 
                        •
                     are
                  From off his face, and with the ſelfe ſame blow
                  He cut his noſe cleane off, or very neare,
                  Whereat a while he ſtood as in a feare,
               
               
                  To ſee the blood run downe his face ſo faſt,
                  That with the ſame his ar
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     all was died:
                  But like a ſtout and valiant Knight, at laſt
                  He ſpurd his horſe and road ſomewhat aſide,
                  (To ſtench it if he might) without the field,
                  But when his brother Dea
                           •
                        or it beheld,
               
               
                  And ſaw him by Menestes wounded ſo,
                  He ran at him in fierce and furious wiſe,
                  And hit him with his ſpeare ſo great a blow
                  That downe he fell, and ere that he could riſe
                  Another of his brethren did come thither,
                  And they all three aſſay led him together.
               
               
                  
                  With full intent to kill him if they might,
                  And to that end on him moſt furious 
                        ••
                     Spand
                        ••
                     .
                  But Meneſtes (that was a valiant Knight,)
                  So gallantly their fierce aſſault did boare.
                  And ſought ſo well that wonder 
                        •
                     'was to ſee.
                  But Thoas 
                     
                        •
                     h'eldeſt brother of the three
               
               
                  Moſt buſieſt was, from him his life to take,
                  And with moſt furious rage and crueltie,
                  His helmet at the laſt in peeces brake,
                  And brought him to ſo great extremitie:
                  That without doubt he ſurely then had died,
                  Had not King T
                           •
                        n
                           ••
                        an bin, that him eſpied.
               
               
                  Who grieuing to behold him in that caſe,
                  Ran haſtely to ayd him if he might;
                  But when he gotten had vnto the place
                  Whereas they fought, and like a valiant Knight
                  Did brauely him relieue out of his paine
                  And great diſtreſſe, t'was labor all in vaine.
               
               
                  For Hector who as then by chance came thither,
                  And ſaw King Tentran fight ſo valiantly,
                  Aſſay led him, and Meneſtes together,
                  And there had ſlaine them both aſſuredly
                  If Aiax had not been, that him eſpied,
                  And with a thouſand Knights vnto him hied.
               
               
                  And with them all at once did him aſſayle,
                  (To ſaue them from his furie if they might,)
                  And Hector of his will then made to fayle.
                  But Paris like a hardy valiant Knight
                  With the renown'd and worthy Perſian King.
                  And with fiue thouſad Knights that he did bring
               
               
                  Vnto the fied, perceiuing their intent
                  To ayd his brother Hector ſtraight did goe,
                  (And being to revenge then fully bent,)
                  He preſently did cauſe a trumpet blow,
                  Whereat the valiant Knights that Hector led
                  That day into the field well furniſhed,
               
               
                  Came ſpeedily vnto him at his call
                  Againſt the Greeks, 
                     
                        •
                     on to enforce the fight,
                  And to relieue their valiant Generall,
                  And ſo with extreame furie and deſpight:
                  Gre
                        ••
                      ſtore of Grecian Knights that day they ſlew,
                  And in ſuch ſort the battaile did renew,
               
               
                  That many a Greeke in heart was grieued ſore,
                  To ſee the loſſe and great deſtruction
                  Vpon them made. But Hector euermore
                  Such valor ſhow'd, that he himſelfe alone
                  A thouſand Grecian Knights that day did ſlay,
                  And made the Greeks to flie and run away.
               
               
                  Not daring to behold his furious face,
                  That wholy vnto cruelty was bent,
                  And while that he ſo furiouſly did chaſe,
                  His enemies not farre off from a tent,
                  It was his chance King Mereon to behold,
                  Whom when he did eſpie with courage bold
               
               
                  And countenance ſterne, vnto him ſpake, & ſaid,
                  Traitor thy glaſſe and fatall courſe is run,
                  Thy life muſt end, no time ſhall be delaid,
                  For that before into the Weſt the ſunne
                  Deſcendeth downe, know that aſſuredly
                  With this my ſword thou ſhalt not faile to die.
               
               
                  Becauſe that thou ſo hardy waſt this day.
                  (When as I thought Patroclus armes to haue,)
                  To hinder and bereaue me of my prey,
                  For which thy bold attempt nought ſhall thee ſaue,
                  And therewithall downe from his horſe he light,
                  And with his ſword his head cleane off did ſmight
               
               
                  And thought his armor likewiſe to haue had.
                  But while that to diſarme him he began,
                  
                     Meneſtes Duke of Athens that was glad
                  To be revengd on Hector, at him ran
                  When as his backe was turn'd, and ſuddenly
                  At vnawares did wound him cruelly,
               
               
                  And pierſt him through the armor in the ſide,
                  Whereat the blood in ſtreames ran out a maine,
                  The which when Hector felt he ſtraight did ride
                  Out of the field, and for to eaſe his paine
                  He cauſed one to ſearch and dreſſe his wound,
                  And for to ſtanch the bleeding faſt it bound.
               
               
                  (Meane time Meneſtes cloſely got away,
                  For to be freed from Hectors furious force,
                  Intending not to meet him all that day.)
                  Which done againe he mounted on his horſe:
                  And to the field returned with much more
                  And greater rage then ere he had before.
               
               
                  For that his heart ſo furiouſly did fret
                  And burne with wrath, that entring in the preſſe,
                  In cruell wiſe whoſoever that he met
                  He killed, beat downe, and wounded mercileſſe.
                  And ſpared none of what degree ſo ere,
                  So that from him the Grecians fled for feare.
               
               
                  And in that fur
                        •
                     e great and crueltie,
                  Wherewith the Greeks as then he did oppreſſe.
                  (As Guide doth declare and certifie.
                  And as his Author Dares doth confeſſe,
                  If that we may beleeue the Hiſtorie,
                  Which truth of things ſincerely, ſhould deſ
                        ••
                     e)
               
               
                  
                  After he did his latter wound receaue,
                  Not reckoning thoſe whereof I ſpake before,)
                  With his owne hands he hid of life bereaue
                  A thouſand Grecian Knights: and more and more
                  He did purſue them with ſuch cruelty,
                  That all his ſword was turnd to crimſon die
               
               
                  With Grecians blood. So that his chivalry
                  So much by them was feard, that euery one
                  Of high and low eſtate from him did flie,
                  And mongſt them all ther was not any one,
                  That after all that day durſt him withſtand,
                  Or offer to reſiſt him hand to hand.
               
               
                  And yet although that Hector ſlew them ſo,
                  And valiantly held them at ſuch a bay:
                  Their Generall Agamemnon would not go
                  Into the field to ayd them, all that day.
                  Whereby as then the Greeks were ſore oppreſt,
                  For Hector like a Lyon did not reſt,
               
               
                  To kill, and wound them in ſuch a furious wiſe,
                  That they conſtrained were for ayd to flie
                  Vnto their tents, with many ſhootes and cries,
                  The Troians following them couragiouſly,
                  By traces of their blood along the way,
                  And in their tents great ſtore of them did ſlay.
               
               
                  And did from them much of their treaſure take,
                  And bare it vnto Troy victoriouſly,
                  And of them there ſuch hauocke then did make,
                  That that ſame day they had moſt certainly
                  Been vtterly orethrowne for euermore,
                  By Troians that oppreſſed them ſo ſore;
               
               
                  And valiant Hectors valor and his might,
                  Who all that day moſt valiantly had fought,
                  And with the ayd of many a Troian Knight,
                  Vnto ſuch great extremitie them brought:
                  That had't not been by their owne fooliſhnes,
                  And pride of heart, with ore-much careleſnes.
               
               
                  Without all doubt they verily had gain'd
                  A great and moſt triumphant victory
                  Againſt the Greeks, and therewithall obtain'd
                  Dominion, rule, and Soveraignty
                  Ore them, and all their land continually,
                  Which well might haue indurd perpetually;
               
               
                  If
                        •
                      had not been for hard and cruell Fate,
                  The which in things begon with wilfulneſſe,
                  Is alwaies preſt and ready to debate,
                  And ſtriues to make them end with wretchedneſſe,
                  By hir moſt enuious diſpoſition,
                  Vnhappy chance and reſolution.
               
               
                  And turning of her light and ſlippery wheele,
                  Which tickleſſe is, and full of 
                        •
                     ickleneſſe,
                  That t'will not ſtand when as a thing is well,
                  For fortune's wholly bent to wilfulneſſe.
                  Great pitty t'was they were ſo ouerſhot,
                  And at that time themſelues ſo much forgot,
               
               
                  And would not their good fortune then purſue,
                  (And chiefely Hector that renowned Knight.)
                  That would not marke what after might enſue,
                  And to prevent the miſchiefe if they might,
                  Which at that time did preſſe on them ſo nere:
                  But ſure it is, too much they blinded were
               
               
                  (That day in field when as victoriouſly,
                  They ſaw themſelues triumphantly to bee
                  Set on the top of fortunes wheeles ſo hie.)
                  That of meere negligence they could not ſee
                  What danger might enſue, and all for lacke
                  Of providence, which did them cleane forſake,
               
               
                  And made them looſe that great and ſpeciall grace
                  Which fortune offered them, (although vnſtable
                  Sometimes ſhe bee,) and ſet before their face.
                  For in a man it is not commendable,
                  (If fortune ſeeme on him to laugh and ſmile,
                  And with faire ſhow doth favor him awhile,
               
               
                  To ſuccour and relieue him in diſtreſſe,
                  When he therein moſt deeply plung'd doth lie.)
                  So great good hap to looſe by wilfulneſſe,
                  And Fortune to let ſlip ſo careleſly,
                  When as ſhe doth impart to him ſuch grace:
                  For when he would, ſhe will him not embrace.
               
               
                  An other time when he of her hath need,
                  And ready is downe from her wheele to fall,
                  Nor yet will care to ſtand him once in ſteed,
                  Or to vouchſafe to ſuccour him at all,
                  But in regard of his ingratitude,
                  With frowns, & mocks, & mowes will him delude
               
               
                  When he doth thinke himſelfe ſecure to bee.
                  For ſhe ſo much is bent to wilfulneſſe,
                  Deceit, and guile, and extreame crueltie;
                  That when a man with fooliſh careleſneſſe
                  Her favors moſt vncertaine doth deride.
                  Another time t'ſhall be to him denide,
               
               
                  When he deſireth moſt the ſame to haue.
                  For at ſome time (it is a thing moſt ſure)
                  She graunts ſome man the thing that he doth craue
                  And 
                        •
                     tmay be, that he neuer ſhall procure
                  The like againe of her, though he ſhould liue
                  A thouſand yeares, and nere ſo much would giue
               
               
                  
                  T'obtaine the ſame, as moſt vnhappely
                  To worthy Hector it befell that day,
                  That needs would ſpare the Greeks ſo wilfully
                  And proudly favord them, when as it lay
                  In him to overthrow them, and to kill
                  And vtterly deſtroy them at his will.
               
               
                  And by his valor great triumphantly
                  With honor, and renowne, t'haue entered
                  Into the Towne of Troy with victory,
                  Which he that day too much by folly led,
                  Reſuſed and could neuer more attaine
                  The like advantage while he liu'd againe.
               
               
                  For as he road and cruelly did ſlay
                  And wound the Greeks on euery ſide, he met
                  With valiant Thelmon Aiax in the way,
                  Who furiouſly and with great envy ſet
                  On him, like to a Lyon fierce and wood,
                  And though that he his kinſman was by blood▪
                  
               
               
                  And therewithall a young and gallant Knight,
                  Yet did he brauely venture to aſſayle
                  His Nephew Hector, and with him to fight
                  Couragiooſly, preſuming to prevaile.
                  To caſt him off his horſe, and yet they were
                  Of blood each vnto other very nere.
               
               
                  For he was ſonne vnto King Thelamon,
                  
                  A worthy Grecian Prince and valerous
                  That him begat vpon faire Exion,
                  
                  That ſiſter was vnto King Pria
                           ••
                        us.
                  
                  And ſo he did the firſt occaſion take,
                  To moue the Greeks that warre on him to make.
               
               
                  And to that end firſt with a ſturdy ſpeare
                  At Hector ran, and he at him likewiſe,
                  And each the others blow did brauely beare,
                  (Like two moſt fierce and and hardy enemies,
                  For both of them in valor did excell.
                  And then like Lyons fierce, and Tygers fell,
               
               
                  Vpon their horſes fought with ſword in hand,
                  And cut and hewd each others armors ſtrong.
                  And each his enemies furie did withſtand
                  Moſt valiantly, the which indured ſo long
                  Betweene them both, till that by providence
                  Divine, or els by naturall influence,
               
               
                  (Which diues into the mind of man ſo farre,
                  And ſearcheth both the heart, and euery vaine,
                  Of thoſe that of one blood and linage are.)
                  They moved were their rancor to reſtraine,
                  And thereby both their furies molefied,
                  Onely for that they were ſo nere ali'd.
               
               
                  Though neither of them then the ſame did know,
                  Nor yet the leaſt ſuſpition thereof had,
                  Till nature it vnto them both did ſhow,
                  And them in heart of foes as friends had made.
                  For naturally blood will to blood be kind,
                  And friends to friends where euer they thē find.
               
               
                  Which was the cauſe that Hoctor mou'd in mind,
                  Of Knighthood, and of inward ame
                        •
                     ie,
                  When he in Aiax did ſuch valor find,
                  Vnto him ſpake, and ſaid in curteſie,
                  Nephew, if thou the Grecians w
                        •
                     l
                        •
                      forſake
                  And come to Troy, I dare well vndertake
               
               
                  Of thine alies, and noble kindred,
                  Thou ſhalt receaued be with chearefull mood,
                  And welcommed without all feare or dread,
                  And ſpecially by thoſe of Royall blood.
                  And ſuch as are of Princely high degre,
                  The which me thinks great pleaſure were to thee,
               
               
                  And naturally thou ſhouldſt in heart be glad
                  To liue among thy friends that wiſh thee good,
                  Sith that no greater joy there ean be had
                  Then to reſtore thy ſelfe vnto thy blood.
                  For by the valor great that thou do'ſt ſhow,
                  (Which naturally within thy heart doth grow.)
               
               
                  I know thou art of Troian blood deſcended:
                  Forſake the Greeks therefore withall thy heart,
                  That long and often times haue vs offended,
                  And willingly gainſt them with vs take part,
                  I pray thee doe me not herein deny.
                  But Aiax anſwere made, and did reply
               
               
                  And ſayd, ſith that by birth he was a Greeke,
                  
                  And from the time of his Nativitie
                  Among them had been bred and foſtredeke,
                  And had receiu'd the order and degree
                  Of Knight-hood there, & armes for thē had borne
                  And thereto had proteſted, vou'd, and ſworne
               
               
                  For to be true to them, and to their Nation.
                  He ſaid he would obſerue and keepe their heſt,
                  And would of blood make no exception.
                  Onely he did of Hector then requeſt
                  That if in courteſie and gentleneſſe
                  He would of Knight-hood and of worthineſſe,
               
               
                  Show vnto him ſo great affection
                  To cauſe the Troians forces to retire,
                  And to withdraw themſelues into the towne,
                  And leaue them and their tents (at his deſire)
                  And for that time their furious fight to ſtay,
                  And to aſſaile the Greeks no more that day.
               
               
                  
                  Sith vnto them (ſaith he) it may ſuffiſe
                  That in the field they haue the victory,
                  And by their valors great in Knightly wiſe,
                  Haue overcome the Greeks triumphantly.
                  He ſayd he would the ſame moſt kindly take,
                  And him thereby to him beholding make.
               
               
                  Which Hector ſtraight did graunt, (although alas
                  T'was done with two much haſt and wilfulneſſe,)
                  And ſodainly ere Aiax thence did paſſe,
                  Made no delay, without adviſedneſſe,
                  But cauſ'd a Trompet in the field to blow,
                  To giue the Troian Knights, thereby to know
               
               
                  That t'was his will they ſhould themſelues withdraw
                  (According to the cuſtome of the warre,)
                  And of the old and ancient Marſhall law,
                  Which alwaies hath been vſed neere and farre.
                  When they moſt hot and earneſt were to fight,
                  And gainſt the Greeks to ſhow their force & might
               
               
                  And had them forſt to flie vnto the ſtrand,
                  Intending there with full and great deſire,
                  (For that the Greeks could not their force withſtād)
                  To kill them all, and ſet their ſhips on fire.
                  And ſo to worke their whole confuſion,
                  Which they without all doubt that time had don
               
               
                  If Hector had not had compaſſion
                  On them, and cauſd the Troians to retire
                  Vnto the towne, without diſcretion,
                  (T'accompliſh that which Aiax doth require.)
                  And fight no more againſt the Greeks that day,
                  The which at laſt did breed his owne decay.
               
               
                  With th'vtter ruine and ſubverſion
                  Of Priamus, and all his whole eſtate,
                  And finally the townes deſtruction.
                  But ſure it was their hard and cruell Fate,
                  For no man can withſtand the iuſt decree
                  Of God, though nere ſo great a Prince he bec.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                      How the Grecians made ſuite to King Priamus to grant the
                        •••
                      truce for eight weekes, which he agreed vnto, and of their ba
                        •
                     tailes after the truce was ended.
               
               
                  THus haue you heard, as G
                           ••
                        do doth declare,
                  What twixt the Greeks & Troians had b
                        •
                     n don,
                  That day in field, and how the Troians were
                  By Hector (when they had the battaile won,)
                  Commanded to retire, and go their way
                  Out of the field, and fight no more that day.
               
               
                  To whom although they willingly obayd,
                  (Becauſe he was their Prince, and Generall
                  Of all the hoaſt, and might not be denaid.)
                  Yet had they knowne what after ſhould befall,
                  Without all doubt they would it not haue don:
                  (But no man fatall Deſtiny can ſhon.)
               
               
                  For from that time they might aſſuredly
                  Say farewell honour, victory, and fame,
                  From Troians tane by perverſe Deſteny,
                  And Fortune that moſt falſe and cruell Dame.
                  Who vnto them a mortall foe ſtill wa
                        •
                     ,
                  But for a while ile let that matter paſſe.
               
               
                  And now I will proceed and further ſhow,
                  That when the Troian Knights the field did leaue,
                  (Vpon the ſound of Trompet that did blow,)
                  And did themſelues of victory bereaue,
                  (Suppoſing that they did it for the beſt
                        •
                     )
                  They went into the towne to take their reſt.
               
               
                  Where hauing ſhut their gates and made them faſt,
                  When they had well refreſht themſelues, that night
                  They layd them downe to ſleepe, which being paſt
                  (Whē 
                     Phoebus ſhone next day moſt cleare & bright
                  And with his beames reflect their hemiſphere,
                  And made Auroraes gliſtring face t'appeare.)
               
               
                  All thoſe that had no wounds, & armes could beare
                  Of purpoſe did prepare themſelues to enter
                  Into the field, (as they commanded were,)
                  And valiantly againſt their foes to venter,
                  To overcome them that day if they might,
                  For t'was decreed by Hector overnight,
               
               
                  That fore the Sun that morning did appeare,
                  Aſſoone as ere they wakt they forth ſhould goe,
                  And to that end no time they did deferre,
                  But ſpeedily themſelues in armes did ſhoe
                  Within the large and ſpacious plaine, whereas
                  The Temple of Diana placed was.
               
               
                  And therefore Hector ſtaid. But ere they went
                  Out of the towne of Troy into the field,
                  The Grecians early in the morning ſent
                  To Priamus, to craue of him to yeild
                  And grant vnto a truce, that ſhould abide
                  For two moneths ſpace, which he not once de
                        ••
                     de
               
               
                  
                  But with conſent of Hector and the reſt
                  Of all his Marſhall counſell, did agree
                  And willingly did yeild (at their requeſt,)
                  That it on his behalfe obſeru'd ſhould bee.
                  And they likewiſe did promiſe for their part
                  To doe the like, and ſo they did depart
               
               
                  Vnto their tents, where while the truce did laſt
                  They buried all their men that had been kild
                  When they did land, and on the day forepaſt,
                  According to the Pay-nim lawes they held.
                  And which by them obſerved was as then,
                  Where all the bodies of the meaner men
               
               
                  Were burnt; and cleane conſum'd to aſhes pure.
                  And ſuch as were of great and high degree,
                  Had other kind of Princely ſepulture,
                  According to their ſtate and dignitie.
                  And in that ſort the time did ouerpaſſe,
                  Till the two moneths of truce expired was.
               
               
                  In which time it is ſayd Achilles made
                  Much ſorrow, and ſuch griefe in mind conceiud
                  For his deare friend Patroclus death, that ſad
                  And full of woe he was, and cleane bereau'd
                  Of ioy, whereby great lamentation
                  Long time he made with much affection
               
               
                  For him, and ſith he lou'd him (as I ſay)
                  To haue him ſtill in memory, he made
                  A tombe to be ſet vp of Marble gray,
                  To bury him therein. (For then they had
                  A cuſtome to intombe and bury thoſe
                  That Princes were, and richly to incloſe
               
               
                  Their bodies faire in tombes moſt brauely made.)
                  And ſo Patroclus, and Protheſilaus
                  
                  Were buried in ſolemne wiſe, and lay
                  Together, yet in ſeverall tombes, and thus
                  The Grecians in their tents without ſtill lay,
                  While Troians in the towne likewiſe did ſtay,
               
               
                  To cure their men that wounded were in fight,
                  And to recouer health and ſtrength againe
                  To thoſe that ſ
                        •
                     re diſeaſed were, and might
                  Not ſtirre themſelues for dolor, griefe, and paine.
                  And in that cruell fight much blood had ſhed,
                  And ere the two moneths truce was finiſhed,
               
               
                  Such diligence did vſe that every man
                  Was whole and ſound, but Priamus the King
                  Made ſo great ſorrow for Caſſibellan,
                  
                  That he would not be mou'd for any thing
                  To ceaſe his griefe, but ſtill he ſobd and wept,
                  And while the corſe aboue the ground was kept,
               
               
                  He cauſ'd a tombe of metall curiouſly
                  Ingrau'd and wrought for to be made, and when
                  T'was finiſhed, and with ſolemnity
                  In Venus Temple ſet and placed, then
                  He held a great and ſtately funerall
                  For him, and there accompanied with all
               
               
                  His Lords, vnto God M
                           •••
                        
                      were offered
                  His honors, as his helmet, ſword, and ſhield,
                  And laſt of all his braue and gallant ſteed.
                  The which when as Caſſandra beheld,
                  And ſaw how all the company did crie,
                  And made great mone and ſighed bitterly
               
               
                  For him, and with great lamentation
                  For all their friends that likewiſe had been ſlaine
                  And loſt their liues in fight before the towne,
                  She was ſo grieu'd that ſhe could not refraine
                  To cry, and ſayd alas and well away,
                  That ere we ſaw this curſed dolefull day.
               
               
                  Oh moſt vnhappy wretches that you bee!
                  Iſt poſſible that ere you ſhould indure
                  The troubles and the woes that you ſhall ſee,
                  The which the Greeks vnto you will procure,
                  While they beſiedge you round on euery ſide,
                  And ſeeke to be reuenged on your pride.
               
               
                  Moſt certaine tis, & that full well I know,
                  You can it not avoid, for without doubt
                  They will to you no grace nor mercy ſhow,
                  But ere that many yeares ſhall come about,
                  Theyle kill and ſlay you cruelly each one,
                  And neuer leaue the ſiedge tell it be done.
               
               
                  Alas, alas, why do you not in time
                  Seeke with your Grecian foes to make a peace,
                  While that the warre as yet is in the prime,
                  And fore the ſword of vengeance mercileſſe,
                  And old and young doth execution,
                  And brings this towne vnto deſtruction?
               
               
                  When all the ſtreets therein with children ſmall▪
                  
                  In woefull mothers armes heapt vp ſhall lie
                  With gaſtly wounds, and faces dead and pale,
                  Slaine by the Grecians furious cruelty.
                  And Maydens into Greece ſhall captiues goe,
                  And there bewaile in miſerie and woe,
               
               
                  Their ſervitude, and loſſe of this our towne
                  That is ſo rich, ſo famous, and renownd;
                  Which by the Greeks ſhall ſure be beaten downe,
                  And vtterly defaced to the ground:
                  And we perforce with patience muſt it beare,
                  Alas, wee buy Queene Helena too deare.
               
               
                  
                  Sith for her foule and vnadviſed rape,
                  All we ſhall die a death moſt pittious,
                  Yong, old, rich, poore, not any one ſhall ſcape,
                  The wrath of them ſhall be ſo furious
                  Gainſt vs, and ours, and there's no remedy,
                  But onely death to end our miſerie.
               
               
                  And thus did ſhe with pittious noyſe and cry,
                  Forewarne the King, her bretheren, and all
                  Within the towne, into what miſeries,
                  By pride and their preſumption they ſhould fall:
                  And like to one that's mad, in every ſtreet
                  Run vp and downe, & told it all ſhe meet.
               
               
                  Till Priamus her furious mood to ſtay,
                  Did cauſe her to be ſhut in priſon faſt,
                  And bound with chaines, and in that ſort ſhe lay
                  Cloſe kept, the while the Grecians ſiege did laſt:
                  And could not once be heard, for no man would
                  Belieue nor credite her, though truth ſhe told.
               
               
                  For neither wiſedome, nor diſcretion,
                  Counſell nor wit, adviſe nor providence,
                  Truth, reaſon, nor yet good perſwaſion
                  Can ought availe, whereas no audience
                  Is given thereto. For were man nere ſo wiſe
                  In counſelling by wiſedome or adviſe,
               
               
                  And could by perfect art and learning know,
                  What could in time hereafter come to paſſe,
                  And would the ſame vnto the world foreſhow,
                  The obſtinate would count him but an aſſe:
                  For counſell with a foole prevaileth nought,
                  Nor truth likewiſe how deare ſo ere tis bought.
               
               
                  As we may by Caſſandra ſee full well,
                  Who though ſhe did ſuch wholeſome counſell giue
                  To them of Troye, and did the truth foretell
                  Of their decay, they would her not belieue,
                  But caſt her into priſon; Where a while
                  Ile leaue her, to the Greeks to turne my ſtile
               
               
                  And now will ſhew how king Palamides,
                  
                  (While that the Greeks theſe two months ſtill did lie)
                  Was ſo poſſeſt with envies foule diſeaſe,
                  That he diſdaind and grudged ſcornfully
                  At all the Grecian Princes that gaue voyce;
                  And of King Agamemnon made their choyſe,
               
               
                  To be the chiefe and Generall of that hoaſt,
                  And of ſo many Kings and Princes great
                  That there aſſembled were from every coaſt
                  Throughout the world, and ſaid he was not meet,
                  Nor worthy of ſo great authority,
                  And that himſelfe of greater dignity
               
               
                  Among the Greca
                           ••
                        ns was, and bare more ſway
                  Then ere he did, and fore them all dem'd
                  To follow him, or his command t'obay,
                  And ſaid he would no longer there abide,
                  To yeeld to him the leaſt ſubiection,
                  Sith he was not at his election.
               
               
                  Affirming that when choiſe of him they made,
                  There was no more but three Kings preſent there,
                  That thereto gaue conſent and voyces had,
                  And thirtie Kings at leaſt then abſent were:
                  And therefore ſwone it was not his intent
                  Nor will, that he ſhould haue that government.
               
               
                  (Here may you ſee and perfectly behold,
                  What miſchiefe breedeth by contention,
                  Mong Princes and Commanders great that ſhold
                  Agree in one without diſſention:
                  But envie and deſire of rule is cauſe,
                  That makes men breake the God of peace his laws.
               
               
                  This curſed vice is cauſe of troubles great,
                  And miſchiefes that in many Countries bee:
                  For when in Princes hearts it once doth get,
                  And maketh them contend and diſagree,
                  That Kingdome cannot proſper nor encreaſe,
                  Till they agree againe and liue in peace.)
               
               
                  The which the Greeks conſidering well, forbare
                  To giue conſent vnto Palamides,
                  
                  And wiſely ſought by good adviſe and care,
                  To ſtop the courſe of envies ſore diſeaſe:
                  And wrought ſo well with him, that in the end
                  He was content t'agree, and not contend
               
               
                  With them therein, but willing was to yeeld
                  Vnto their choyſe, and did from ſtrife ſurceaſe.
                  But now ile ſhew how they did meet in field,
                  On either ſide againe when as the peace
                  Was ended: and their battails did ordaine
                  Before the towne of Troye vpon the plaine.
               
               
                  The truce expyr'd, King Agamemnon made
                  A muſter of the Greeks in generall,
                  And with all ſpeed aſſoone as ere he had
                  Pervſed them, he did the Princes call
                  Together vnto him, and forth of hand
                  Appointed vnto every one a band,
               
               
                  By them to be conducted gainſt their foe.
                  The firſt whereof Achilles forth did lead,
                  With Myrmidons which made a gallant ſhoe.
                  The ſecond band was giuen to Di
                           •
                        mede.
                  
                  Before the third King Menelaus did ride.
                  Duke Meneſtes the next and fourth did gi
                        •
                     de.
               
               
                  
                  And after them there followed many moe,
                  All full of gallant Knights; but who they were
                  That guided them, the Storie doth not ſhoe,
                  And every one of them rich ſtandards bare:
                  And in that ſort they marched forth in haſt,
                  In order as their Generall had them plaſt.
               
               
                  
                     Hector likewiſe for his part was not ſlacke,
                  Within the towne his battailes to ordaine,
                  (But at that time how many he did make,
                  It is not ſaid) and ſent them to the plaine
                  Againſt the Greeks: the firſt whereof he gaue
                  To Troy
                           •
                        lus, conduct thereof to haue.
               
               
                  With whom great ſtore of worthy knights did ride,
                  And after went the reſt in order plaſt
                  With Hector, who no longer would abide,
                  But mounting on his horſe road forth in haſt
                  Before them all, and when he entered
                  Into the field, and ſaw Achilles lead
               
               
                  The forefront of the Greeks, he ſpurd his horſe,
                  And with his Launce in reſt moſt furiouſly
                  Ran at him with a great and mighty force.
                  The which when as Achilles did eſpie,
                  He ſet his ſpurs vnto his horſes ſide,
                  And valiantly gainſt Hector forth did ride.
               
               
                  And ere that they their courſe performd & met,
                  (Like two moſt gallant knights and excellent)
                  Their puiſſant Launces in their reſts they ſet,
                  And gaue each other ſtrokes ſo violent,
                  That forcibly they both fell to the ground,
                  (As many times it's often ſeene and found,
               
               
                  When two braue knights of equal ſtrēgth do meet.)
                  But Hector ſtrongſt and nimbleſt of them both,
                  Roſe firſt, and on his horſe againe did get,
                  And left Achilles there exceeding wroth▪
                  
                  And mong the Greeks in furious wiſe he rode,
                  And kild and ſlew all thoſe that him withſtood.
               
               
                  For with his ſword ſuch cruell blows he gaue,
                  Vnto the Greeks in breſt, ſides, legs, and head,
                  That who ſo ere he hit was ſure to haue
                  His mortall wound, & on the ground lay dead:
                  And ever as he road it did him good,
                  To bath his ſword within the Grecians blood.
               
               
                  And in that ſort he ſtill purſued his foes,
                  And many of them in furious wiſe had ſlaine,
                  Before that from the ground Achilles roſe,
                  Who mounting vp vpon his horſe againe,
                  Did enter mongſt the Troyans valiantly,
                  And where he road, did ſlay them cruelly.
               
               
                  And beat & bore downe all that ere he met,
                  And made ſuch ſlaughter mongſt thē euery where
                  As he did ride, that no man durſt him let,
                  For all before him to the ground he bare:
                  Till that in ſuch his great melancholy,
                  He met with Hector riding ſodainly.
               
               
                  And when as each the other did behold,
                  Without delay their ſpeares in hand they tooke,
                  (Like two moſt braue couragious knights & bold,)
                  And to each other gaue a p
                        •
                     iſſant ſtroke:
                  But Hector hit Achilles with ſuch force
                  Vpon the breſt, that he fell off his horſe.
               
               
                  And while that ſtill vpon the ground he lay,
                  And ere that he againe got on his horſe,
                  
                     Hector advanſt himſelfe and did aſſaie,
                  Deſpight of them by force his horſe to get:
                  But ſuch a troope of Grecians came with ſpeed,
                  To ayd and helpe Achilles in his need,
               
               
                  That he could not his purpoſe then attaine,
                  And by that meanes with great extreamity,
                  
                     Achilles got vpon his horſe againe,
                  And meaning to revenge the iniurie
                  He had receau'd, did ſtraight to Hector goe,
                  And with his ſword gaue him ſo great a blow
               
               
                  Vpon the head, that with the mighty force
                  And ſtrength thereof, he was conſtraind to fall
                  Out of his ſadle backe vpon his horſe.
                  But preſently, and in deſpight of all
                  The Greeks that him aſſaild by force and might
                  He reard himſelfe, and like a valiant knight,
               
               
                  With heart repleat with anger and deſire,
                  To be reveng'd of him for that deſpight,
                  In furious wiſe with extreame wrath and ire,
                  He ſtroke Achilles with ſuch force and might,
                  That with the blow he gaue him in the head
                  A cruell wound, wherewith full ſore he bled.
               
               
                  And yet although the bloud ran downe his face,
                  No whit abaſht, but like a valiant knight,
                  He would not vnto Hector once giue place,
                  But ſtill maintaind a fierce and cruell fight
                  With him, the which made all that ſaw't to wōder,
                  For every blow they gaue did ſound like thūder.
               
               
                  And neither of them would the other ſpare,
                  But like two ſavage Tygars in their rage,
                  Each other ſtrong and ſturdy ſtrokes they bare,
                  And by no meanes their chollers would aſſwage:
                  So that without all doubt aſſuredly,
                  It they held on with ſuch hoſtility,
               
               
                  
                  And in that cruell fight did long endure,
                  (They both behau'd themſelues ſo valiantly)
                  In th'end the one or both of them muſt ſure
                  Haue died there, without all remedy:
                  Which had great pittie been, for they were both
                  Exceeding valiant knights, and of great worth.
               
               
                  And while that they ſo fiercly fought together,
                  And neither would vnto the other yeeld,
                  The Greeks with many warlike troops came thither,
                  The which when as the Troyan knights beheld,
                  They likewiſe marched forward, and did enter
                  The field, againſt their foes their liues to venter.
               
               
                  And at that time ſo fiercely met together,
                  That with the preaſe twixt them on either ſide,
                  They did conſtraine thoſe valiant knights to ſever
                  Themſelues, and each from other way to ride:
                  And then into the field came Diomede,
                  
                  With all the knights that he as then did lead.
               
               
                  Who had no ſooner entred in the place,
                  But with him ſtout and gallant Troyelus met,
                  And they encountring brauely face to face,
                  Vpon each other valiantly did ſet:
                  And ran together with ſuch mighty force,
                  That each of them the other did vnhorſe.
               
               
                  But Diomede firſt on his horſe did get,
                  And ſodenly Prince Troyelus aſſaild
                  (As he on foot did ſtand) with furie great,
                  But he whoſe valiant courage neuer faild:
                  So brauely him at that time did withſtand,
                  That's enemie got nothing at his hand.
               
               
                  But Diomede with great dexſteritie,
                  Sitting with much advantage on his horſe,
                  Lift vp his ſword and ſodainly let flie
                  A blow at Troyclus head with ſo great force,
                  That his rich circle full of iewe
                        •
                     s, ſtroke
                  Cleane off his Helme, & it in ſunder broake.
               
               
                  But that could not yong Troyelus diſmay,
                  No
                        •
                      make him once giue place or ſtep aſide,
                  For with his ſword he preſently did ſlay
                  The horſe whereon prowd Diomede did ride:
                  And by that meanes conſtrained him to fight
                  On foot with him, and like a valiant Knight.
               
               
                  Vpon his foe in furious wiſe did ſet,
                  Whereas betweene them both they ſtoutly ſhewd
                  Their moſt couragious hearts and valor great,
                  And each the others ha
                        •
                     nas hackt and hewd:
                  And rent and tore't like Lyons fierce & ſtrong,
                  And in that ſort their fight continued long.
               
               
                  Till that the Greeks came thither, and by force
                  (While they on foote did fight ſo furiouſly)
                  Caus'd Diomede to mount vpon a horſe,
                  And there withall the Troyans ſpeedily
                  Brought Troyelus a horſe likewiſe to ride,
                  And being mounted both againe, defied
               
               
                  Each other, and the fight continued
                  In equall ſort, without advantage great,
                  Till it fell out at laſt that Diomede
                  
                  By policie or fortune chanſt to get
                  Advantage by ſome meanes on Troyelus,
                  
                  (For no man alwaies is victorious.
               
               
                  Nor yet in peace or warre like fortunate,
                  For tis the doubtfull end of bloudy warre,
                  Now vp, now downe, ſtill ſubiect vnto fate,
                  And therfore let each man himſelfe prepare,
                  (Sith fickle fortune is ſo full of doubt)
                  To take his chance when as it falleth out.
               
               
                  And at that time layd hand vpon his horſe,
                  (being then enclos'd by Grecians round about)
                  And tooke him for his priſoner, and by force
                  Among the preaſe began to lead him out:
                  Accompanyed with many a Grecian knight,
                  To gard and keepe him as they went by might.
               
               
                  For though it then fell out that Troyelus
                  
                  Was tane perforce by Diomede in 
                        •
                     ight,
                  He might by fortune proue victorious
                  Another time, and him therefore requite:
                  For that as it 
                        •
                     ell out in little ſpace,
                  He had not led him farre out of the place.
               
               
                  But multitudes of Troyans him aſſaild,
                  And maugre all the power of Diomede,
                  
                  So mightily againſt the Greeks prevaild,
                  That they did reſcue Troyelus in his need:
                  And him by force of armes from him did take.
                  And then began great ſlaughter for his ſake
               
               
                  On either ſide, where many men were ſlaine,
                  On th'one ſide for to keepe him priſoner ſtill,
                  On th'other ſide to ſet him free againe,
                  But yet in th'end the Troyans had their will:
                  And while the fight in this ſort twixt them held,
                  King Menelaus did enter in the field.
               
               
                  Who all that day gainſt Troyans brauely fought,
                  And buſie was on them reveng'd to bee,
                  For malice that to them of old he ought,
                  The which when Paris not farre off did ſee:
                  With all his knights vpon him he did ſet,
                  And he with Greeks on him, & when they met
               
               
                  
                  Betweene them both, on either ſide began
                  A cruell, fierce, and bloudy fight, which was
                  The death of many a braue and gallant man.
                  
                     Hector meane time through thick & thin did paſſe, ſpill.
                  And neuer ceaſt in ſurious wiſe to kill
                  The Greeks, & in great ſtreams their bioud to
               
               
                  For with his ſword ſo many of them were ſlaine,
                  And beaten downe with extreame cruelty,
                  That they could not his puiſſant blowes ſuſtaine,
                  But were conſtraind before his face to flye:
                  And when a luſtie, yong, and gallant knight
                  Cald Boetes, ſaw with how great force & might
               
               
                  The Greeks were ſlaine by Hectors cruelty
                  On euery ſide, to win himſelfe great fame,
                  And that record of him perpetually,
                  Might ſtill be kept for th'onor of his name:
                  With courage bold & heart not once affeard,
                  He thought he would adventure him to beard.
               
               
                  The which when Hector ſaw, he did conceaue
                  Such wrath within his heart and great diſdaine,
                  That with his ſword he did his body cleaue,
                  Cleane downe from head to foot in pieces twaine,
                  And tooke his horſe and ſent it to the towne.
                  And then againe road fiercely vp and downe
               
               
                  Amongſt the Greeks, and euer mercileſſe,
                  With extreame force and heart couragious,
                  He kild all thoſe that on him ſought to preſſe,
                  Which when the valiant King Archilagus,
                  
                  Perceau'd and ſaw his Couſin Boetes lie
                  By Hector ſlaine in that ſort cruellie.
               
               
                  To be reveng'd on him for that deſpight,
                  With fury great vnto him he did goe,
                  And as at him he did begin to ſmight,
                  
                     Hector vpon his ſhield receau'd the blowe:
                  And with his ſword ſtroke him vpon the head
                  So mightily, that he therewith fell dead
               
               
                  Vpon the ground, his body cleft in twaine:
                  And though his armes were paſſing ſtrong & good,
                  Yet could they not the mighty force ſuſtaine
                  Of Hectors ſtroke that came with furious mood:
                  The which when King Protbenor did behold,
                  With great deſpight & courage fierce & bold,
               
               
                  (And yet in truth t'was but in fooliſh pride,)
                  He road to him in haſt, and vnaware
                  Smote him a mighty blow vpon the ſide,
                  And him therewith out of his ſadle bare,
                  And made him fall downe flat vpon the ground:
                  But Hector who in valor did abound,
               
               
                  In haſt leapt vp vpon his horſes backe,
                  And Prothenor purſued furiouſly▪
                  
                  And when at laſt he did him ouertake,
                  He ſmote him with his ſword ſo cruelly
                  Vpon the Helme, that with the blow he gaue,
                  His head and body to the breſt he claue:
               
               
                  And downe he fell before the Greeks, who ſore
                  Abaſhed were at that moſt cruell blow,
                  But ſpecially Achilles grieu'd therefore,
                  And for the ſame his heart was full of woe:
                  To ſee his Couſin Prothenor lye ſlaine
                  Before his face, for which he felt ſuch paine
               
               
                  And griefe in mind, that full of heauineſſe
                  He road among the Grecian troopes, to ſee
                  If he could eaſe himſelfe of his diſtreſſe,
                  And find the meanes with them reueng'd to bee
                  On Hector, for the death of Prothenor,
                  
                  The which both he and they together ſwore,
               
               
                  And for the death of King Archilagus,
                  
                  And to that end conspir'd among them all,
                  With many Grecian Knights chivalorous,
                  At once on Hector furiouſly to fall:
                  And him with ſpeed on every ſide t'aſſaile,
                  But at that time it did them not availe.
               
               
                  For all that day ſuch hauocke he did make,
                  And kild and hewd the Greeks ſo furiouſly,
                  That they on him could no advantage take,
                  But were conſtraind for their owne ſafety:
                  And for to ſhun the extreame force and might
                  Of him, and of the Troyans that did fight
               
               
                  At that time with ſo great agility,
                  And ſuch a fierce aſſault vnto them gaue,
                  To leaue the field, and to recoyle and fly
                  Vnto their tents, and there themſelues to ſaue:
                  And in their flight ſo beaten were & ſlaine,
                  That all the way along, & all the plaine
               
               
                  Lay full of dead and wounded Greeks that bled,
                  And gaſpt, and groand, and howld, and cryed ſore,
                  And ſtill the Troyan Knights continued
                  The chaſe, and draue the Grecians more & more
                  Before them downe, till that it grew to night,
                  And waxed darke, & then for want of light,
               
               
                  The Troyans to their honor and renowne,
                  With Hector did retire, and entered
                  Victoriouſly againe into the towne,
                  And there themſelues refreſhed, cur'd, and fed:
                  Where till the day next morning gan to breake,
                  Ile let them reſt, and of the Grecians ſpeake:
               
               
                  
                  When Hesperus the bright and gliſtring ſtarre,
                  At euening in the Weſt began t'appeare,
                  And ſpred his beames abroad both nere & farre,
                  And twilight with a pale and deadly cheare,
                  Did ſeeme to mo
                        •
                     ned he abſence of the Sun,
                  And night approached with his mantle dun.
               
               
                  When Tytan did begin his leaue to take,
                  And to the Weſterne coaſt in haſt deſcond
                  At twilight, when the day an end doth make,
                  (For twy-light nothing elſe is but the end
                  Of day, and the beginning of the night,
                  And yet in truth is neither day nor night.
               
               
                  But iuſt a meane betweene them both doth beare,
                  Yet neither th'one nor th'other perfectly,
                  And comes before the gliſtring ſtarres appeare,
                  To ſhew themſelues within the azure skie.)
                  Their Generall King Agamemnon ſent
                  For all the Grecian Princes to his tent.
               
               
                  And when that they therein aſſembled were,
                  And every one of them in order ſet,
                  With lookes demure and ſad, and heauy cheare,
                  And many ſighs which from their hearts they fet:
                  They did begin of Hector to complaine,
                  Affirming that they never ſhould obtaine
               
               
                  That honor and renowne the which they fought,
                  Nor victorie againſt their foes ſhould haue,
                  While he did liue and dailie gainſt them fought,
                  And to that end they might their honors ſaue:
                  They did conſult with one conſent and will,
                  How that they might that valiant Chāpion kill.
               
               
                  Concluding that while he in Troye remaind,
                  They never ſhould attaine the towne to win,
                  And ſaid that he the ſame alone maintaind,
                  And that he was of all that dwelt therein,
                  The only ſtay and chiefe protection,
                  Of them and Troye, without exception.
               
               
                  And caſtle, wall, and bulwarke of their land,
                  And vnto them a ſterne and deadly foe,
                  Whoſe mighty force the Greeks could not withſtād,
                  Nor never ſhould the Troyans overthrow:
                  Nor while that he did liue and them defend,
                  Bring that their doubtfull warre vnto an end.
               
               
                  And therefore all together did agree
                  With full and whole conſent, that by ſome ſlight
                  When he ſhould in the field moſt eager bee,
                  (To kill and ſlay the Grecians in the fight)
                  
                     Achilles with his Knights ſhould him beſet,
                  And vnawares advantage of him get,
               
               
                  And with a mighty troope of Gre
                           •
                        kes a
                        ••
                     a
                        ••
                     e
                  Him round about and e
                        •
                     then 
                        •
                     lay or take
                  Him quicke or dead, wherein they could no
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     aile
                  If they would do't, and to that end did make
                  A motion to Achilles, to require
                  And pray him to accept of their deſire.
               
               
                  To take in hand and brauely vndergoe,
                  That great and valiant enterpriſe to kill,
                  By force and ſlight their chiefe and deadly fo
                        •
                     ,
                  Who preſently did grant vnto their will:
                  And from that time in wayt for him did lie▪
                  
                  T
                        ••
                     ntrap him and to kill him ſodainly.
               
               
                  (But from thenceforth I counſell him beware
                  That he do not that action vndertake,
                  And if therein he needs will haue a ſhare,
                  T'were beſt for him not too much haſt to make:
                  To try his force gainſt Hectors puiſſant mig
                        ••
                     ,
                  Leaſt fortune turne her face, and in deſpight
               
               
                  Looke on him with an angry frowning cheare,
                  And make him put his life in ieopardy,
                  And into Hectors hands light vnaware,
                  And in himſelfe the Proverbe verifie:
                  He that doth for another ſet a trap,
                  Into the ſame himſelfe may chance 
                        •
                     o hap.
               
               
                  Which hardly he ſhall ſcape if that he trye.
                  For Hector had the like deſire and will,
                  T'encounter with Achilles valiantly,
                  And him by all the meanes he could to kill:
                  As hauing vowd his death without all doubt,
                  If he on him could light to fight it out.
               
               
                  So that nought elſe but death he was t'attend,
                  If he and Hector chanſt to meet in field)
                  And thus the Greeks their counſell then did end,
                  Which they for that intent had onely held:
                  And to their lodgings went their reſt to take,
                  Till next day in the morne that they did wake.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  I How the Troyans tooke King Thoas priſoner in the battaile, and led him captiue into the To
                        •••
                     .
               
               
                  
                  WHen faire A
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        
                      with her drops that thine,
                  Complaining made great dolor, griefe, and
                  And ſeemed for her childrēs death to whine, (ſorow
                  As ſhe doth vſe to doe each Sommer morrow:
                  That is, when a
                        •
                      the dew that it ſo ſweet,
                  Each pleaſant flower, hearbe, & root doth weet,
               
               
                  With liquor cleare in Aprill and in May.
                  And when of day the Larke that's meſſenger,
                  Salutes A
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        
                      faire in morning gray,
                  With ſundry notes her woefull heart to cheare,
                  And ere the Sunne doth riſe with ioyfulneſſe,
                  Doth make her leaue her griefe and heauineſſe:
               
               
                  At that ſame time the Grecians did ariſe,
                  And luſtily with ioyfull hearts and cheare,
                  Put on ſuch armes in braue and warlike wiſe,
                  As a
                        •
                      that time it was their vſe to weare:
                  Intending earely that ſame day to goe
                  Into the field, to meet their deadly foe.
               
               
                  And Hector alſo fully purpoſed,
                  That day likewiſe againſt the Greeks to fight,
                  And early in the morning iſſued,
                  Accompanied with many a warlike knight:
                  All borne within the towne of Troye and bred,
                  Which formoſt of them all himſelfe did lead.
               
               
                  Next after him Aeueas followed,
                  The ſecond band to guide againſt their foe.
                  The third it was by worthy Paris led.
                  Before the fourth Deiphobus forth did goe.
                  The fift and laſt the luſty gallant knight
                  Yong Troyelus conducted to the fight.
               
               
                  In which fiue bands that iſſued out as then,
                  The Hiſtory declareth that there were
                  An hundred and iuſt fiftiethouſand men
                  On horſe and foot, all able armes to beare:
                  And fully bent with will and courage great,
                  Vpon the Grecian foes that day to ſet.
               
               
                  And when they met together on each ſide,
                  With cruell and with deadly hatered,
                  And each againſt the other fiercely ride.
                  
                     Paris that all the Perſian Archers led,
                  And croſſebow ſhot with arrows long & round,
                  And ſhafts that were ſquare headed ſharply ground.
               
               
                  Great ſtore of Greeks in furious wiſe did kill,
                  And while that they their valors gainſt them tride,
                  And that the field began with Knights to fill,
                  King Agamemnon on the Grecians ſide
                  Did enter in, with whome when Hector met,
                  In furious wiſe he did vpon him ſet.
               
               
                  And in the midſt of all his troopes did caſt
                  Him cleane out of his ſadle to the ground,
                  And then did beat the Grecians downe ſo faſt,
                  That many dead vpon the plaine were found▪
                  
                  Till at the laſt Achilles that did watch,
                  And follow Hector, if he could to catch
               
               
                  Him in a trap, came ſ
                        •
                     denly and ſtrake
                  So puiſſant a blow on Hectors head,
                  That with the ſame he did his Helmet cracke,
                  But nought therewith Hector aſtoniſhed:
                  To ſet vpon Achilles did not faile,
                  Intending him in furious wiſe t'aſſaile,
               
               
                  Had not Aeneas come them two betweene,
                  And Troyelus with him, who both together
                  To ſet vpon Achilles did begin,
                  And with ſuch mighty blows ſtrake one the other,
                  That harnas, male, & plates of ſteele they b
                        ••
                     ke,
                  And made each others ſhields & helmet crake.
               
               
                  And then on each ſide ſlaughter great began
                  So cruelly, that all the field was red
                  And dyed with bloud of many a valiant man.
                  At which time fierce and cruell Diomede,
                  
                  By fortune in the preaſe Aeneas found,
                  To whome he gaue a great and deadly wound.
               
               
                  And therewith all ſaid to him ſpightfully,
                  That's thy reward becauſe thou doſt malign
                  At me, and didſt giue counſell fooliſhly,
                  In open Court to Priamus the King,
                  To ſlay me there when as I was before
                  Him in the hall, as Greeks Embaſſador.
               
               
                  Which was againſt all law of armes & right,
                  And truſt me it ſhall nere out of my mind,
                  Till that I be reveng'd for that deſpight,
                  And for that cauſe if ere I chance to find
                  Thee in the field, if fortune doe conſent,
                  Ile make thee for thy counſell to repent.
               
               
                  And with my ſword which now in hand I beare,
                  Thy blood ile ſhed, to make thee feele & know
                  How it can cut, & therewith all did reare
                  His ſword on high, and gaue him ſuch a blow
                  Againe vpon the head with ſo great force,
                  That therewith all he feld him off his horſe.
               
               
                  And while they fought, Hector Achilles met,
                  And him aſſaild ſo cruelly againe,
                  That with a blow that on his head he ſmet,
                  His helmet cleft almoſt in pieces twaine:
                  And had him brought to ſuch extreamity,
                  That at that time without all remedy,
               
               
                  
                  He would him there perforce haue priſoner 
                        •
                     ane,
                  I Diomede had not by chance come thither,
                  The quarrell of Achilles to ſuſtaine:
                  And with his ſword while they two fought together,
                  To Hector gaue a blow that hurt him ſore,
                  But he nothing at all diſmaid therefore.
               
               
                  Straight turnd his horſe about to Diomede,
                  
                  And ſmote him with his ſword ſo furiouſly,
                  That with the blow he feld him off his ſteed.
                  The which aſſoone as Troyelus did eſpie,
                  Without delay off from his horſe he light
                  Vpon his feet, with Diomede to fight.
               
               
                  Who then together fought ſo valiantly,
                  That no man that beheld them well, could tell
                  Which of them both ſhould haue the victorie,
                  For each of them in Knighthood did excell.
                  And while they two together ſo did fight,
                  
                     Hector againe vpon Achilles light,
               
               
                  And on him ſet with fierce▪ and furious mood,
                  Where twixt them both a gallant fight was ſeene,
                  And each his foe ſo fiercely then with ſtood,
                  A
                        •••
                      two cruell Lyons they had been.
                  Meane time the Greeks with many a gallant wing
                  Of Knights, came on with Menelaus the King,
               
               
                  With great deſire vpon their foes to ſet.
                  And next to him did march Neoptolemus.
                  
                  Then wiſe Uliſſes, aud ſtout Pollimet.
                  
                  
                     Palamides, and valiant Selemus.
                  
                  Duke Meneſtes, Duke Neſtor, and King Thoas.
                  
                  
                     Currinulus, and then Philoctheas.
                  
               
               
                  And laſtly with the rereward followed
                  Duke Theſeus with a band of gallant men.
                  And on the Troyans ſide there entered,
                  All thoſe that to the towne were come, as then
                  Againſt the Greekes to helpe them in their need,
                  And all the Kings by whom they then were led.
               
               
                  And none did ſtay behind but Hectors band,
                  Wherewith that day himſelfe had iſſued,
                  And at that time did valiantly withſtand
                  Their Grecian foes, and then much bloud was ſhed
                  On either ſide; for that moſt cruell fight
                  Procur'd the death of many a valiant Knight.
               
               
                  And while the fight twixt them continued thus,
                  It was King Agamemnons chance to meet
                  Among the preaſe with ſtout Pantiſilaus,
                  
                  And on him there in furious wiſe did ſet,
                  And he on him likewiſe, and in their courſe
                  Each ſtrake the other down off from his horſe.
               
               
                  And Menelaus againe on Paris ſet,
                  And each to other furiouſly did ride,
                  And when they both together fiercely met,
                  King Menelaus hit Paris on the ſide
                  A blow, which though it hurt him not at all,
                  Yet he was forſt downe from his horſe to fall.
               
               
                  Wherewith in heart he was exceeding wrath,
                  And at that time did ſeeme to bluſh for ſhame,
                  Leaſt Helena ſhould know't, as being loath
                  That it againſt his honor, name, and ſame,
                  Should vnto her be told, that by maine force,
                  King Menelaus had thrown him from his horſe.
               
               
                  And then the valiant King Adraſtus met
                  
                     Uliſſes in the preaſe, and there together
                  A while they fought with force and courage great,
                  Without advantage one againſt the other:
                  But at the laſt Vliſſes ſtroke a blow
                  At him ſo hard, that it did overthrow
               
               
                  Him to the ground, and then he tooke his horſe,
                  And ſent it by his Squire to his tent.
                  Then valiant King Palamides by force
                  King Hupon did aſſaile, and they two ſpent
                  Long time in fight, till with great cruelty,
                  
                     Palamides a blow at him let flie
               
               
                  With ſo great force, that it did wound him ſore,
                  And therewith all dead to the ground he fell.
                  Not farre from them two pikes length & no more,
                  
                     Neoptolemus, who did in force excell,
                  Aſſailed King Archilagus, whereas
                  Betweene them both a valiant fight there was,
               
               
                  Till in the end each th'other did vnhorſe.
                  Then to the field came ſtout Pollidamas
                  
                  Vpon a gallant ſteed of mighty force,
                  And when he did perceiue and ſaw, whereas
                  The valiant King Palamides did ride,
                  He ſet his ſpurs vnto his horſes ſide,
               
               
                  And ran at him with ſuch exceeding force,
                  That maugre all his valor and his might,
                  He gaue him ſuch a blow that from his horſe,
                  He threw him on the ground with great deſpight:
                  For to revenge King Hupous death, whome he
                  Had ſlaine before with extreame cruelty.
               
               
                  Not farre from thence King Selemus did ſet
                  Vpon a King cald Carras, and by force,
                  When they in furious wiſe together me
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Selemus threw King Carras off his horſe▪
                  
                  On th'other ſide King Phil
                           •
                        m
                           •
                        ns aſſaild
                  The worthy Duke of Athens, and preuaild
               
               
                  
                  So much gainſt him that 
                        ••
                     ally by force,
                  (Although he was both valiant, ſtout, & ſtrong)
                  And fought right well, he tooke from him his horſe,
                  And led it in his hand with him along.
                  And worthy King Phil
                           •
                        ct
                           ••
                        
                      did fight
                  With R
                           •
                        mus, and each of them both did ſmight
               
               
                  The other from his horſe. And Theſeus,
                  
                  As he amongſt his Troyan foes did fight,
                  By chance did meet with King Coriolus,
                  
                  A Prince of paſſing valor, force and might:
                  Where twixt the both the fight continued long,
                  (For Theſeus likewiſe was exceeding ſtrong.)
               
               
                  Till each the other wounded ſore did ſmight
                  Off from his horſe, and riſing vp againe
                  Vpon their feet, ſtill valiantly did fight
                  A fierce and bloudy combate, to otaine
                  The victory againſt his mortall foe,
                  For each of them great proweſſe then did ſhoe.
               
               
                  And all this while the ſons of Priamus
                  
                  Behau'd themſelues ſo valiantly in fight,
                  And gainſt the Greeks like Knights couragious,
                  Such valor ſhewd that by their force and might,
                  Great ſtore of Kings, Dukes, Lords, & knights were ſlaine,
                  And many Greeks laid dead vpon the plaine.
               
               
                  And at that time renowmed Thelamon,
                  
                  With ſpeare in hand ſet ſpurs vnto his horſe,
                  And furiouſly ran at King Sarpedon,
                  
                  Who likewiſe at him ran with mighty force:
                  And each the other mortally did wound,
                  And in that ſort they both fell to the ground.
               
               
                  And after they a furious fight had held,
                  And cut and mangled each the other ſore,
                  Whē neither of them both their armes could weld,
                  They were conſtraind to breath and fight no more:
                  And mongſt the horſes feet in danger ſtood,
                  And all the ground about thē dide with blood.
               
               
                  While Thoas and Achilles that had ſpide
                  Where Hector fought in midſt of all his foes,
                  Vnto him in moſt furious wiſe did ride,
                  And vnawares they did him round encloſe:
                  And with great ſpight which they vnto him bore,
                  They did aſſaile and ſet on him ſo ſore,
               
               
                  That they did ſmight his helmet from his head,
                  And in the ſame gaue him a mighty wound,
                  But he therewith no whit aſtoniſhed,
                  (For in him never cowardiſe was found,)
                  Moſt valiantly againſt them both did fight,
                  And many furious blows at them did ſmite.
               
               
                  So that advantage none on him they got,
                  Till Thoas did a blow at him let flie,
                  Wherewith his noſe off from his face he ſm
                        ••
                     ,
                  The which when as his brethren did eſpye
                  The Grecians, they ſo furiouſly aſſaild,
                  And at that time ſo much gainſt them preuaild,
               
               
                  That Thoas valiaritly by them was tane,
                  And Thelamon aſſaild ſo cruelly,
                  That they ſuppoſing him to haue beene ſlaine,
                  Vpon the ground for dead did let him lye:
                  Till that his men did beare him to his tent,
                  And Thoas priſoner vnto Troy was ſent,
               
               
                  Deſpight of all the Grecian knights that ſought
                  To giue him ayd in that extremity.
                  And Menelaus as he in field then tought,
                  And road from place to place, at laſt did ſpie
                  Where Paris did the Grecians fiercely ſlay,
                  (For whom he had in wait laine all that day.)
               
               
                  And preſently his horſe he ſpurd in haſt,
                  And ran at him, intending if he might,
                  Ere that he further mongſt the Grecians paſt,
                  To kill him ſodainly with great deſpight:
                  But his intent and purpoſe to prevent,
                  
                     Paris that had his puiſſant bow then bent,
               
               
                  At him did let a poyſoned arrow fly,
                  And gaue him therewith all a deadly wound,
                  Wherewith he was in ſuch extremity,
                  That he fell downe halfe dead vpon the ground:
                  Which when his knights did ſee that then were nere
                  Forthwith vnto his tent they did him beare.
               
               
                  Where with all ſpeed for Surgions ſtraight he ſent,
                  Who being come, in haſt they ſearcht the wound
                  And ere that they into it put a tent,
                  When as they had it viewd vnto the ground,
                  They firſt of all drew out, and tooke away
                  The arrow head that in the bottome lay.
               
               
                  And then did wipe and clenſe it thorowly
                  Of all the matter and corruption
                  That they could find therein, and preſently
                  Put in a tent, and bound it vp, which done,
                  King Menelaus no longer would abide,
                  But furiouſly into the field did ride.
               
               
                  With full intent and purpoſe to require
                  Himſelfe, (although he had ſo great a wound,)
                  On Paris that ſame day if that he might,
                  And never ceaſt vntill that he him found:
                  By fortune cleane vnarmed in the field,
                  Of ſword or Launce, of Target or of ſhield,
               
               
                  
                  Or Bow in hand, the which as I ſuppoſe,
                  He did for to refreſh himſelfe, when as
                  He had long fought againſt his Grecian foes,
                  And at that time exceeding wearie was:
                  Which Menelaus eſpying, ſtraight did take
                  His Launce in hand, & towards him did make:
               
               
                  And without doubt at that time had him ſlaine,
                  Had not Aeneas been that him beheld,
                  And ſodainly ſtept in betweene them twaine,
                  And did receaue the blow vpon his ſhield:
                  Elſe Paris had aſſuredly been kild,
                  At that ſame time diſarmed in the field.
               
               
                  And preſently Aeneas ſet a band
                  Of valiant Knights on Paris to attend,
                  And to defend his perſon, and withſtand
                  The furie of King Menelaus: to th'end
                  He ſhould him not with diſadvantage ſlay,
                  For he in wait at that time for him lay.
               
               
                  And had as then by Hector taken been,
                  If that the Greeks had not come ſodainly,
                  To reſcue him with multitudes of men,
                  And at that time relieu'd him ſpeedily:
                  But Hector by his valor great & might,
                  Diſperſed, kild, and put them vnto flight.
               
               
                  So furiouſly that he did them conſtraine,
                  By force of armes vnto their tents to run,
                  And by that meanes the Troyans did obtaine
                  The battaile gainſt the Greeks, & th'onor wun
                  That day, and fore them brauely did purſue
                  And beat them, till the day to euening drew.
               
               
                  And Phoebus did deſcend into the Weſt.
                  For he as then was ready to go downe,
                  At which time they went home to take their reſt:
                  And entering againe into the towne,
                  Shut faſt their gates, and ſo that day did end.
                  And when that Phoebus light againe did ſend,
               
               
                  Next morning when the skie was covered
                  With crimſon coloured clouds which he then ſent,
                  And ere the azure element did ſpread,
                  Before the Sun did riſe in th'orient,
                  King Priamus intending not to goe
                  That day into the field againſt his foe;
               
               
                  His Privie Counſell ſummond to appeare
                  Before him that ſame morning ſpeedily,
                  Whoſe names (as I in Guido find) then were
                  
                     Hector the flower and root of Chivalry,
                  His ſecond brother Paris, Deiphobus,
                  
                  And luſty, yong, and worthy Troyelus.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Anthenor, and his ſon Pollidamas,
                  
                  
                     Aeneas, and ſome other Princes more.
                  And when that he with them aſſembled was,
                  And that they had ſhut faſt the counſell dore,
                  Each one in order ſet and ſilence made,
                  King Priamus vnto them ſpake, and ſaid:
               
               
                  My Lords, in whome my truſt I do repoſe,
                  And onlie on your valors doe relie,
                  You know that mongſt our ſterne & deadly foes,
                  King Thoas (now our priſ'ner) ſpecially,
                  Did alwaies vnto vs great hatred beare,
                  (Although of him we never ſtood in feare,)
               
               
                  And to his power hath ſought vs to offend,
                  And now to ſeeke our full ſubverſion,
                  With all the aid that he the Greeks can lend,
                  Is come with them here to beſiege our towne,
                  And to procure our ruine and decay,
                  By all the meanes that poſſibly he may.
               
               
                  Wherefore in reaſon and in equity,
                  (If vnto you it be acceptable,
                  And that it liketh you as it doth me)
                  I thinke it not a thing vnreaſonable:
                  That ſith he ſeeks to do vs iniurie,
                  With like for like he ſhould required be.
               
               
                  And as our deaths he ſeeketh to procure,
                  So let him die; for reaſon doth require,
                  That he the ſelfe ſame cenſure ſhould endure,
                  Which he in heart to others doth deſire:
                  This is my doome, now let me heare I pray,
                  What euery one of you thereto will ſay.
               
               
                  To this Aeneas anſwere made and ſaid,
                  If to your Grace it will be no offence,
                  That to the propoſition you haue made
                  I may reply, with leaue and audience
                  Of you and of your counſell learnd & wiſe,
                  I will to you herein giue mine adviſe.
               
               
                  It doth behooue your Royall Maieſtie,
                  In all things which your Grace in hand ſhall take,
                  Not to proceed therewith too haſtily,
                  But ere that you begin your reckning make,
                  What may enſue thereof, and looke not on
                  The firſt beginning of a thing alone:
               
               
                  But as all wiſe men do, forecaſt the end,
                  And then proceed that you may bring to paſſe,
                  With iſſue good, the ſame which you pretend.
                  For that thing ſure is well begun, when as
                  The end and the beginning both agree,
                  And either of them fals out happilie.
               
               
                  
                  Leaſt otherwiſe for want of good forecaſt,
                  You might conſtrained be another day,
                  Againſt your will t'repent your ſelfe at laſt.
                  The reaſon why I this to your Grace ſay,
                  Is, that I thinke it good you ſhould remember,
                  That Thoas who is now your priſoner,
               
               
                  Is mongſt the Greeks one of the principall
                  And greateſt Lords of bloud and high degree:
                  And that if at this time it ſhould befall,
                  He ſhould be put to death by your decree,
                  It may be that all thoſe that giue conſent
                  Thereto, at laſt full ſore would it repent.
               
               
                  For if by chance (which no man can withſtand)
                  Some of your Sons or chiefe Nobilitie
                  Now in this towne, ſhould fall into the hand
                  Of them, and by that meanes ſhould priſoners be:
                  Aſſure your ſelfe, they'le ſhew like gentlenes
                  To them, as you do him in this diſtreſſe.
               
               
                  For if King Thoas now condemn'd ſhould be
                  And put to death, you muſt your reckning make,
                  The Grecians will ſhew vs like crueltie,
                  If any of vs they ſhould priſoner take:
                  Yea, though it were one of your Royall blood,
                  The which I know for all your worldlie good,
               
               
                  You would by no meanes wiſh, nor gladlie ſee.
                  Wherefore by mine aduiſe I thinke it beſt,
                  That Thoas ſhould well kept and garded bee
                  Within this towne, and quietlie let reſt:
                  Leaſt as I ſaid to you before, it may
                  Fall out, that one of vs another day
               
               
                  Might hap into their hands, and priſoner be:
                  And ſo for him we might haue ours againe;
                  Which otherwiſe if with extreamitie
                  We do proceed, we never ſhould obtaine:
                  This is my counſell in this caſe, ſaid he,
                  And ſuch as I do thinke the beſt to be.
               
               
                  Whereto moſt worthy Hector did conſent,
                  And with him was of like opinion:
                  And ſaid, that he no will had nor intent,
                  That any wrong to Thoas ſhould be done,
                  While he in Troy then priſoner was, though he
                  Nere had deſeru'd of them well vs'd to be.
               
               
                  
                     Paris King Priams ſecond ſon likewiſe,
                  (When as his brother Hector had declar'd
                  His mind,) ſaid vnto them, that his aduiſe
                  Was, that he wiſht King Thoas ſhould be ſpar'd,
                  And not put vnto death, although he ſaid,
                  To doe the ſame they need not be afraid.
               
               
                  But Deiphobus of cleane contrarie mind,
                  Vnto his brethren twaine did ſay, he ſaw
                  No cauſe why Thoas ſhould ſuch favor find
                  At Troyans hands; who by their marſhall law,
                  Might iuſtlie for his merits make him die,
                  Being as he was their vtter enemie.
               
               
                  Whereto with courage bold & youthfull heart,
                  Prince Troyelus, did ſeeme ſomewhat t'agree
                  With Deiphobus, and ſaid, that for his part,
                  He did no cauſe nor any reaſon ſee,
                  Why they ſhould ſpare their enemie, that ſought
                  Their overthrow, and to that end had brought
               
               
                  His forces fore their towne, as fullie bent
                  To worke their vtter ruine and decay:
                  But yet (ſaid he) it is not my intent,
                  To counſell you to deale with him that way:
                  Leaſt (as my Lord Aeneas ſaith) we might
                  Perchance thereby procure our owne deſpight.
               
               
                  Whoſe counſell Lord Anthenor did commend,
                  And ſaid, that to ſhew ſuch extreamitie
                  Of marſhall Law, and rigor, to extend
                  To him, could not be done adviſedlie:
                  For that (ſaid he) there is none of vs all,
                  But may into our foes hands chance to fall:
               
               
                  And with the ſelfe ſame rigor vſed be,
                  That vnto him we ſhewd. Wherefore I ſay,
                  If that by my adviſe you'le ruled be,
                  It's beſt to let him ſafe in priſon ſtay,
                  And vſe him well, that we like cur
                        •
                     eſie
                  May haue (when need requires) of th'enemy.
               
               
                  
                     Pollidamas his ſonne, with all the reſt
                  Of thoſe that in their Counſell chamber were,
                  With one conſent did ſay they thought it beſt,
                  That he ſhould ſtill be kept a priſoner:
                  And as Aeneas ſaid, be vſed well,
                  Till they ſaw how fortune with thē would deale.
               
               
                  But Priamus to wrath and furie bent,
                  Did not agree to their opinion,
                  And would by no meanes therevnto conſent,
                  But ſtill maintain'd his firſt concluſion:
                  And ſaid, that if the Greeks ſhould once perceiue,
                  That we of life do Thoas not bereaue,
               
               
                  But ſpare him, though vnto that end it were:
                  They would report to our no little ſhame,
                  That we dare not attempt to do't for feare
                  We haue of them, and ſo will vs defame:
                  But nere the leſſe (ſaid he) ſith you're content,
                  I will (though loath) vnto the ſame conſent.
               
               
                  
                  And therewithall their counſell vp they brake:
                  And then Aeneas and Anthenor went
                  With Troyelus into the hall, and ſpake
                  With Helena, (whereas ſome time they ſpent
                  With her, and with Queene Hecuba that bare
                  Her company, with many Ladies faire,
               
               
                  That with her & the Queene then preſent were.
                  Where Troyelus and Aeneas did perſwade
                  Queene Helena to ſet aſide all feare,
                  Which by the meanes of war that great ſhe had:
                  And ſhe, although much diſcontent ſhe were
                  In outward ſhew, did ſeeme with ioyfull cheare,
               
               
                  And countenance demure, & being glad
                  To welcome them as to their ſtate was fit,
                  But Hecuba that nere her equall had,
                  For vertue, bountie, eloquence, and wit:
                  While they vnto Queene Helena ſo ſpake,
                  Deſired them for that faire Ladies ſake.
               
               
                  And for the weale and ſafety of them all,
                  And of the towne, that they would not adventer
                  Themſelues in field what ever might befall,
                  Too farre among the enemies to enter:
                  Nor put themſelues in danger careleſly,
                  And yet beſought them to fight valiantly,
               
               
                  To ſaue and keepe the towne from that diſtreſſe,
                  Which th'enemy did ſeeke to bring't into,
                  The which ſhe ſaid ſhe fear'd (ſhe muſt confeſſe)
                  Although ſhe hope't they ſhould it never do:
                  And ſo of her and of the Ladies all,
                  The knights tooke leaue & went out of the hall.
               
               
                  Meane time the Greeks that morning as I ſaid,
                  While Priam in the towne a counſell held,
                  Did murmure & great ſorow mongſt them made,
                  As in their tents they lay in th'open field:
                  To thinke vpon the loſſe which they ſuſtaind,
                  And all of them together much complaind.
               
               
                  And grieued for the death of many a man
                  Of great account, ſlaine by the cruelties,
                  (Since that moſt cruell deadly war began)
                  And valor of their Troyan enemies:
                  And for the hunger, cold, and thirſt alſo,
                  With ſorow, thought, vnquietnes and woe,
               
               
                  Which they had had and felt, & all for nought,
                  Or at the leaſt for cauſes very ſmall,
                  If that the ground thereof were truely ſought.
                  This was the ſpeech and words in generall,
                  That through the Grecians campe at that time ran,
                  And currantly did paſſe from man to man.
               
               
                  But ſpecially amongſt the poorer ſort
                  Of ſoldiers, who in war moſt commonly
                  Conſtrained are t'endure, and to ſupport
                  The brunt of all, and haue no remedy:
                  For though they do find fault & grieue therfore,
                  Yet are they not relieued nere the more.
               
               
                  And ſo they did complaine & make great mone,
                  To thinke vpon the miſchiefe they endured,
                  And which to them the Troyan knights had done,
                  Thogh't were thēſelues that had the ſame procured:
                  Vnto their owne decay, and might it ſhun,
                  If they had not that bloudy war begun.
               
               
                  Which to encreaſe the next enſuing night,
                  So cloudy, darke, and thicke as pitch became,
                  That neither Moone nor ſtar appear'd in ſight,
                  And ſuch a ſtorme did happen on the ſame,
                  Of thunder, lightning, wind, & raine that fell
                  Vpon them, as if all the fiends of hell,
               
               
                  Conſpired had their vtter overthrow,
                  And therewithall the waters did ſo riſe,
                  That all the field and plaine did overflow:
                  And with the wind that blew in furious wiſe,
                  Their tents were overthrowne, & they compeld
                  To leaue the place which all that while they held.
               
               
                  By reaſon that the water grew ſo hie.
                  And in that ſort the Greeks in great diſtreſſe,
                  Compelled were all that ſame night to lie,
                  With hearts repleate, with griefe and heauineſſe:
                  In that great ſtorme of thunder, wind, & raine,
                  Vntill the water did go backe againe.
               
               
                  The wind appeas'd, and day began t'appeare,
                  Next morning when the Sun began to riſe,
                  Which made the aire ſhew beautifull and cleare,
                  And draue away the clouds out of the skies:
                  And with the force and feavor of his heat,
                  Dried vp the ground which was exceeding weet.
               
               
                  And made the moyſture voyd out of the plaine,
                  At which time ſomewhat eaſed of their ſorrow,
                  They did with ſpeed their tents raiſe vp againe,
                  And ioyfully with courage bold that morrow,
                  Did arme themſelues in braue and warlike wiſe.
                  With full intent t'aſſaile their enemies.
               
               
                  And when the field was thorow dried againe,
                  With Phoebus beames, the Troyans left the towne,
                  And valiantly came forth into the field,
                  And were no ſooner to the Greeks come downe,
                  But ſtout Achilles met them in the way,
                  And was the firſt that th'onſet gaue that day.
               
               
                  
                  Who entring in the field without abode,
                  In furious wiſe ſet ſpurs vnto his horſe,
                  And valiantly to ſtrong King Hupon road,
                  At whome he ſtroke with ſuch a mighty force:
                  That with his Launce he gaue him ſuch a wound,
                  That dead he fell therewith vpon the ground.
               
               
                  Then Hector with King Octamene did meet,
                  And each the other valiantly aſſaild,
                  But Hector with ſuch furie on him ſ
                        •
                     t,
                  That neither force nor armor ſtrong preuaild:
                  But with his Launce he pierſt his heart in twaine,
                  That he therewith fell dead vpon the plaine.
               
               
                  At which time furious Diomede did wound
                  The worthy valiant Prince King Zantippus,
                  
                  So ſore that he fell dead vpon the ground.
                  And then in furious wiſe King Cedius,
                  
                  And valiant King Epiſtrophus his brother,
                  Aſſaild and ſet on Hector both together.
               
               
                  And firſt of all Epiſtrophus began
                  To ſpurre his horſe with mighty ſpeare in hand,
                  And with the ſame at Hector fiercely ran,
                  And ſpightfully at him did curſe and band,
                  And many raging words to him did giue,
                  Which Hector at the heart ſo much did grieue,
               
               
                  That he at King Epiſtrophus let f
                        •
                     ye
                  So great a blow, and with ſuch mighty force,
                  That with the ſame he kild him furiouſly,
                  And as he fell downe dead off from his horſe,
                  He bad him goe vnto the fiends of hell,
                  And there ſuch bragging words vnto them tell,
               
               
                  For here (ſaid he) there's no man doth them feare,
                  Nor any whit at all for them doth care.
                  Which words when as King Cedius chanſt to heare,
                  He did in heart like to a mad man fare:
                  And for his death ſo grieued was in thought,
                  That with the knights that he with him had broght,
               
               
                  He did on Hector ſet with great deſpight,
                  And him on euery ſide encloſed round,
                  (While he againſt his enemies did fight)
                  And forcibly ſtroke him vnto the ground:
                  And while with them on foot he fighting ſtands,
                  King Cedius with his ſword in both his hands
               
               
                  At Hector ſmote a blow moſt furiouſly,
                  Intending to haue ſlaine him without faile,
                  But Hector watched him ſo narrowly,
                  That all the force he had could not preuaile:
                  For ere his puiſſant blow deſcended downe,
                  
                     Hector ſore moou'd with indignation,
               
               
                  Lift vp his ſword▪ and vnto him did giue
                  A blow, the which his arme cleane off did ſmight,
                  And with a ſecond blow did him bereaue
                  Of life and all: and while he thus did fight.
                  
                     Aeneas like a Lyon furious,
                  Couragiouſly ſlew King Amiphimacus.
                  
               
               
                  Then to the field came in King Menelaus.
                  
                  And after followed ſtout king Thelamon.
                  
                  And then the valiant Duke Menesteus.
                  
                  And worthy valorous king Machaon.
                  
                  And laſt of all king Agam
                           •
                        mnon went
                  With them, t'aſſaile the Troyans fully bent.
               
               
                  Wdo valiantly themſelues did long defend
                  Againſt the Greeks, and held them at a bay
                  With equall fight, vntill that in the end
                  As it did grow to noone-time of the day:
                  When they had each the other long aſſaild,
                  The Greeks gainſt thē of Troy ſo much preuaild,
               
               
                  That forcibly they made them to retire,
                  And backe to goe of meere necſſity.
                  And while Achilles fought with furious ire,
                  He ſlew King Philon with great cruelty:
                  And Hector to requite the Greeks therefore,
                  Deſpight of them did ſlaie king Alphenor.
                  
               
               
                  And then another King cald Dorius.
                  
                  And did the Greeks ſo valiantly withſtand,
                  That like a Lyon fierce and furious,
                  By vertue of his ſtrong and mighty hand,
                  The Troyans many Grecian knights did ſlay,
                  And valiantly forſt them to fly away.
               
               
                  And then out of the towne of Troy there came
                  The worthy King Epiſtrophus that brought
                  A gallant band of men, and with the ſame
                  So furiouſly againſt the Grecians fought:
                  That by maine force he made them leaue the plain,
                  And giue vnto the Troyans place againe.
               
               
                  For with him in his company he had
                  An Archer of ſuch ſtrange proportion,
                  And monſtrouſly and woonderfully made,
                  That men had him in admiration:
                  For from the middle vpward to the crowne
                  He was a man, and from the middle downe
               
               
                  Like to a horſe he was proportioned,
                  In each reſpect for forme and feature.
                  His skin it was all hairy, rough, and red,
                  And yet although this monſtrous creature
                  Had man-like face, yet did his color ſhow
                  Like burning coles that in the fire glow.
               
               
                  
                  His eyes they did two furnaſes reſemble,
                  As bright as fier, whereby all that him met,
                  The very ſight of him did make them tremble,
                  And from their hearts deepe ſighs for feare to fet,
                  His face it t'was ſo fowle and horrible,
                  And looke ſo vgly, fierce, and terrible.
               
               
                  His manner was to goe into the field
                  Vnarmed of all weapons whatfoere,
                  And never vſed, ſword, ſpeare, axe, nor ſhield,
                  But in his hand a mighty bow did beare.
                  And by his ſide a ſheafe of arrowes hung,
                  Bound faſt together with a lether thong.
               
               
                  Wherewith he did his enemies withſtand,
                  And ſhot ſo ſtrong, ſo mightely, and ſure,
                  That whereſoere he fought on ſea or land
                  No armor could againſt his ſhot endure.
                  Nor any horſe how fierce ſoere he were,
                  Durſt looke on him, ſo much they did him feare.
               
               
                  For of him they no ſooner had a fight,
                  (He was in all mens eies ſo odio
                        •
                     s,)
                  But they would run from him with all their might,
                  As from a Divell fowle, and monſtrous.
                  Nor any man though neare ſo ſtrong a Knight,
                  Could raine or hold his horſe by force or might,
               
               
                  If that he once this monſter chauſt to ſee,
                  But furiouſly it would ſtart back, and fling
                  And neighing loud, and ſnorting, way did flee.
                  This hideous beaſt did many Grecians bring
                  With arrowes ſharpe and ſtrong vnto their end,
                  For armour could them not from him defend,
               
               
                  So that not any one durſt him abide,
                  When they him ſaw, (ſo much they did him doubt)
                  But ſpedely away from him did ride.
                  Till in the end that it by chance fell out,
                  While that the Troians by his ayd did chaſe
                  And ſlay, and driue the Greeks before their face▪
                  
               
               
                  Vnto their tents, with extreame feare and dread,
                  He did by fortune meet full in the face
                  Hard by a tent, with valiant Diomede,
                  
                  Who for becauſe it was in ſuch a place,
                  Where he could not this hideous moſter ſhun,
                  Vnleſſe he ſhould in greater danger run.
               
               
                  (For at his backe ſo many Troians were,
                  That flie from him he could not any way
                  But muſt of them be ſlaine, or taken there.)
                  When as he ſaw he muſt of force needs ſtay,
                  With courage bold he did vnto him go,
                  B
                        •
                     t ere that he could ſtrike at him a blow,
               
               
                  The monſter let an arrow fiercely flie
                  At Diomede, and gaue him ſuch a blow
                  That with the ſame he bled exceedingly,
                  Wherewith he was in heart offended ſo
                  That furiouſly vnto him ſtraight he went,
                  And ere that he his bow againe had bent,
               
               
                  Stept into him and with exceeding force
                  Gaue ſuch a dangerous deepe and fatall wou
                        •
                     d
                  Vnto that monſter Demy man and horſe,
                  That dead he fell down groueling on the ground.
                  Whoſe death when as the Grecians did behold
                  Abandoning all feare, with courage bold
               
               
                  They did vpon the Troians ſet ag
                        ••••
                     ,
                  And furiouſly conſtrained them to 
                        ••
                     i
                        •
                     
                  
                  And to retire in haſt into the plaine,
                  Where Duke Policinare moſt valiantly
                  Great ſtore of them did of their liues bereaue
                  Whoſe crueltie when Hector did perceiue.
               
               
                  In furious wiſe he did vpon him ſet,
                  And ſlew him with his ſword wi
                        •
                     h great deſpight.
                  And then as he by chance Achilles met,
                  Couragiouſly and like a hardy Knight
                  With launce in reſt he ran at him amaine,
                  And he at him, with purpoſe to haue ſlaine
               
               
                  Each th'other if they might, and in their wroth,
                  So fiercely ſtrake each other on the ſhield.
                  That with their blowes they were vnhorſed both,
                  And laid along flat downe vpon the field.
                  But fierce Achilles with diſpightfull hart,
                  Firſt vp againe into his ſadle ſtart.
               
               
                  And ſought by all the meanes he could to take
                  
                     Gallathe Hectors horſe if that he might,
                  With full intent a prey thereof to make.
                  And hauing tane't to Hectors great deſpight,
                  He gau't his men to lead out of the field,
                  And Hoctor by that meanes was then compeld
               
               
                  To fight on foot, amongſt his deadly foes,
                  Who in moſt furious wiſe on them did fall▪
                  
                  And kild, and beat them downe with mighty blowes,
                  And then vnto his Troian Knights did call,
                  And willed them vpon the Greeks to ſet,
                  And forcibly his horſe from them to get.
               
               
                  And they in haſt to reſcue it againe,
                  
                     Achilles did aſſaile, and gainſt his will
                  Tooke it by force from him vpon the plaine,
                  And brought it vnto Hector, who the while
                  The Grecians fiercely ſlew with great deſpight,
                  And then by force moſt like a valiant Knight,
               
               
                  
                  Deſpight of all that round about him keapt,
                  And like Smiths on an anvell at him ſtroke,
                  Vpon his gallant horſes backe he leapt.
                  And by maine 
                        •
                     orce through thickeſt of them broke
                  And then againe ſo fiercely with them fought,
                  That they his wrath and anger dearely bought.
               
               
                  And mongſt them riding bramely here and there
                  Like Lion ſtrong the Greeks did wound and ſlay,
                  So furiouſly, that cleane po
                        ••
                     eſt with feare,
                  As death, his ſword they ſhun'd, and fled away.
                  And by that meanes the Troians did begin
                  Vpon the Greeks the field againe to win.
               
               
                  But it befell in 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſo furious fight,
                  That vnawares Anthenor went ſo farre
                  Amongſt the Greeks, that by maine force & might,
                  They did him for their priſoner take, and bare
                  Him ſtraight frō thēce vnto their tents with ſpeed.
                  And yet his ſonne to helpe him at his need,
               
               
                  Spard neither paine nor valor to relieue
                  And reſcue him, but all was labor loſt,
                  For which at heart he did ſo free and grieue,
                  That many a Grecians life that time it coſt,
                  By valor great which he as then did ſhow,
                  But for becauſe the ſonne then waxed low
               
               
                  And it began in haſt to draw to night,
                  They made an end and fought no more as then,
                  Becauſe at that ſame time they wanted light,
                  And either ſide retired with their men.
                  The Greeks vnto their tents vpon the plaine.
                  The Troians went into the towne againe,
               
               
                  And reſted there, till morning did appeare,
                  When Phoebus gan his gliſtring beames to ſhew,
                  And Dame Aurora with moſt ioyfull cheare,
                  The hearbs and flowers did moiſten with her deaw,
                  And hungd her ſiluer drops like pearles fine,
                  On euery buſh which gainſt the Sun did ſhine.
               
               
                  And ſhow themſelues ſo orient and ſo cleare
                  On every valley, hill, and pleaſant greene,
                  In morning when the Crimſon clouds appeare,
                  And in the skies moſt beautifull are ſeene.
                  Vntill the heat of Phoebus gliſtring beames
                  Dries vp their moiſture with his fiery ſtreames.
               
               
                  And makes the vaper mount into the aire,
                  When as the skie did not exceed with heat,
                  And that the weather ſhew'd both cleare and faire,
                  Which time the Troians purpoſed to meet
                  Then foes, and with moſt braue & warlike ſhow,
                  In order plaſt, into the field did goe.
               
               
                  Gainſt whom likewiſe the Grecians valiantly
                  Did goe into the field, and when they met
                  And each the others armies did eſpie,
                  They did vpon each other fiercely ſet,
                  And preſently great ſtore of launces broke,
                  And many a mighty, ſtrong, and cruell ſtroke
               
               
                  On either ſide was giuen, and many a ſhield
                  With axes, billes, and trenchant 
                        •
                     ades were cl
                        ••
                     
                  
                  And many a Knight ſore wounded in the field:
                  In little ſpace was of his life bereft:
                  And ſuch a cruel laughter there was then
                  On either ſide, that many thouſand men
               
               
                  That day were brought vnto confuſion.
                  But greateſt loſſe on Troians ſide did fall,
                  Yet Guido of no Prince makes mention
                  That then was ſlaine, but ſpeakes in generall.
                  And ſaith that cruell fierce and bloody fight,
                  Betweene them held from morning vnto night.
               
               
                  Which Troians for their parts full dearely bought,
                  For Fortune then vnto them was no friend,
                  But rather with the Grecians gainſt them fought.
                  And ſo when day did draw vnto an end,
                  The Troians went againe into the towne,
                  The while the Greeks vnto their tents went down
               
               
                  And there did reſt till they againe could ſee,
                  At which time all the Grecian Princes met,
                  And mongſt them did with one conſent agree
                  To ſend vnto the towne of Troy, to get
                  A truce for 3 moneths ſpace, to which intent
                  
                     Uliſſes and fierce Diomede were ſent,
               
               
                  That meſſage vnto Priamus to beare.
                  And when vnto the gates of Troy they came,
                  A Troian Knight cald Dolon met them there,
                  And courteouſly convaid them through the ſame,
                  And brought them to King Priams royall hall,
                  Where he then ſat amongſt his Princes all.
               
               
                  Where they to him their meſſage briefely told,
                  Which was a truce for 3 moneths ſpace to haue,
                  If he would be content the ſame to hold.
                  To whom the King a friendly countenance gaue,
                  And ſayd he would adviſe of counſell take,
                  And then to them he would an anſwere make.
               
               
                  And they did all agree and were content
                  To yeild vnto the Greeks in that reſpect,
                  Saue Hector, who thereto would not conſent,
                  But at the firſt their motion did reiect.
                  And did affirme that t'was but meere deceit
                  By them then vſed, of Priam time to get.
               
               
                  
                  And that two things them therevnto procur'd,
                  Firſt, that they might haue time and libertie
                  To bury all their dead, while truce endur'd,
                  And vnder colour thereof, ſecretly
                  More victualls to prouide, which they did want,
                  And which as now with them was very ſcant,
               
               
                  And by that meanes the famine to preuent
                  Which then was in their campe, with pollicie,
                  He ſayd he knew was only to th'intent
                  That they the longer there in ſiege might lie,
                  And being well prouided of each thing
                  That needfull is ſayd he they might vs bring.
               
               
                  While they increaſe, and we decreaſe our ſtore,
                  Into great want and famine at the laſt,
                  For by their meanes we can prouide no more,
                  And this (ſayd he) is it which they forecaſt:
                  For that which doth for their advantage make,
                  For certaine, doth from vs advantage take.
               
               
                  Yet neretheleſſe (ſayd he) what did befall,
                  Sith to the truce you willingly agree,
                  I will not be repugnant to you all,
                  No
                        •
                      gainſt ſo many ſtriue and diſagree.
                  And ſo they did conſent on either ſide
                  That for 3 moneths the truce ſhould firmly bide.
               
               
                  And be obſeru'd, that while it did indure,
                  Such as ſore wounds and ſickeneſſe doe oppreſſe,
                  Might time and leaſure haue their wounds to cure,
                  And for their paine and ſickneſſe ſeeke redreſſe:
                  And while the truce for that time did abide,
                  It was twixt them agreed on either ſide,
               
               
                  That to procure Anthenors liberty,
                  Who at that time the Grecians priſoner had,
                  King Thoas then held in captiuity
                  Within the towne, ſhould for him free be made,
                  And neither ranſome pay: but while they ſat
                  In counſell thereupon, it chanced that
               
               
                  The Troian Biſhop Calchas cald to mind,
                  And thought vpon his daughter Creſida,
                  
                  Whom he left in the towne of Troy behind,
                  When he the ſame forſooke, and went away
                  At Delos to the Greeks, for whom in hart
                  He dayly felt great ſorrow, woe, and ſmart.
               
               
                  Suppoſing that ſhe being there alone,
                  Should for his ſake (becauſe of his offence
                  And treaſon, which without occaſion
                  Gainſt Troians he had done,) in his abſence
                  Be hardly vſd, and little favor find,
                  For which he was full ſore perplext in mind:
               
               
                  And made account, that he ſhould neuer be
                  Releaſt nor freed from extreame griefe, and paine,
                  Till he his daughter Creſida did ſee,
                  And that ſhe were reſtor'd to him againe:
                  And therefore ſtill within his mind forecaſt
                  While that the time of 3 moneths truce did laſt,
               
               
                  How he mihgt her relieue and get away
                  Out of the towne of Troy, where he her left:
                  And to that end vpon a certaine day,
                  As one that were of comfort cleane bereft,
                  Sore weeping in great woe and heauineſſe,
                  He did himſelfe vnto the Greeks addreſſe.
               
               
                  And humbly on his knees before them fell,
                  And with great floods of teares ſubmiſſiuely,
                  His hard and woefull ſtate to them did tell,
                  Beſeeching them with great humilitie,
                  On him and his t'haue compaſſion,
                  And to procure him reſtitution.
               
               
                  Of Creſida his child and onely ioy,
                  Whom he becauſe he had the Troians left,
                  Durſt not goe fetch out of the towne of Troy,
                  
                  Leaſt he by them ſhould of his life be reft:
                  Deſiring them that they a meanes would be,
                  That ſhe might be exchanged, and ſet free
               
               
                  With Thoas, for Anthenor, which he thought
                  If they to his requeſt would giue conſent,
                  By their good mediation might be wrought,
                  And they for Calchas ſake were all content.
                  And preſently a meſſenger did ſend
                  To Priam King of Troy vnto that end.
               
               
                  To whom they gaue expreſſe commiſſion,
                  To bring their ſure for Creſida to pas,
                  But when the Troians hard their motion,
                  And found that it for Calchas daughter was;
                  Whoſe Father was become ſo odious
                  To all the towne, and to King Priamus,
                  
               
               
                  That all men ſayd he was a traitor falſe,
                  And for his treaſon great and trechery
                  Well worthy to be hanged by the hal
                        •
                     e,
                  And that he well deſerued had to die
                  A farre more cruell death, for by the law,
                  They ſayd, they ſhould his traitrous body draw
               
               
                  Vnto the place of execution,
                  And hang it there till that halfe dead it were,
                  And in that ſort with ſpeed to cut it downe,
                  And it in quarters foure to cut, or teare.
                  And ſaid ſith that he was ſo badly bent
                  To Troy, that death was not ſufficient.
               
               
                  
                  For his offence, and anſwere therefore gaue,
                  That ſith he had ſuch treaſon gainſt them wrought
                  They flatly ſayd he ſhould no fauour haue
                  Of them therein, nor yet would graunt to ought
                  That might his mind in any wiſe content,
                  Nor ſhould his daughter Creſida be ſent
               
               
                  To him as he requird, but flatly ſayd
                  If they could euer hands vpon him lay
                  He ſhould haue that which he deſerued had,
                  And vnto his requeſt ſayd flatly nay.
                  But at the laſt allthough with much adoe
                  They were content, and granted therevnto.
               
               
                  For Prians King of Troy his ſentence gaue,
                  That ſhe with Thoas ſhould exchanged be,
                  And both of them ſhould for Anthenor haue
                  Their free diſcharge out of captiuitie.
                  Which his decree with Princely promiſe ſeald,
                  The Troians could by no meanes get repeald.
               
               
                  But muſt the ſame againſt their wils fulfill,
                  And by that meanes ſhe did from Troy depart,
                  Although it were full ſore againſt her will,
                  For that much grieu d and vexed at the heart,
                  Great ſorrow and complaint therefore ſhe made,
                  Which when time ſerues vnto you ſhall be ſayd.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  ¶ How during the time of the three moneths truce, Hector went into the Greekes campe, and there spake with Achilles, and what ſpeeches paſt between them at that time,
               
               
                  THe truce confirmd as I before did ſay,
                  And for three moneths agreed on either ſide,
                  It chanced that vpon a certaine day
                  
                     Hector out of the towne of Troy did ride,
                  And with him many Lords of high degree,
                  Determining the Grecians campe to ſee.
               
               
                  And entring thereinto directly went
                  With courarge ſtout and bold, (ſaluting none
                  That with him met) vnto Achilles tent,
                  For he was mou'd with great affection,
                  To ſpeake with him although he did intend
                  If that he could, to bring him to his end.
               
               
                  And truth to ſay Achilles had as much
                  And great deſire of Hector t'haue a ſight,
                  (Though as his foe he bare him mighty grutch,
                  Intending his deſtruction if he might.)
                  Becauſe he nere had meanes nor libertie
                  
                     Hector vnarmd at any time to ſee.
               
               
                  And when that they together both were met,
                  And each be held the other for a while,
                  As in that ſort they were together ſet.
                  
                     Achilles vpon Hector gon to ſmile,
                  And ſayd, great pleaſure Hector tis to me,
                  That here diſarmd at this time I thee ſee
               
               
                  For nere before could I of thee haue ſight
                  But in the field, when thou thine armes didſt were,
                  And valiantly with trenchant blade didſt fight,
                  And therewith put the Grecian Knights in feare.
                  But truth to ſay it's much more griefe to mee,
                  Which am ſo deadly enemy to thee.
               
               
                  That now of thee I cannot haue my will,
                  For here of be aſſur'd if that the peace
                  Reſtraind me not, forthwith I would thee Kill,
                  So much my wrath againſt thee doth increaſe,
                  For th'onely thing which I in heart deſire
                  Is cruell death to thee t'appeaſe mine ire.
               
               
                  For oftentimes when t'was my chance to fight
                  With thee in field, full ſore againſt my mind
                  I haue both tri'd and felt thy puiſſant might,
                  As by the wounds which I about me find,
                  Which yet doth ake and are both freſh & greene,
                  And for iuſt proofe are extant to be ſeene,
               
               
                  For with thy ſword thou oft haſt ſhead my blood,
                  And ſought to bring my life vnto an end.
                  And like a Lyon furious, ſierce, and wood,
                  Thou haſt not ſpard my armes to teare and rend,
                  And cruelly, as I the ſignes can ſhow,
                  Moſt furiouſly the ſame didſt hac and hew.
               
               
                  Whereby mine armes that forged are of ſteele,
                  When thou with puiſſant force on thē diſt ſmight,
                  Could neuer yet aſſure my corps ſo well,
                  But that thy trenchāt blade through thē would 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Into my fleſh, full deepely and profound,
                  As well appeares by many a mortall wound,
               
               
                  Which in the ſame are now both long and wide,
                  And at this time full ſorely ake and ſmart,
                  And put me to ſuch paine on euery ſide,
                  For which as now it ſeemeth that my heart
                  Doth riſe, ſwell, beat, and pant when I thee ſee,
                  With great deſpight reuengd on thee to bee.
               
               
                  
                  And is ſo full repleat with furious rage
                  And rancor old, with ſuch extreamitie,
                  That by no meanes it never will aſſwage,
                  Till with my hands thy death I giue to thee.
                  But one thing doth torment me moſt of all:
                  Which is when I vnto remembrance call,
               
               
                  And with my ſelfe in mind expoſtulate,
                  How to content thy fierce and bloody will,
                  With trenchant blade thou diddeſt ſeparate
                  
                     Patroclus corps in twaine, and didſt him kill,
                  Whom I did loue with heart and mind intire,
                  And vnto him ſo great good will did beare:
               
               
                  That as my ſelfe, I muſt the truth confeſſe,
                  I loued him, and ſuch affection
                  Vnto him had, as no tongue can expreſſe,
                  And thou thereby didſt make diviſion
                  Twixt him and me, that liu'd and lou'd together
                  Like brethren twaine, and ſo had done for euer
               
               
                  While life endur'd, for that betwixt vs twaine
                  Our faithfull hearts were knit to faſt together,
                  As if they had been linked in a chaine.
                  No griefe nor no adverſity could ſever
                  Our hearts and thoughts, how great ſoere it was,
                  Till by his death thou broughtſt the ſame to pas,
               
               
                  And by that meanes our faith full loue didſt part.
                  Whoſe death ſo deepe in printed in my thought,
                  So ſore doth griue and vex me at the heart,
                  That I proteſt it ſhall be dearely bought.
                  And't may be if I reckon not amiſſe,
                  Before this preſent yeare expired is.
               
               
                  For be aſſurd, that onely for his ſake,
                  When Fortune ſhall afor'd the time to do't▪
                  
                  Revenge by cruell death on thee ile take,
                  And thereof make account and looke well to't:
                  For if I liue it ſhall be ſurely don,
                  Whē thou ſhalt haue no means the ſame to ſhun▪
                  
               
               
                  For right requires, that ſith by death thou wert
                  The cauſe and meane▪ to part two louer true,
                  Death ſhould to thee be rendred for deſert,
                  Which I my ſelfe will giue thee as thy due.
                  That all the world through out may thereof know
                  And heare how that Achilles kild his foe,
               
               
                  To be revenged for Patroclus death.
                  And though that I doe hate thee for the ſame,
                  And will as long as I on earth doe breath,
                  Thou haſt no cauſe nor reaſon me to blame:
                  For well I wot thou haſt my death conſpird,
                  And many a day the ſame in heart deſird.
               
               
                  So that to end this ſtrife, I tell thee plaine,
                  Nought els but cruell death ſhall v
                        ••
                     p
                        ••
                     r bee,
                  For till thou, I, or both of vs be ſla
                        •••
                     ,
                  It ſhall not ceaſe. The which I hope to ſee
                  Ere it be long, for ſure it ſhall be d
                        ••
                     
                  
                  By me or thee, the which thou ſhalt not ſhun.
               
               
                  When Hector had Achilles ſpeech well hard,
                  And giuen him leaue to tell ſo long a 
                        •
                     ale,
                  As he that for the ſame full little card,
                  With countenance glad, and yet with anger pale▪
                  
                  He did thereto reply and anſwer made
                  Vnto the ſame, and thus to him he ſayd:
               
               
                  
                     Achilles, thou no maruell oughſt to haue,
                  That as thou ſaiſt, I doe thy death conſpire,
                  And howrely the ſame of fortune craue,
                  As th'onely thing which I in heart deſire:
                  And that to kill thee ſtill I he in wait,
                  Becauſe to thee I beare ſo deadly hate.
               
               
                  For if in mind thou didſt conſider well
                  The ſentence graue, which verity doth proue,
                  And vnto vs for certaine truth doth tell,
                  That neither I, nor any man can loue,
                  Nor any kind of fauor ſhow to one,
                  That dayly ſeeketh my confuſion.
               
               
                  And me and mine to vanquiſh and deſtroy
                  With deadly hate, and great preſumption,
                  Beſieged hath the noble towne of Troy,
                  
                  To bring vs wholly to deſtruction:
                  Not can I any cauſe nor reaſon find,
                  That in my heart I ſhould to him be kind,
               
               
                  Nor loue, nor fauor him in any thing
                  That ſeekes my death. For loue doth neuer breed
                  Of bloody warre and ſtrife, nor yet doth ſpring
                  From fowle and deadly hate, but doth proceed
                  And takes her firſt and true originall
                  From faithfulneſſe, which is the principall
               
               
                  And onely cauſe that makes mens hearts t'agree,
                  And neuer from true faith and loue to ſtart,
                  But doth them ſtill preſerue in vnitie,
                  Of words, and will, deſire, mind, and hart,
                  And neither life nor death can loue diſſeuer,
                  For faithfull loue continueth true for euer.
               
               
                  But hatred and diſſention is contrary,
                  From whence proceeds and followes as we ſee,
                  When as mens hearts and minds diſſent & varry,
                  Nought els but rancor, ſtrife, and en
                        ••
                     itie.
                  Whe which once bred, makes men proceed ſo far,
                  That at the laſt they fall to mortall warre.
               
               
                  
                  The which all loue cleane vaniſheth away.
                  But neretheleſſe I will that thou ſhalt know,
                  That whatſoeuer thou to me doſt ſay
                  In proud and vaunting words, and makeſt ſhow
                  As if that thou wouldſt doe that vnto mee,
                  Which while thou liuſt ſhal neare be don by thee.
               
               
                  I care not whatſoere thou doſt, or ſayſt,
                  For without boſt hereof I thee aſſure,
                  When as thou haſt don all that ere thou 
                        ••
                     yſt,
                  If that this warre long twixt vs doth indure▪
                  
                  I hope if that it be my chance to liue▪
                  
                  The Grecians ſo to terrifie and grieue,
               
               
                  That thou and they full▪ well ſhall find and feele,
                  How with my trenchant blade when we ſhall meet,
                  Ile hac and hew their armors made of ſteele,
                  And beat them downe and tread them vnderfeet,
                  And thine and all their pride ſo much will daunt,
                  That if you ſtay and ſtill theſe warres doe haunt,
               
               
                  Ile make you all repent your comming here.
                  For this I know, and well aſſured am,
                  That th'onely thing (as plainely doth appeare,)
                  For which vnto this towne you hither came,
                  Proceeds of pride and indiſcretion,
                  Els would you not with ſuch preſumption,
               
               
                  A thing of ſuch importance take in hand,
                  As is the ſiedge of this our towne ſo great.
                  Which able is your forces to withſtand,
                  And you and yours from thence by force to beat,
                  For th'enterpriſe I tell you true and plaine,
                  Is ouer hard and heavy to ſuſtaine.
               
               
                  And will becauſe to make you all in fine,
                  (As hauty and as ſtout as now you ſeeme,)
                  To leaue your pride and lowly to decline,
                  And ſtoop vnto the burthen, (which you deeme
                  To be but very eaſie, ſmall, and light.)
                  With your no little ſhame and great deſpight.
               
               
                  And this I ſay Achilles vnto thee,
                  That whenſoeuer thou doſt me aſſayle,
                  Death ſhall vnto thy ſelfe be giuen by mee,
                  Before that thou againſt me ſhalt prevaile
                  To do the thing wgich thou ſo eaſie deem'ſt,
                  Though of thy ſelfe thou nere ſo much eſteem'ſt
               
               
                  Yet if in thee there be ſuch worthineſſe,
                  And courage ſtout, that like a valiant Knight,
                  Thy mind's repleat with ſo much hardineſſe
                  To moue thee hand to hand with me to fight.
                  And that this quarrell may betwixt vs twaine,
                  (By combat brauely fought vpon the plaine)
               
               
                  Be ended, for the which we all contend.
                  Ile graunt vnto the ſame withall my hart,
                  And whatſoeuer fortv ne doth me ſend,
                  Ile neuer yeild till death vs two doth part:
                  So that the Lords on either ſide will bee
                  Content, and with good will thereto agree,
               
               
                  That we two ſhall this combat vndertake
                  And fight it out betwixt vs two alone,
                  And thereof for vs all an end to make.
                  Which ſhall be done on this condition;
                  That if thou by thy valor and thy might,
                  Cauſt overcome and vanquiſh me in fight,
               
               
                  I will to thee and them aſſurance make,
                  That Priamus my Father ſhall agree
                  To all which I for him ſhall vndertake,
                  And that aſſoone as I ſhall vanquiſht bee,
                  He ſhall his Crowne and Regall ſcepter yeild
                  (Which he ſo long and many yeares hath held.)
               
               
                  Vnto the Greeks, and him and his ſubmit
                  In all reſpects moſt humbly to their will,
                  To doe with him and his as they thinke fit.
                  Which that he may withall his Lords fulfill,
                  T'avoid each doubt and all ambiguitie,
                  Both he and they for more ſecuritie,
               
               
                  Shall ſweare each one, and all in generall,
                  To doe as I haue ſayd, and there to ſtand,
                  And further to confirme the ſame he ſhall
                  Deliuer preſently into their hand
                  Such ſuerties, as theyle chufe out of the beſt,
                  And nobleſt men in Troy, the which ſhall reſt
               
               
                  And ſtay among the Greekes while we two fight,
                  That they may haue no cauſe at all to doubt
                  That wee will not performe our words, as right
                  And reaſon doth require, if it fall out
                  That I ſhould be orecome and ſlaine by thee,
                  The which I hope thou neare ſhalt doe to me.
               
               
                  Now then Achilles ſpeake and freely do
                  (As I haue ſayd,) thine honor to increaſe,
                  And let vs arme our ſelues and fall thereto,
                  That by our meanes this bloody warre may ceaſe,
                  Which other wiſe is likely and moſt ſure,
                  Long twixt the Greeks and Troians to indure.
               
               
                  And thou thereby not onely ſhalt win fame,
                  And honor both, but by thy valor great
                  Throughout the world eternize ſhalt thy name,
                  And of the Greeks much thanks and favor get.
                  Who by thy meanes from hence may ſcape aliue
                  And ſafe and ſound in Greece againe arriue.
               
               
                  
                  Which otherwiſe may to themſelues procure
                  Their deaths by fond and fooliſh hardineſſe,
                  If they ſtay heere and that this warre endure,
                  Whereof there is no other likelineſſe.
                  Be briefe therefore and make no long delay,
                  But let vs for this Combat point the day,
               
               
                  As I haue ſayd, vpon condition
                  On Grecians ſide, that if in this ſame fight
                  (Which I for all the Troians and the towne
                  Shall take in hand;) doe vanquiſh thee by might,
                  That preſently they ſhall from warre ſurceaſe,
                  And breake vp ſiedge, and let vs liue in peace,
               
               
                  And into Greece returne againe with ſpeed.
                  Whereto Achilles burning hot with ire
                  With haughty, fierce, and furious looke agreed,
                  As being that which he did moſt deſire.
                  And vnto Hector ſayd, he would that taſke
                  Vpon him take, which he of him did aſke:
               
               
                  And gainſt the ſame made no exception.
                  And for a ſigne of his deſire and hart
                  T'accomplith it, for confirmation
                  He threw his Gantlet downe, and for his part
                  Said, whatſoere vnto him happen might,
                  He would that Combat for the Grecians fight.
               
               
                  The which when Hector ſaw, with countenance glad
                  As euer any valiant Knight could haue,
                  He ſ
                        •
                     oopt and tooke it vp, and therewith ſaid,
                  It was the onely thing that he did craue:
                  And no man can in heart and thought ſurmiſe,
                  How glad he was of that high enterpize.
               
               
                  The newes thereof ſoone mongſt the Greeks was ſpread,
                  And to the eares of Agamemnon came,
                  Who with great troopes of Lords accompanied,
                  Went to Achilles tent to know the ſame.
                  And when they had the matter fully ſcand,
                  They would vnto no ſuch condition ſtand,
               
               
                  But did it with one will and voice deny,
                  And ſayd, they would not haſſard their eſtate,
                  And welfare of ſo great a company
                  Of valiant Knights, to falſe and wauering Fate.
                  Nor ſhow themſelues to be ſo fond and vaine,
                  To ſtand vnto the combat of thoſe twaine.
               
               
                  And on the Troians ſide within the towne,
                  They alſo ſayd, and flatly did deny,
                  They would not ſtand to that condition,
                  To venter all their good and liberty,
                  Vpon the ſingle valor of a Knight,
                  Although he were of paſſing ſtrength & might.
               
               
                  But Priamus himſelfe was fully bent,
                  To ſtand vnto the combat of thoſe two,
                  And willingly did yeild and was content
                  In all reſpects as Hector ſayd, to do.
                  Nought doubting, but beleeuing certainly▪
                  
                  That Hector ſurely ſhould haue victory,
               
               
                  If that he tooke the enterprize iu hand.
                  But loth to make too much contention,
                  And ſtrife with thoſe that did againſt him ſtand,
                  He yeilded vnto their opinion.
                  And was content to let the matter paſſe,
                  And gainſt his will to leaue it as it was.
               
               
                  And Hector therewith left Achilles tent,
                  And went to Troy againe. Where for a while
                  Ile let him reſt. For now tis mine intent,
                  For ſome reſpect to change and turne my ſtile,
                  To tell you of the ſorrow, griefe, and wo,
                  That Troiclus made to part his Lady fro.
               
               
                  WHy ſhouldſt thou ſtill oh Fortune variable,
                  (Whē men moſt truſt in thy moſt flattring (face,)
                  Become ſo falſe, vntrue, and ſo vnſtable,
                  And make as though thou wouldſt them embrace.
                  When as with fained falſe diſſembling ſhow,
                  Thou only ſeekſt their vtter ouerthrow?
               
               
                  As well it may by Troiclus be ſeen,
                  Whom ſodainely with envy thou didſt throw
                  Downe from the mount of ioy that he was in▪
                  
                  Into the vale of ſorrow, griefe, and woe▪
                  
                  When he did thinke himſelfe to be ſecure,
                  And of his Loue and Lady deare moſt ſure.
               
               
                  And twixt them mad'ſt a ſeperation.
                  For whom I muſt a little while complaine,
                  Becauſe he made ſuch lamentation,
                  And in his heart endur'd ſuch extreame paine,
                  Such inward griefe, and ſuch great heauineſſe,
                  That all my wit cannot the ſame expreſſe.
               
               
                  For when he knew his Father had decreed,
                  And for a finall ſentence ſet it downe,
                  That Creſid
                           •
                        
                      ſhould preſently with ſpeed,
                  Vnto the Greeks be ſent out of the towne.
                  Into ſuch mighty griefe and rage he fell,
                  That no mans tongue can well declare, or tell
               
               
                  The inward paine which in his breſt he bare:
                  For day and night he did ſuch ſorrow make,
                  That like vnto a mad-man he did fare,
                  And neuer left complaining for her ſake.
                  Deſiring rather death with all his hart,
                  Then that ſhe ſhould away from him depart:
               
               
                  
                  For inwardly an other mind ſhe had,
                  Which ſhe with faire diſſembling face did hide,
                  And to her true and fathfull louer made,
                  As though for loue of him ſhe would haue died:
                  As women can falſe teares at pleaſure borrow,
                  When in their hearts there is but little ſorrow.
               
               
                  And vnto men for truth wil ſometimes ſay
                  That which they will deny againe as faſt,
                  And ſerpentlike mongſt flowers freſh and gay,
                  Moſt commonly their poyſon vſe to caſt.
                  With ſweet and ſugred word, when as they mind
                  Nought but deceit and guile, for tis their kind
               
               
                  And propertie to flatter, faine, and lie,
                  When in them men doe greateſt truſt repoſe,
                  For all they doe is done in pollicie:
                  For when you thinke thē friends, they are your foes
                  And hide their malice with ſuch ſubtiltie,
                  That though they ſeeme with one diſſēbling eye
               
               
                  And outward ſhow in piteous wiſe to weepe,
                  They can with th'other laugh full couertly,
                  And in their hearts their double meaning keepe,
                  Their ſorrowes they are outward commonly:
                  And neuer to their hearts and thoughts draw nere,
                  And all the partie coulours which they were,
               
               
                  Are mixt with change and great variety,
                  For therein doth conſiſt their chiefeſt blis,
                  The'are ſure and fixt in lies and flattery,
                  And double in their trueſt promiſes.
                  Make ſhow of faith, when leaſt thereof they thinke
                  Likelieſt to loue, when moſt from it they ſhrinke,
               
               
                  Moſt ouerthwart when as they ſhould agree,
                  And trueſt ſeeme, when truth in them is none.
                  For certaine tis that few of them there be,
                  That in their hearts contented are with one,
                  But will in ſhow receiue and entertaine
                  Two, three, or foure, and in their ſpeeches faine,
               
               
                  Aud make them all with flattering words beleeue
                  That ſhe doth loue and like them euery one,
                  And ſecretly her faith to all will giue.
                  Yet maketh them to thinke ſhe loues but one,
                  And that ſheele liue with him in weale and woe,
                  When as in very truth it is not ſo.
               
               
                  And by that meanes to each of them doth ſeeme,
                  As if ſhe lou'd and liked him alone,
                  And makes him her for his true loue eſteeme,
                  When as in truth perchance ſhe loueth none.
                  And thus with fained hope ſhe doth thē ſcoffe,
                  The tru'ſt to her is ſoon'ſt by her caſt off.
               
               
                  He that beſt ſerues leaſt favor ſhall deſerue,
                  And yet ſhe doth them all with fancie feede,
                  But promiſe will with none of them obſerue,
                  She'le ſoon'ſt deceaue, whē you think ſur'ſt to ſpeed
                  Let no man truſt therefore vnto delay,
                  But take time and aduantage when he may.
               
               
                  A man may change at pleaſure all the yeare,
                  And yet thereby may get but little gaine.
                  Great folly tis to buy that thing to deare,
                  Which man cannot in his bounds retaine;
                  But flies away when moſt he doth it want,
                  And if ſuch ware at any time wax ſcant,
               
               
                  Men may them out at windoes oft behold,
                  And find them in a chamber or a hall,
                  That with moſt ſhameles countenance and bold,
                  Will not refuſe vnto a man to call.
                  And many times abroad in euery ſtreet
                  You may them ſee, and alſo with them meet
               
               
                  At Pilgrimages, and oblations,
                  At daunces, 
                        •
                     ights, and euery common play,
                  That vſed are in Citties, and in townes,
                  Where they reſort for pleaſure night and day
                  To ſee and to be ſeene of every man,
                  And by their wiles t'intrap them if they can.
               
               
                  For their's no fraud nor any ſubtiltie,
                  Like vnto that of willy women kind,
                  Nor worſe deceit, nor craftier pollicie,
                  Then in their falſe diſſembling hearts men find.
                  For he that loueth women ſtedfaſtly,
                  And thinks in them to find fidelity.
               
               
                  Shall ſee and proue them like vnto the moone,
                  That ready is to change. For if their loue
                  Be young, and them diſpleaſe they will him ſoone
                  Out of the dores by head and ſhoulders ſhoue,
                  If he be old, th'yle ſay age makes him dote,
                  And let ſome younger man ride in his bote.
               
               
                  My counſell therefore is vnto them both,
                  To caſt them off in time and let them flie.
                  This Guido ſaith, (not I, I tell you troth)
                  That hath delight to ſpeake vnhappily
                  Of women, in moſt part of all his Booke,
                  As you may ſee if you therein will looke.
               
               
                  Whereby it ſeemes that he was not their friend,
                  And vnto them did beare no little ſpight,)
                  Els would he not ſo much with them contend,
                  Nor in his Booke ſuch ſlaunders of them wright:
                  Which inwardly did make my heart to bleede
                  For griefe, when I ſuch things therein did read.
               
               
                  
                  Which onely of meere malice favored.
                  And maile of purpoſe women to contemne,
                  Wherein I ſee he was too much miſled,
                  For generally he doth them all condemne.
                  And for to ſhow more indiſcretion;
                  Twixt good and bad makes no exception.
               
               
                  He was too blame for one 
                        •
                     'accuſe them all,
                  For I dare ſay and ſwere it by the rood,
                  And you ſhall find it to in generall,
                  That for one bad, there are an hundred good,
                  And though ſome doe themſelues vnconſtant ſhew
                  It hurts not them that faithfull are and crew.
               
               
                  And though by ſome examples he may ſhow,
                  (As likely tis, for many ſuch there are,)
                  That▪ ſome one boue the reſt did proue a ſhrow,
                  Thoſe that are meeke and gentle need not care.
                  We muſt not blame nor tax all women kind,
                  For ſome that proue vntrue. For this we find,
               
               
                  That in the towne of Collen once there were
                  Eleuen thouſand Virgins pure and true,
                  Which did the name of Holy Martyrs beare.
                  And many other ſtories tell to you,
                  That diuers maids did Virgins long remaine,
                  And to preſerue virginitie were ſlaine.
               
               
                  And ſome with flowers of true virginitie,
                  Did liue on earth in honor great, and fame,
                  That died at laſt in perfect ehaſtity,
                  And ſanctified in heauen for the ſame.
                  With God remaine in his eternall reſt,
                  And mongſt the Saints for euermore are bleſt.
               
               
                  And though ſome gainſt bad women ſo much ſay,
                  We muſt not all for ſome few women blame,
                  Therefore let no good women be diſmaid,
                  For that of men may well be ſayd the ſame.
                  Is it a ſhame to him that liueth true,
                  Becauſe an other man doth liue vntrue.
               
               
                  And for his theft is hang'd, (as many be.)
                  No more is it to women vertuous,
                  If mongſt a hundred, one of them we ſee
                  That is of liuing bad and vicious.
                  When for one bad a thouſand we may find
                  That vertuous are. Though Guido faith by kind
               
               
                  And nature they are falſe, yet men ſhould thinke,
                  They are not ſo, and them not too much blame,
                  But rather at their frailtie ſeeme to winke,
                  For though ones bad, they are not all the fame.
                  Nature in operatiou hath great power,
                  And who is he that liueth at this hower,
               
               
                  That can by anymeanes his courſe reſtraine,
                  For ſhe will not be ſhortned of her right,
                  Nor yet be ſtaied with bridle norwith raine▪
                  
                  And therefore man withall his power and might
                  Should giue God thanks for them▪ 
                     
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      not blame
                  Poore women that by nature are the 
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     e.
               
               
                  And though ſo much my Author gainſt them saies,
                  Where he doth write of Creſida alone,
                  And for her fault ſuch blame on women laies,
                  My counſellis to all and euery one,
                  In reading it on her t'impoſe the ſhame,
                  And taſk not other women for the ſame.
               
               
                  Or read it not at all, but rather ſtay
                  Till that you come where Diomede had charge
                  To goe to Troy, to fetch faire Creſida
                  
                  Whereas my ma
                        •
                     ſter Chaw
                           ••
                        r ſhewes at large,
                  Firſt how ſhe was to him deliuered,
                  With Thoas for Anthenor, and was led
               
               
                  By them out of the towne, accompanied
                  By Troiclus, and many more that road
                  With him and her, and how King Diomed
                  
                  Did lead her horſe, and her great kindnes ſhewd,
                  Till that ſhe came vnto her Fathers ſent,
                  Where ſhe did light, and ſtraight into it went.
               
               
                  And then declares how ſhe therein did ſtay,
                  What ſpeches ſhe to him and others vſed,
                  While ſhe with them ſat talking all that day,
                  And how that ſoone her ſelfe ſhe did abuſe.
                  For G
                           •
                        ldo ſaith, that day before t▪was night,
                  She cleane forlooke her deare & louing knight.
               
               
                  And gaue her heart and loue to Diomede,
                  
                  To ſhew what truſt there is in women kind▪
                  
                  For ſhe of her new loue no ſooner ſped,
                  But Troiclus was cleane out of her mind.
                  As if ſhe had him never knowne nor ſeene.
                  Wherein I cannot geſſe what ſhe did meane,
               
               
                  Vnleſſe it were becauſe ſhe did delight
                  In novelty, as women doe by kind
                  And nature, which vnſtable is and light,
                  As by experience commonly we find.
                  But now no more of loue I will declare,
                  But turne my ſtile againe vnto the warre.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  ¶ Of the E
                        •••
                     ailes fought betweene the Greeks and the Troians, after the truce of three moneths was expired. The deſcription of the Pallace of Ilion in Troy, of a great p
                        •
                     ſt
                        ••••
                     ce that happened in the Grecians hoaſt: Whereby they were conſtrained to ſeeke for a truce, which they obtained of the Troians for 30. daies.
               
               
                  THe three moneths truce aforeſaid being don:
                  The next enſuing day when Titan had
                  His Indian courſe from Weſt to Eaſt out run,
                  And after he great ſport and cheare had made
                  In ſweet and faire Auroraes company,
                  And roſe from her and would no longer lie,
               
               
                  But with his Radiant beames that ſhone moſt clear
                  (When as the 
                        •
                     arke did ſing with great delight.)
                  Did on the walles and towne of Troy appeare:
                  
                     Hector the ſtrong and moſt victorious Knight,
                  His battailes in good order did ordaine,
                  And ready was to goe into the plaine,
               
               
                  To fight againſt the Grecian enemy:
                  The firſt whereof himſelfe well armed led;
                  And with him had to beare him company,
                  Full fifteene thouſand Knights well furniſhed.
                  Next vnto him braue Troielus did goe,
                  With iuſt ten thouſand Knights in warlike ſhoe.
               
               
                  And after him the Percian archers went,
                  That had his brother Paris for their guide▪
                  
                  Each with his Bow in hand all ready bent,
                  And ſhea
                        •
                     es of peircing arrowes by his ſide:
                  In number full thre thouſand archers braue.
                  The leading of the fourth ward Hector gaue▪
                  
               
               
                  Vnto his brother Deiphobus, that had
                  Three thouſand men well arm'd in corſlets cleare,
                  And of the reſt Aeneas leader made,
                  And as the ſtory 
                        •
                     aith, as then there were
                  An hundred thouſand valiant Knights & ſtout,
                  By Hector to the field that day ſent out.
               
               
                  And as I find by Dares Frigius,
                  
                  And Guido too, againſt them forth were led
                  Seven thouſand Grecian Knights by M
                           •••••
                        ,
                  
                  And iuſt as many more by D
                           •••
                        ed.
                  
                  And next to them A
                           •
                        billes with his 
                        •
                     and
                  Of Myrmidons, in order plaſt did ſtand.
               
               
                  Then Zantipus a King of great renowne,
                  Conductor of three thouſand Knights was 
                        ••
                     d
                        •
                     
                  
                  And laſt of all into the field came downe,
                  The Generall of the hoaſt, that with him had
                  So huge a band of Grecian Knights, that all
                  The plaine with them was fild▪ & ſtraight d
                        ••
                      
                     
                        ••••
                     
                  
               
               
                  And ſet vpon the Troian Knights ſo faſt,
                  That many men at that encounter died,
                  And furiouſly vnto the ground were caſt,
                  And as by chance King Phillis Hector ſpied,
                  That cruelly the Greeks beat downe and chaſt,
                  He ſpurd his horſe and ran at him in haſt,
               
               
                  And with his launce vpon him fiercely ſet.
                  Which when as Hector ſaw, he coucht his ſpeare,
                  And him with ſo great ſorce and fury met,
                  That he did him out of his ſadle beare:
                  And gaue him ſuch a deepe and cruell wound,
                  That he therewith fell dead vpon the ground▪
                  
               
               
                  Whoſe death when as the Grecians did eſpie,
                  With griefe for him they waxed pale and wan;
                  And many to revenge it, valiantly,
                  On Hector ſet, and firſt vpon him ran
                  King Zantipus, who with moſt great diſdaine,
                  And griefe to ſee King Phillis there lie ſlaine,
               
               
                  His launce vpon him brake, which to requite
                  
                     Hector at him moſt furiouſly did flie,
                  And with his ſpeare ſo fiercely did him ſmite,
                  That with the blow he did moſt cruelly
                  Giue him a wound ſo deepe into the ſide,
                  That he therewith fell off his horſe and died.
               
               
                  For whom the Greeks complain'd and grieued ſor
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  And hated Hector for his cruelty,
                  And each to other promiſed and ſwore,
                  With Troian blood his death reuendg'd ſhould 
                        •
                     e:
                  And at that time did them ſo ſore purſue,
                  That many of them in little ſpace they ſlew,
               
               
                  And mongſt the reſt Achilles cruelly,
                  
                     Lichaon and Euforbius both did ſlay,
                  (Two Knights that came out of their Countrey,
                  Which diſtant was from Troy a mighty way,
                  To ayd and help their friend King Priamus▪
                     )
                  And while the Greekes ſet on the Troians thus▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Hector by chance was wounded in the face,
                  Wherewith the blood out of his Bever ran,
                  Whome when the Troyans ſaw in ſuch a caſe,
                  They were ſo much abaſht, that they began▪
                  
                  To flie, & in great haſt to leaue the plaine,
                  And in the chaſe great ſtore of them were ſlaine,
               
               
                  Before that they could get out of the prea
                        •
                     e.
                  The Grecians them ſo ho
                        •••
                     e followed,
                  And to purſue and kill them did not ceaſe
                  In furious wiſe▪ as they before them fled,
                  And chaſed them almoſt vnto the towne:
                  Till Hector that moſt worthy Champion,
               
               
                  Perceiuing them to flie ſo faſt away,
                  Vnto them went t'encourage them againe,
                  And made them turne & ſpight their hearts to ſtay,
                  And valiantlie to fight, and to maintaine
                  The battaile gainſt the Grecian enemies.
                  For when as he by chance caſt vp his eies
               
               
                  Vnto the wals of Troy, and did behold
                  Queene Hecuba, and Policene, that ſtood
                  Thereon to ſee the fight his heart waxt cold,
                  As being moou'd with fierce and furious mood,
                  For verie ſhame to ſee the Troyans flie,
                  And made them turne with great dexteritie,
               
               
                  And ſtaid their 
                        •
                     light, & with them backe did ride
                  Vnto the plaine, and in his way he met
                  A Grecian King cald Merion, neere allide
                  T'Achilles, and on him moſt fiercelieſet:
                  And with his ſword gaue him ſo great a blow,
                  That therewithall his body claue in two.
               
               
                  Whome when Achilles found in that ſort dead,
                  Much grieu'd to ſee't, but't could him noght availe,
                  He tooke a ſpeare and Hector followed,
                  With full intent t'revenge him without faile:
                  And to that end ran at him valiantly,
                  And on the ſhield ſmote him moſt cruelly.
               
               
                  But could not once remooue him with the ſtroake,
                  Nor make him in his ſadle riſe▪ nor bow,
                  For he ſat ſure and ſteadfaſt as an Oake.
                  But mooued ſore when as he fel
                        •
                      the blow,
                  With ſword in hand he did Achilles ſmite,
                  So great a ſtroke with all his force and might,
               
               
                  That with the ſame he did his helmet breake,
                  And tare his Bever off, and made him reele,
                  And on his horſe to bend, and then did ſpeake,
                  And ſaid to him, Achilles now I feele,
                  And well perceiue the envie that to mee
                  Thou bearſt in heart, but I do counſell thee,
               
               
                  That thou vnto thy ſelfe doſt not procure
                  Thy death, for if (as I deſire) I may
                  Meet with thee 
                        •
                     n the field, I thee a
                        •
                     ſure▪
                  
                  No ranſome, aid, nor ſuccor ſhall 
                        •
                     e ſtay,
                  With this my ſword to take revenge on th
                        ••
                     
                  
                  For with thy life thou ſhalt not ſcape from 
                        ••
                     .
               
               
                  Be well advis'd therefore I tell thee plaine,
                  For by my hand thou ſhalt moſt ſurely die,
                  For I intend to pay thee for thy paine.
                  Whereto Achilles 
                     
                        •
                     hinking to replie,
                  As he began to anſwere him againe,
                  Prince Troy
                           ••••
                        
                      ſtep
                        •
                      in betweene them 
                        ••••
                     ne,
               
               
                  And parted them, and with the company
                  Of worthy knights, which he as then did guide,
                  Behau'd himſelfe ſo braue and valiantly,
                  That where he fought▪ the Greeks on everieſide
                  Were beaten downe and kild, for that ſame day,
                  He did ſix hundred knights moſt fiercely ſlay.
               
               
                  And made the Greeks for feare the end of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Vnto their tents, till Menelaus came in,
                  With ſeven thouſand Greeks in company,
                  T'aſſaile the Troyans fiercely did begin▪
                  
                  And made the Greeks march forward once againe,
                  And to reco
                        •
                     er ground vpon the plaine.
               
               
                  But as he buſied was to ſet vpon
                  The Troyan knights, 
                        ••
                      bea
                        •
                      them downe by 
                        •••••
                     ,
                  He was encountred by King Ode
                           •••
                        ,
                  
                  Who valiantly did caſt him off 
                        •••
                      
                     
                        •••••
                     ,
                  And wounded him ſo deepelie in the face,
                  That he had thought t'haue died in that place.
               
               
                  And had been priſoner tane and led away,
                  (By aid and helpe of Troy
                           •
                        lus) to the towne,
                  But that in his extreamitie and need,
                  So many thouſand Grecian knights came dow
                        ••
                     
                  
                  To aid and reſcue him: that Ode
                           •••
                        
                     
                  
                  Was forſt to let King Menelaus alone.
               
               
                  And at that time as it by chance fell out,
                  King Diomede with Troyelus did 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  And 
                        •
                     re that he could turne himſelfe about,
                  With ſpeare in hand ſo fiercely on him ſet▪
                  
                  That Troyelus by maine and mighty force
                  At vnawares, he caſt downe from his horſe,
               
               
                  And gaue it to his Squire for to beare
                  To Creſida, and praid her for his ſake,
                  That Preſent to accept (though ſmall it were)
                  And with good will, and in good part y 
                        •
                     o take
                  That ſimple gift from her moſt louing knight▪
                  
                  That valiantly had woone it in the 
                        •••••
                     ,
               
               
                  
                  And taken it from him, whome ſometimes 
                        •
                     he
                  Had loued well▪ and like't, and in her heart
                  Eſteemd and 
                        〈◊〉
                      only knight to be.
                  The Squire as he had, did ſtraight depart,
                  
                     
                        •••
                      when he came therewith to Creſids tent,
                  He did 
                        ••
                      in his Maiſters name preſent.
               
               
                  And as he had in charge, in humble riſe
                  Deliuered 
                        ••
                      to 
                        •••
                     , and earneſtly
                  Beſought her that 
                        •
                     he would it not deſpiſe,
                  But take it in good part, and c
                        •••
                     eouſly
                  Vouchſafeto thinke on Diomede her knight▪
                  
                  That in her 
                        ••
                     d his ſole and whole delight.
               
               
                  Whereto with countnance glad & ioyfull cheare,
                  She anſwere made, and bad 
                        •
                     im go with ſpeed
                  Vnto his Lord, and ſay 
                        •
                     o him from her,
                  That for his part to feare he ſhould not need,
                  That ſhe would proue vncurteous or vnkind
                  To him, in whom 
                        •
                     he did ſuch kindnes find.
               
               
                  And would no
                        •
                      his good will and loue reiect,
                  That vnto her 
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     ranger in that place,
                  So much himſelfe did humble and ſubiect,
                  As to deſire 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                      o
                        •
                     
                     ▪ loue, and grace,
                  That never had 
                        ••
                      him 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſo well,
                  And therefore had him to his maiſter tell,
               
               
                  That while ſhe liu'd it was her ſol
                        •
                      intent,
                  His loue to her 
                        ••••
                     in her he
                        ••
                     t to ſet.
                  The Squire with this anſwere gladly went
                  Vnto his Lord 
                        ••
                     d when with h
                        ••
                      he met,
                  Vnto him told▪ what ſhe to him had ſaid▪
                  
                  For which he was ſo well at heart appaid,
               
               
                  That from thenceforth he did eſteeme it nought,
                  What gri
                        •••
                      ſo e
                        •••
                      after to him fell.
                  Meane time the Troyans then ſo brauely fought,
                  And 
                        •
                     gainſt the Gr
                           ••
                        ks behau'd themſelues ſo well,
                  That they of force conſtrained w
                        •
                     re to fly
                  Vnto their tents, and there ſo cruelly
               
               
                  Were ſlaine and 
                        •••••
                     n down
                        •
                     , that certainly
                  They had been 
                        〈◊〉
                      & cleane driuen out the field
                  At that ſame time, and ſpoyled vtterly.
                  If 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      when he them beh
                        •
                     ld,
                  Had not come downe with many a gallant man,
                  At which time ſuch a furious fight began,
               
               
                  That many men were beaten downe and feld,
                  But ſpecially vpon the Troyans ſide,
                  For then the Greeks them 
                        •
                     oo'
                        •
                      ſo hardly held,
                  That they could not their fury great abide:
                  And by that me
                        •••
                      the Grecia
                           •
                        
                      ground thē wonne,
                  And Troyans to recoyle as faſt begunne,
               
               
                  And loſt▪ their ground 
                        ••••
                      
                     
                        •
                     hat 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
                  
                  (W
                        •
                     o with a troope of gallant knights & ſtrong,
                  The Greeks on th'other 
                        〈◊〉
                      was)
                  In furious 
                        ••
                     ſe did 
                        〈◊〉
                      into the 
                        ••••
                     ng,
                  And ſuch a ſlaugh
                        •••
                      of the Greeks the
                        •
                      ma
                        ••
                     ,
                  That in ſhort time
                        •••
                      them compelled had
               
               
                  To make retract, and way to flie at laſt▪
                  
                  Downe towards theſ
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                      vnto the ſtrond, where 
                        •
                     e
                  Along the way did 
                        ••••
                      them downe ſo faſt,
                  And put them to ſo great extreamity:
                  That they were in no l
                        ••
                     tle feare and dread▪
                  
                  Vntill ſuch time as fierce King Diomede
                  
               
               
                  Beheld and ſaw how that Pollidam
                           •
                        s,
                  
                  So cruelly the Grecians did purſue,
                  That if the fight continued as it was,
                  He doubted ſome great danger would enſue
                  Vnto the Greeks, a ſpeare in hand did take,
                  And ſpurd his horſe, and after him did make.
               
               
                  And he likewiſe to ſhew himſelfe a knight
                  Of valor great, his ſpeare ſet in his reſt,
                  And valiantly with all his force and might,
                  Smote Diomede therewith into the breſt,
                  Cleane through his armes a deepe & deadly wound,
                  Wherwith he fell down headlong on the ground.
               
               
                  Which having done deſpight of all the force,
                  That then the Grecians vs'd t'ayd Diomede,
                  
                  He brauely tooke and ſeaz'd vpon his horſe,
                  And by the bridle in his hand it l
                        •
                     d,
                  And gaue it vnto Troyelus that ſtood
                  On foot, as then all bath'd in Grecians blood.
               
               
                  (Whereas he fought with them ſo valiantly,
                  That they could not his mighty blowes ſuſtaine,
                  For with his trenchant blade moſt cruelly,
                  He kild and beat them downe vpon the plaine)
                  Who did his foot ſtraight in the ſtirrop ſet,
                  And with a trice vpon his backe did get▪
                  
               
               
                  And then againe himſelfe he did advance,
                  And furiouſly vpon the Grecians 
                     
                        •
                     et,
                  Till at the laſt with ſwords in hand by chance,
                  He and Achilles both together met,
                  And each the other valiantly aſſaild,
                  But Troyelus againſt him ſo prevaild,
               
               
                  That he did wound Achilles, and by force,
                  (Deſpight of his great valor and his might)
                  Moſt puiſſantly did ſmight him off his horſe.
                  But nere the leſſe Achilles like a knight,
                  That nothing feard, roſe vp vpon his feet,
                  And vs'd all meanes he could his horſe to get.
               
               
                  
                  But ere that he could do't, a new ſupply
                  Of Troyan Knights enclos'd him round about,
                  And on him ſet with ſuch dexterity,
                  That he by no meanes from them could get out:
                  And Hector at that time in furious rage,
                  His choller on Achilles to aſſwage,
               
               
                  A thouſand Grecian knights did fiercelie 
                        ••
                     ay,
                  And many more by his victorious hand,
                  Were beaten downe that then ſtood in his way,
                  And him (to aid Achilles) did withſtand:
                  Who at that time in extreame danger ſtood,
                  And could not ſcape by any likelihood,
               
               
                  But either had been taken, or elſe ſlaine.
                  For Hector on him ſet ſo furiouſly,
                  That he had not beene able to ſuſtaine
                  The fight gainſt him, and thoſe that buſilie
                  Vpon him ſet; till that King Thelamon
                  
                  Much grieu'd thereat, when as he heard theron,
               
               
                  With many thouſand Grecians thither road,
                  (And in deſpight of all the Troyans force,
                  Who notwithſtanding brauely him withſtood)
                  Did reſcue him, and holpe him to his horſe,
                  But not without the loſſe of many a knight.
                  But for becauſe as then it drew to night,
               
               
                  They left the battaile for that time, and went
                  Out of the field, the Troyans to the towne:
                  The Grecians everie one vnto his tent,
                  And for that night to reſt themſelues lay downe.
                  And after that as Dares Frigius ſaies,
                  Continually for ſpace of thirtie daies,
               
               
                  They neuer ceaſed valiantly to fight,
                  And furiouſlie each other to deſtroy
                  On either ſide, but yet for all their might,
                  The Grecians loſt much more then they of Troy.
                  
                  And Priam loſt in thoſe moſt furious fights,
                  Six Baſtard ſons all braue and valiant knights.
               
               
                  For whome he made much dole and heauineſſe,
                  And neuer ceaſt to weepe and to complaine,
                  And in that time (as Guido doth expreſſe)
                  
                     Hector a wound got in his face againe:
                  And in that ſort each t'other did procure,
                  Great loſſe, while all thoſe battailes did endure.
               
               
                  Till Priamus vnto the Greeks ſent downe
                  For truce for ſix months ſpace, if that they would
                  Grant therevnto, which King Agamemnon
                  
                  With all his Lords contented was to hold:
                  And ſo it was confirm'd on either ſide,
                  For ſo long time betwixt them to abide.
               
               
                  And while it held, the worthy Champion
                  
                     Hector, the chiefe defence of Troy, did lie
                  To heale and cure his wo
                        •
                     nds in Ilion,
                  
                  King Priams Princelie houſe. Whereof if I
                  Should take on me (as Dares ſets it downe)
                  To make to you a full deſcription▪
                  
               
               
                  I feare I ſhall want learning to expreſſe,
                  And ſhew the ſame to you, for tis too much
                  For my bare wit, to doo't I muſt confeſſe.
                  For truth it is, there nere was any ſuch,
                  In all the world before that ere was ſeene
                  For riches, nor the like nere ſince hath beene.
               
               
                  For (as he ſaith) t'was made for great delight,
                  And ſtood vpō twelue mightie ſtones foure ſquare,
                  The which were all of Alablaſter white.
                  The true and right proportion that it bare,
                  Was twenty paces in the latitude,
                  And iuſt as many in the longitude.
               
               
                  The pauement vnder foot was Chriſt all cleare.
                  And all the walls compos'd and made of ſtones,
                  The which moſt coſtly, rich, and ſumptuous were:
                  As Rubies, Saphires, Aga
                        •
                     s, Diamones,
                  Topas, Emrands, Turques, Croſolites,
                  Purfier, Iaſper, Iet, and Margarites:
               
               
                  And many other kinds the which are found,
                  And with great labour ſought and digged out,
                  Within the rich and fertile Indian ground,
                  And all the Countries of the world about.
                  The which did gliſter, ſhine, and ſhow as bright,
                  Within that faire & ſumptuous houſe by night,
               
               
                  As when the Sun by day therein did ſhine.
                  And round about the hall moſt curiouſly
                  Huge pillars therein ſtood, exceeding fine
                  And brauely made of pure white Ivorie,
                  Which on the tops of each of them did hold,
                  Moſt great and maſſie Images of gold,
               
               
                  Inchaſt with Pearls & precious ſtones moſt bright.
                  So that the ſtately workemanſhip and faſhion,
                  Of that moſt ſumptuous Pallace to the ſight,
                  Was likelier by eſtimation,
                  To be compos'd by incantation,
                  Then wrought and made by mans invention.
               
               
                  And rather ſeem'd a thing celeſtiall,
                  And framed by the heauenly Deity,
                  Then any houſe of Prince terreſtriall.
                  But for becauſe I never did it ſee,
                  I will conclude and briefly to you tell,
                  Th
                        ••
                      i
                        •
                      all other buildings did excell▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  And turnd againe vnto King Priamus,
                  
                  Who while the truce aforeſaid did endure,
                  Moſt earneſt was by workemen curious,
                  To make moſt coſtly tombes for Sepulture
                  Of his ſix Baſtard ſons aforeſaid dead,
                  That in the warre their liues had finiſhed.
               
               
                  And all this while King Diomede lay ſicke,
                  And inwardly did feele great woe and ſmart
                  By Cupids ſhaft, that cruelly did pricke
                  And ſting him through the breſt into the heart,
                  For loue of his faire Lady Creſida.
                  
                  For whom he neuer ceaſt both night & day,
               
               
                  To fret & grieue, & with deepe ſighs complaine,
                  And for that cauſe moſt wilfullie begun
                  To leaue all food, and fooliſhlie abſtaine
                  From earthly ioy, and lookt ſo pale and wan,
                  That he did ſeeme to be a man forlorne,
                  And one that all terreſtriall bliſſe did ſcorne.
               
               
                  And ever vnto her did ſtill complaine,
                  And prayed her of loue and charitie,
                  To ſhew ſome grace to eaſe him of his paine,
                  And nor to put him to extreamitie:
                  Which ſurely was for her ſweet ſake to die,
                  If vnto him her loue ſhe would denie.
               
               
                  But cunningly ſhe held him at a bay,
                  And for to haue and keepe him in good hope,
                  She ſtill did vſe to feed him with delay,
                  Yet would not ſeeme to giue him too much ſcope:
                  But as it were twixt hope and deepe deſpaire,
                  Shewd vnto him a countnance glad and faire,
               
               
                  To eaſe him partlie of his heauineſſe,
                  And then with ſome new tricke as in diſdaine,
                  Would put him to ſome other new diſtreſſe,
                  And rather more then leſſe encreaſe his paine:
                  As wylie women well can play ſuch parts,
                  With men that pierced are with Cupids darts,
               
               
                  And make them oftentimes to giue aſſaies,
                  Yet wau'ringly to ſtand twixt hope and dread,
                  By putting them to Non-plus by delaies,
                  As Creſida dealt with King Diomede,
                  
                  Of purpoſe for to ſet him more on fire,
                  For naturally all women doe deſie,
               
               
                  When they haue made men after them to dance,
                  Twixt hope and dread both linked in a chaine,
                  Vnequally to hang them in ballance,
                  Of moſt vncertaine end of either twaine:
                  To make them long and many yeares to ſerue,
                  Nought caring whether they doliue, or ſtarue.
               
               
                  Loe here what by too fervent loue is got,
                  For ſhe to keepe him ſtill in ſeruitude,
                  Held him at ſuch a bay, that he could not
                  Perceaue what ſhe did meane, but to conclude
                  Left him in doubt; wherein ile let him lie,
                  And vnto you will further certifie,
               
               
                  How well themſelues the Troyans did defend
                  Againſt the Greeks their enemies in field,
                  When as the ſix months truce were at an end,
                  Who after that, twelue daies together held
                  Continuall fight and never would refraine,
                  Wherin great ſtore of valiāt knights were ſlaine
               
               
                  On either ſide, all in their owne defence,
                  Which in the field long did vnburied lie,
                  Whereof enſu'd ſo great a peſtilence
                  Among the Greekes, by much extreamitie
                  Of heat, and by contagiouſnes of aire,
                  That they therewith did fall in great deſpaire.
               
               
                  For day by day ſo many of them dyed,
                  That in ſhort ſpace their number did decreaſe
                  Moſt mightily, the which when they eſpyed,
                  And ſaw the plague ſtill more & more encreaſt,
                  Their Generall a meſſenger ſent downe,
                  With all their whole conſents vnto the towne.
               
               
                  To craue a truce if Priam would conſent
                  And yeeld thereto, for thirtie dayes t'endure.
                  Which when the Troyans heard, they were content,
                  And willingly the ſame did them aſſure:
                  In hope the plague whereof they dyed ſo faſt,
                  Would be a meanes to kill them all at laſt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  ¶ How Andromecha in a dreame was fore
                        •
                     ar
                        •
                     ed of her Husband Hectors death, if he the next day following entred into the field; and how he refuſing her counſell, was the next day ſlaine in the battaile by Achilles.
                  
               
               
                  WHen as the plague among the Greeks did ceaſe,
                  And time of truce likewiſe was at an end,
                  The Grecians that in courage did encreaſe,
                  Determined and fully did intend,
                  T'aſſaile and ſet vpon the Troyan foes
                  Betimes next day, aſſoone as Phoebus roſe.
               
               
                  
                  But as the ſtorie ſaith, the night before,
                  
                     Andromecha Prince Hectors louing wife,
                  
                     ▪That vnto him two Princelie children bore,
                  (Whome he did loue as dearely as his life)
                  The eldeſt cald Laomedon, the other
                  
                     Aſtionax, much leſſer then the other.
               
               
                  For he as then was ſmall and very yong,
                  And onely with his mothers pap was fed,
                  And neither had the vſe of foot nor tong)
                  As ſhe lay faſt a ſleepe within her bed,
                  Was troubled with a ſodaine viſion,
                  Or as men ſay a revolution
               
               
                  By dreame (as hapned to King Scipio)
                  Whether it were by divine Oracle,
                  Or that the Gods did then vnto her ſhoe,
                  And giue her warning as a miracle)
                  Wherein ſhe thought that one to her did ſay,
                  That if that Hector iſſued forth next day
               
               
                  Out of the towne his Grecian foes t'aſſaile,
                  That he ſhould not eſcape, but certainlie,
                  Fell fate would then ſo much gainſt him preuaile,
                  That ſhe would him in trap, and finally
                  Fierce Atropos that foule and divelliſh fend,
                  The thrid of her deare husbands life would end.
               
               
                  Thereby to ſhew her cruell force and might:
                  If he that day into the field did goe.
                  Wherewith ſhe fell into ſo great a fright,
                  And thought that ſhe did feele ſuch extreme woe:
                  That waking of a ſodaine vp ſhe ſtart,
                  And for her dreame was grieued at the heart.
               
               
                  And lay and ſighted ſore, and could not ſleepe,
                  By reaſon of the extreame griefe and ſorrow
                  She had conceau'd, and pittiouſly did weepe,
                  But ſpecially the next enſuing morrow,
                  When ſhe beheld the worthy famous knight,
                  
                     Hector put on his compleat armour bright,
               
               
                  And ready was to go out of the towne.
                  To whome with flouds of teares within her eies,
                  She ran in haſt and on her knees fell downe,
                  And vnto him declar'd with woefull cries,
                  The fearefull dreame ſhe had the night before,
                  But he eſteem'd it not, but was therefore
               
               
                  Offended, and with indignation
                  Affirm'd, and ſaid that folly great it were
                  For men that are of good diſcretion,
                  Such peeuiſh, fond, and idle dreames to feare,
                  Or truſt vnto ſo fooliſh fantaſies
                  Of viſions, that moſt commonly are lies,
               
               
                  And full of ieſts and falſe eluſions,
                  Whereof the end is onely to delude
                  Such as do truſt to their concluſions,
                  Although the common people groſſe and rude,
                  Are mooued with moſt fond affection,
                  To iudge by them in their opinion
               
               
                  What may enſue, and what they ſignifie,
                  Which many times falls out as they ſuppoſe,
                  But oftner times do hap cleane co
                        •••
                     arie.
                  Whereat with wringing hands ſtraight vp ſhe 
                        ••
                     ſe▪
                  
                  But downe againe ſhe fell, and there did lie
                  A while as in a trance, and then did crie,
               
               
                  And ſaid alas, my loue and Lord moſt deare,
                  Why will you not belieue nor thinke vpon
                  Your louing wife, but her refuſe to heare,
                  That with good will and true affection,
                  Deſires and wiſheth you all good ſhe can▪
                  
                  And vp ſhe roſe like one that's mad and ran
               
               
                  To Priamus and Hecuba that ſat▪
                  
                  Together at that time, and downe ſhe fell
                  Vpon her knees, but long it was ere that
                  For ſobs and ſigthes ſhe could vnto them▪ tell
                  Her woefull caſe, till at the laſt ſhe tooke
                  Some courage, and with ſad and heavie looke,
               
               
                  Vnto them ſhewd the fearefull dream ſhe had
                  The night before▪ when as ſhe wa
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  And to them there a full diſcourſe then made
                  Thereof in euery point, with ſighs moſt deepe:
                  Affirming that for certaine't would fall aur▪
                  
                  So as ſhe ſaid if Hector did goe out
               
               
                  That day into the field, ſor't was ordaind
                  By fortunes falſe and miſchieuous decree.
                  And therewith in moſt pittious wiſe complaind;
                  And weeping prayd King Priam on her knee,
                  Of her and hers to haue compaſſion▪
                  
                  And with all ſpeed to giue direction,
               
               
                  That Hector her deare Lord might not go out
                  That day into the field, and therewithall
                  With weeping teares ſhe turn'd her ſelfe about,
                  And in a deadly ſound began to fall:
                  And with exceeding pale and woefull cheare,
                  Cry'd out & ſaid, helpe, help, ſweet mother dere.
               
               
                  And of your great benignity and grace,
                  Find meanes that my Lord Hector may not go,
                  This day into the field to fight, no
                        •
                      paſſe
                  Out of the gates, and to perſwade him ſo:
                  That he this day vſe neither ſpeare nor ſhield,
                  But vnto your deſire get him to yeeld.
               
               
                  
                  Whereto they both did willingly agree,
                  And readilie did grant to her requeſt,
                  And to that end with ſpeed went downe to ſee,
                  When all the battailes readie were, and preſt
                  To iſſue forth, where Troyelus firſt of all
                  Appointed was vpon the Greeks to fall.
               
               
                  And next to him his brother Paris went.
                  And after him Aeneas forth did paſſe.
                  And then in order brauelie plaſt were ſent
                  King Sarpedon, and braue Pollidamas.
                  
                  King Erio
                           ••
                        , and King Epistr
                           •
                        phus.
                  
                  And after them a King cald Forcius.
                  
               
               
                  All richly arm'd in harneſſe bright and cleare.
                  And laſt of all went out King Philomene,
                  
                  With all the Kings & Lords that then were there,
                  To aid King Priamus. Who hauing ſeene
                  Them all before him paſſe out of the towne,
                  Himſelfe in perſon with them did go downe
               
               
                  A little way, and them in order plaſt.
                  Which having done he bad them forward goe,
                  And willed them couragiouſly to haſt
                  And ſet vpon the Greeks, and there to ſhoe
                  Their valors great gainſt them with all their might,
                  That ready were, and preſt with them to fight.
               
               
                  And proudly ſtood all armed in the plaine,
                  With enſignes ſpred in braue and warlike ſhoe;
                  But Priamus with ſpeed went backe againe,
                  And vnto Hector purpoſely did goe,
                  To will him not to 
                        ••
                     ue forth that day
                  Into the field, but in the towne to ſtay.
               
               
                  For which he was ſore grieued in his mind,
                  And when he ſaw the battailes all go forth
                  Into the field, and he was ſtaid behind,
                  He did begin to be exceeding wroth,
                  And laid the fault thereof vpon his wife,
                  That ſeemd to be ſo tender of his life,
               
               
                  Impoſing vpon her th'occaſion,
                  That he vnto his great diſgrace and ſhame,
                  Conſtrained was to ſtay within the towne.
                  But that it might not derogate his fame,
                  Nor giue men cauſe by falſe report to ſay,
                  That he for feare did ſtay within that day;
               
               
                  He did proteſt, and with an oath it bound,
                  That happen life or death he would go out
                  Into the field, and therein would be found,
                  Yea though he were aſſured without doubt,
                  That he ſhould die a thouſand deaths and more,
                  So ſtout a heart within his breſt he bore.
               
               
                  And for that cauſe he made no more delay,
                  But arm'd himſelfe againe with full intent,
                  Againſt his fathers will, that bad him ſtay,
                  To go into the field; and forward went.
                  For feare whereof his wife did cry & ſhout,
                  And with her child in both her armes ran out.
               
               
                  And did to him moſt pittiouſly complaine,
                  Beſeeching him her ſorrow to behold,
                  And of his Princely loue to eaſe her paine
                  By granting her requeſt, and that he would
                  Not onely pittie her, but haue a care
                  Of his yong Son which in her armes ſhe bare.
               
               
                  Who all the while would not from crying keepe
                  By any meanes, what ſo euer that ſhe made:
                  When as he ſaw his wofull mother weepe,
                  And kneeling on her knees vnto him ſaid,
                  Alas my Lord haue pittie now on me,
                  And on this tender babe whome here you ſee
               
               
                  So wofully before you weepe and crie,
                  And be not ſo hard hearted and vnkind,
                  T'abandon vs, and ſuffer vs to die.
                  Let Troy ſome mercy at thy hand now find,
                  (Mine owne deare Lord) leaſt it and we each one,
                  Be put to cruell death when thou art gone,
               
               
                  For want of aid. Thus did Andromecha
                  
                  Her Husband Hector mournfully deſire
                  To ſtay at home. The like Queene Hecuba
                  
                  His mother alſo of him did require,
                  Together with his Siſters Caſſandra,
                  
                  And Policene, with faire Queene Helena.
                  
               
               
                  Who all at once downe at his feet did fall,
                  And pittiouſly their haire did rent and teare,
                  And lowdly cri'd, and dolefully did call
                  On him, that he would for that day forbeare
                  To go into the field, and of the towne,
                  With them and her to haue compaſſion,
               
               
                  And to behold their ſad and pittious mone,
                  For that he was the bulwarke and the wall,
                  And chiefe defender of the towne alone,
                  And th'only true ſupporter of them all:
                  In whome their onely ſafety and good,
                  With all their weale eſpecially then ſtood.
               
               
                  But all this could not moue his heart to ſtay,
                  Nor grant to their requeſt, yet ſtill they kneel'd,
                  And him with many briniſh teares did pray,
                  Vnto their cries and woefull ſute to yeeld,
                  And that they might ſome ſparks of grace thē feele
                  To come out of his heart as hard as ſteele,
               
               
                  
                  By pittying them and on their woe to rew,
                  Which likely was to their deſtruction
                  And overthrow, ſtill dailie to renew:
                  For that of their moſt famous Troyan towne,
                  His death would be the ruine and decay.
                  Yet all this could by no meanes make him ſtay,
               
               
                  But forth he would with heart couragious,
                  Which was inflam'd with extreame wrath & rage,
                  And like a Lyon fierce and furious,
                  Would by no meanes his crueltie aſſwage:
                  For neither crie nor lamentation,
                  Could him withdraw from his opinion.
               
               
                  For caſting everie danger cleane aſide,
                  And all perſwaſions what ſo ere were made,
                  He ſpurd his horſe, and forward gan to ride,
                  Wherewith his wife ſuch extreame dolor had
                  Within her heart, that with face pale and wan,
                  In furious wiſe vnto the King ſhe ran
               
               
                  So ſore amaz'd, and in ſuch wofull caſe,
                  That ſhe could hardly tell where ſhe did go,
                  And with ſalt teares be-dewing all her face,
                  So ſtrangely lookt that no man could her know:
                  And in that ſort with great perplexitie,
                  She fell before King Priam on her knee,
               
               
                  And vnto him her wofull caſe did ſhoe.
                  Deſiring him to put his helping hand,
                  To ſtay her husband Hector that would goe
                  Out of the towne, whom no man could withſtand,
                  Vnleſſe't were he; who preſentlie did bid
                  One bring his horſe, and forth in haſt he rid,
               
               
                  And pittying her eſtate, did for her ſake,
                  Set ſpurs vnto his horſe with ſo great haſt,
                  That he did Hector ſpeedilie oretake,
                  Before that he out of the gate was paſt:
                  And ſtraight laid hold vpon his horſes reine,
                  And made him gainſt his will turne back again.
               
               
                  (Wherein he would his father not gaine ſay,
                  Although he was full loath the ſame to doe)
                  And by that meanes intreated was to ſtay,
                  And partly was by force conſtraind thereto:
                  And ſo he did downe from his horſe alight,
                  With heart ſo full of ranckor and deſpight,
               
               
                  Melancholie and hot and burning ire,
                  That his couragious heart did boile in blood,
                  And with diſdaine was ſet on ſuch a fire,
                  That like a Tygar fierce, or Lyon wood
                  And furious, depriued of his pray,
                  He did behaue himſelfe all that ſame day.
               
               
                  Or like a Bore that as he goes doth whet
                  And grind his tuskes, ſtill walking vp and downe,
                  While that the Greekes & they of Troy did meet,
                  Where at the firſt yong Troyel
                           ••
                        
                      fore the towne,
                  In furious wiſe vpon his gallant ſteed,
                  By chance did meet with fierce King Diomede.
                  
               
               
                  And both of them ſo furiouſly aſſaild,
                  And ſet vpon each other with ſuch might,
                  That neither armes nor weapons had preuaild,
                  But one or both of them in that hard fight
                  Had died, if that King Menelaus had not beene,
                  That ſodenly came riding them betweene,
               
               
                  And made them part, and after valiantly
                  Did ſpurre his horſe, and ran at Mereon
                  
                  The Phrigian King, and him moſt cruellie
                  With ſword in hand aſſaild and ſet vpon:
                  And at him ſtroke a blow with ſo great force,
                  That with the ſame he feld him off his horſe.
               
               
                  And at that time he ſurely had bin tane,
                  Or loſt his life, the Greeks ſo mightily
                  Aſſaild and ſet on him, and on the plaine
                  Enclos'd him round about, and furiouſly
                  Pluckt off his helme, and band vpon him laid,
                  And had him led away. If to his aid
               
               
                  
                     Pollidamas had not come ſodenly,
                  With many valiant knights with him, and when
                  He ſaw King Mereon in extreamitie,
                  And mongſt a troope of Grecians priſoner, then
                  In furious wiſe he did vpon them ſet,
                  And him out of their hands by force did get.
               
               
                  But ere he could relieue him cleane from thence,
                  On either ſide there was ſuch mortall ſtrife,
                  For that the Greeks gainſt him made great defence,
                  That many a valiant knight then loſt his life:
                  For rather then he ſhould from them be tane,
                  They ſwore & vowd that he ſhold firſt be ſlaine.
               
               
                  And by that meanes he was in danger great.
                  But ſodainly to free him from the ſame,
                  Yong Troyelus vpon the Grecians ſet:
                  And at the firſt as he amongſt them 
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     e,
                  He did behaue himſelfe gainſt them ſo well,
                  And in ſuch furious wiſe vpon them 
                        •
                     ell,
               
               
                  That in deſpight of them and all their traine,
                  Moſt valiantly he holpe king Mereon,
                  
                  And him reſtor'd to libertie againe.
                  And then into the field came Thelamon,
                  
                  That of three thouſand knights the leader was,
                  And ſodenlie vnhorſt Pollidamas.
                  
               
               
                  
                  And him in midſt of all his knights caſt downe
                  Vnto the ground. But worthy Troyelus
                  
                  T'encreaſe his hautie fame and great renowne,
                  Deſpight of them with courage furious,
                  Holpe him perforce vnto his horſe againe,
                  But at that time the Troyans were ſo ſlaine,
               
               
                  And beaten downe by Greeks on euery ſide,
                  (For fierce Achilles then ſo cruelly
                  Purſued them) that they could not abide
                  Before his face, but of neceſſitie
                  Conſtrained were perforce to flie away,
                  And by no meanes within the field would ſtay.
               
               
                  But fiercelie chaſt by him vnto the towne,
                  Cloſe by the walls did looſe great ſtore of men.
                  Which when the valiant Knight Margariton,
                  
                  One of King Priams baſtard Childeren
                  Perceau'd and ſaw, ſuch hauocke of them made,
                  Such griefe and ſorrow in his heart he had,
               
               
                  And was ſo moou'd thereat with great diſdaine,
                  To ſee them flie and chaſt ſo furiouſly,
                  And fore the walls ſo many of them ſlaine,
                  He purpoſed with heart couragiouſly,
                  T'revenge them on Achilles if he might:
                  And therefore like a ſtrong and valiant knight,
               
               
                  He ſpurd his horſe & through the preaſe he brake,
                  And in the midſt of all the Myrmidons,
                  
                  Enforſt himſelfe to kill, or elſe to take
                  
                     Achilles, and to that end on him runs,
                  And him with fierce and furious mood aſſaild,
                  But notwithſtanding all his might, he faild
               
               
                  Of that which he intended to haue done.
                  (For as fell fortune did for him ordaine,
                  Which by no meanes he could at that time ſhone)
                  He was himſelfe by fierce Achilles ſlaine:
                  Wherewith the Troyans preſently did flie,
                  Vnto the towne with fearefull noiſe and crie,
               
               
                  To ſee the valiant Knight Margariton,
                  
                  Dead on the ground ſo pittiouſly to lie,
                  And alſo for becauſe King Thelamon,
                  
                  Purſued them with ſo great cruelty,
                  And with his ſword ſo fiercely ſhed their blood,
                  Though Paris him couragiouſly withſtood,
               
               
                  With all his valiant baſtard Brethren,
                  But nere the leſſe the Troyans more and more
                  Fled backe, and with the loſſe of many men,
                  Conſtrained were to giue the field cleane ore:
                  And entring into Troye with mighty feare,
                  
                     Margaritons dead corps with them did beare.
               
               
                  And after them ſhut faſt the gates with ſpeed,
                  Whoſe body when as Hector did behold,
                  His heart within his breſt for griefe did bleed,
                  And for that cauſe he ſwore and vowd he would,
                  (Without abode or any more delay)
                  Revenge his death vpon the Greeks that day.
               
               
                  And preſently his compleat armes put on,
                  And mounting on his horſe with ſpeed did goe
                  Out of the towne, before that any one
                  Of thoſe that would haue ſtaid him did it know:
                  And like a Lyon in his cruelty
                  Aſſaild the Grecians hoſt ſo furiouſly,
               
               
                  That like to ſwarmes of Bees, they ran away
                  Before his ſword, and thought it beſt to get
                  Out of his ſight, and he that time did ſlay
                  Two worthy Dukes that then vpon him ſet,
                  Whereof the one was cald Euripalus,
                  
                  The other had to name Halcidius.
                  
               
               
                  And by that meanes the Troyans hauing woone
                  Their ground againe, they did the Grecians ſlay
                  So furiouſly, that they in haſt begun
                  To leaue the field, and giue the Troyans way:
                  Yet though they were purſu'd ſo, then it was
                  Their chance by force to take Pollidamas,
                  
               
               
                  A Troyan knight, but Hector ſpurd his horſe,
                  And road into the thickeſt of the preſſe,
                  And tooke him from them all againe by force,
                  And after put the Greeks to ſuch diſtreſſe,
                  That through his valor great where s'ere he rood,
                  He bath'd his trenchant blade within their blood.
               
               
                  And was ſo cruell and ſo mercileſſe,
                  That none eſcapt his hands that with him met,
                  And then a Grecian cald Leothides,
                  
                  Preſumptuouſly would needs vpon him ſet,
                  While he was in his greateſt rage and ire:
                  But Hector, who as then had great deſire
               
               
                  To make the Grecians feele his cruelty,
                  Slew him forthwith, and on the ground him caſt.
                  The which when as Achilles did eſpie,
                  And ſaw how he the Grecians ſlew ſo faſt,
                  And hackt and hew'd them down, & ſpared none,
                  He did conceiue in his opinion,
               
               
                  That while that Hector liu'd it was moſt ſure,
                  The Greeks ſhould nere orecome their enemies,
                  Nor long gainſt them in battaile could endure.
                  And for that cauſe did ſtudie and deuiſe,
                  Which way to find the meanes by force or ſlight,
                  To rid him of his life, if that he might.
               
               
                  
                  And with him alſo did therein conſent
                  
                     Pollicenes an Indian Duke, that had
                  His loue vnto Achilles ſiſter bent,
                  And ſhe of him her onelie choice had made:
                  Who, that he might more in her favor ſtand,
                  Preſum'd to take that enterpriſe in hand.
               
               
                  And him began t'aſſaile with courage bold,
                  But he was ſlaine by Hector preſently.
                  The which when as Achilles did behold,
                  And ſaw him there dead on the ground to lie,
                  His heart with ſo great furie was poſſeſt,
                  That preſently he ſet his ſpeare in reſt,
               
               
                  And ran therewith at Hector furiouſlie,
                  But Hector with a dart moſt ſharpely ground,
                  Which he with mightie force at him let flie,
                  Stroke him clean throgh the thigh a mighty woūd:
                  Which grieu'd him ſo that he could not abide
                  Within the field, but was conſtraind to ride,
               
               
                  With all the ſpeed he could vnto his tent,
                  And there bound vp his wound, and preſently
                  Did mount vpon his horſe againe, and went
                  Into the field, in feare leaſt he ſhould die
                  Of that ſame wound ſo dangerous and ſore,
                  And not to take revenge on him before.
               
               
                  For he deſir'd no better remedie,
                  To caſe him of the griefe he did ſuſtaine,
                  Then for to haue the meanes and libertie,
                  That Hector by his hands might firſt be ſlaine:
                  For of his death he did ſmall reckning make,
                  So he might like revenge on Hector take.
               
               
                  And ſo he made a full concluſion,
                  Death for death to giue him if he might,
                  And with that ſtedfaſt reſolution,
                  And heart repleat with choller and deſpight,
                  He road in mighty rage to find him out:
                  While Hector rang'd the field and plaine about.
               
               
                  And like a Lyon fierce and Tygar fell,
                  The Grecians ſlew and beat from place to place,
                  And by his valor great which did excell,
                  With ſword in hand did them ſo hotly chaſe,
                  That as the ſheepe before the Wolfe do flie,
                  They ran aſſoone as they did him eſpie,
               
               
                  For none ſo hardy was on him to ſet.
                  And while that he ſuch hauocke of them made,
                  Amongſt the Greeks a Grecian King he met,
                  That on his backe a goodly armor had,
                  Ingrau'd and ſet with many a precious ſtone,
                  And Pearles fine that bright & clearely ſhone.
               
               
                  For on the circle of his helme throughout,
                  And all the borders of his Creſt were ſet,
                  In every place (on Velvet edg'd about)
                  Moſt rich and precious ſtones of value great:
                  Whoſe Armor when as Hector did behold,
                  To be ſo rich of precious ſtones and gold,
               
               
                  Aſſoone as he vnto the king drew neare,
                  He ran at him, and with exceeding force
                  Cleane through the heart did pierce him with his ſpeare,
                  Wherewith 
                        •
                     e died, and fell off from his horſe,
                  And Hector then did preſently alight,
                  And being of exceending ſtrength & might,
               
               
                  Tooke vp the body armed as it was,
                  Before him on his ſadle-bow, and ride
                  Therewith out of the battaile, that when as
                  He had it got out of the way aſide,
                  He might of his rich armor make a pray,
                  And ſpight of all the Grecians beare't away,
               
               
                  Being glad that he had gotten ſuch a priſe.
                  But out alas, that ere he ſhould it ſee,
                  Or ſet his mind ſo much on a varice,
                  The heat whereof cannot extinguiſht bee
                  Out of mans heart, if once therein it get:
                  For tis the cauſe that maketh man to ſet
               
               
                  His mind on nothing elſe but greedineſſe,
                  Which cleane diſgraceth true Nobility,
                  And doth extinguiſh all the worthineſſe
                  Of Conquerors, and ſuch as by degree
                  Of honor ſeeke to climbe to loftie fame,
                  And oftentimes cleane blemiſheth the ſame.
               
               
                  A covetous deſire of getting wealth,
                  Belongeth not vnto Nobilitie,
                  Nor riches gotten ſo by ſpoyle or ſtealth,
                  Pertaineth not to worthy Chivalrie:
                  For avarice and Knighthood diſagree,
                  And cannot well together lincked bee.
               
               
                  For certaine tis, that greedineſſe of gaine
                  Hath often beene the onely overthrow
                  Of many famous men that haue beene ſlaine,
                  As Guido in this Hiſtorie doth ſhow
                  By worthy Hectors fall, who coveting
                  To haue the ſumptuous armor of that king,
               
               
                  So greedy was thereof, that when he had
                  The body vp, and on his horſe it bare,
                  To haue the ſpoyle thereof ſuch haſt he made,
                  That he did hang his ſhield without all care
                  Behind him at his backe, the eaſier
                  To pull the armor off at his deſire.
               
               
                  
                  And by that meanes his breſt cleane open lay,
                  And nothing to defend nor ſaue the fame,
                  But his thin plates. Wherein I needs muſt ſay,
                  He was too vnadvis'd and much to blame:
                  And't grieues me that ſo braue a Champion,
                  And of all knighthood the onely pateron,
               
               
                  Should haue of his owne good ſo little care,
                  As not to thinke vpon his enemie,
                  That him ſo great and deadly hatred bare,
                  And watching time and opportunitie,
                  On him attended had all that ſame day,
                  To take him at advantage, and then lay
               
               
                  Cloſe hovering not farre off from him, to ſpie
                  A time t'effect his purpoſe and deſire,
                  For at that time Achilles ſo 
                        ••••
                      die,
                  With heart repleat with wrath and furious ire,
                  (While Hector ſo the dead Kings body beare
                  Vpon his horſe) tookevp a mightie ſpeare
               
               
                  And therewith did at Hector fiercely ride,
                  And ſmote him vnawares with great deſpight
                  Into the heart, 
                        •
                     hat he fell downe and dide:
                  And ſo that moſt renowned Troyan knight
                  Was ſlaine by careleſſe bearing of his ſhield.
                  Whoſe death when as King Odemon beheld,
               
               
                  He was ſo grieu'd there at, that preſently
                  He road vnto Achilles, and deſpight
                  Of all his Myrmidons, moſt furiouſly
                  Smote him ſo great a blow with all his might,
                  That downe for dead he fell vpon the plaine,
                  As if at that ſame time he had beene ſlaine.
               
               
                  Wherwith his knights ſtraight laid him on a ſhield,
                  And bare him faire and ſoftlie thence away
                  Into his tent, where ſtaying to be heald,
                  Ile leaue him for a while ſicke as he lay:
                  And ſhow how when that night began t'appeare,
                  The Grecians that with fighting wearied were,
               
               
                  Vnto their tents retir'd, and leſt the plaine.
                  And at that time the Troyans alſo went,
                  With heauie hearts into the towne againe,
                  And all the way did mournefully lament
                  For Hectors death, whoſe body ſolemnly
                  They bare with them, and weeping bitterly,
               
               
                  Vnto the Temple therewith all did goe.
                  And in that ſort that dolefull day did end,
                  And all the night enſuing with great woe
                  And heavineſſe, did after likewiſe ſpend:
                  Wherein I will them lea
                        •
                     e, and for a while
                  To mourne for Hectors death, ile turne my ſtile.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  ¶ The complaint of Lidgate for the death of Hector; and the deſcription of the ſumptuous Toombe that King Priam made for him.
               
               
                  THe fearefull ſtile which I till now haue held,
                  Of dangerous, cruell, fierce, and bloody warre,
                  So numbs my hand, that I can hardly weld
                  My pen that is ſo clog'd with feare and care,
                  Of valiant Hectors death the truth to write,
                  Vnleſſe ſome one vouchſafe me helpe t'indite.
               
               
                  But vnto whome ſhall I crie out or call
                  For helpe? it muſt not be to any one
                  Of thoſe faire Nymphs amongſt the Muſes all,
                  That on Pernaſſus hill by Helicon,
                  
                  So Angell-like with heavenly melodie,
                  Do ſing together with ſuch harmonie,
               
               
                  That no man can expreſſe nor well declare,
                  The ſweet accord of their moſt pleaſant ſong,
                  For they do never diſagree nor iarre,
                  And haue their inſtruments moſt ſweetly ſtrong,
                  That they on them no dolefull tunes can ſound,
                  Nor dittie ſweet with woefull ſongs compound.
               
               
                  Of them therefore it boots me not to craue,
                  Their aid to helpe in this extreamitie,
                  And ſure I am I ſhall as little haue
                  Of Clio, or of faire Caliope:
                  
                  I therefore muſt make ſute with woefull mone,
                  And many a grieuous ſigth and gaſtly grone.
               
               
                  Vnto Megaera, Alecto, and Theſiphone,
                  
                  That ever are in ſorrow, and complaine
                  With briniſh teares in bad condition:
                  For they ſtill liue in extreame woe and paine
                  Eternally, and do in torments dwell
                  With triple headed Cerberns in hell.
               
               
                  Whome I muſt pray to be to me bening,
                  In this my caſe which is ſo lamentable,
                  For to a man whome ſorrow ſtill doth ſting,
                  A ſhew of feare is alwaies commendable,
                  And in a matter full of heauineſſe,
                  A heauie looke the ſame doth beſt expreſſe.
               
               
                  
                  Helpe me herein o
                        •
                      
                     Niobe to mone,
                  And in my pen ſome of thy teares diſtill.
                  Do thou the like oh cruell Exion.
                  
                  And Be
                           •
                        ides that doeſt the bucket fill.
                  Helpe with thy roling ſtone good Seſiphus.
                  
                  And furtherme alſo poore Tantalus,
                  
               
               
                  That hungreſt ſtill in water without reſt.
                  Helpe me I pray you all my plaints to end,
                  And let me craue of you to do your beſt,
                  To ayd me ſo that I my wits may bend,
                  With phraſes fit the wofull chance to tell,
                  Of him that did in worthineſſe excell.
               
               
                  And while he liu'd the root of Knighthood was,
                  The onely mirror of all Chivalrie,
                  The man that did all other men ſurpaſſe,
                  For valor and for great actiuitie:
                  And th'onlie patterne of all curteſie,
                  As Guido ſheweth in this Hiſtorie.
               
               
                  Why ſhouldſt thou die oh Hector valorous?
                  What was the cauſe thou tookſt no better heed,
                  Oh Parchas fell and too too miſchievous,
                  So careleſly to twiſt his vitall threed?
                  And what did mooue thee Atropos thereto,
                  So haſtily to cut the ſame in two?
               
               
                  Oh Troy alas, well mayſt thou mourne and cry,
                  And bitterly lament thy wofull ſtate,
                  That art this day bereau'd ſo ſodainly
                  (By moſt accurſed, falſe, and wavering fate)
                  Of him that was thy ſpeciall proppe and ſtay,
                  And chiefe defence and bulwarke night & day,
               
               
                  And he that onely made thee fortunate.
                  Now, now, alas, the brightnes of thy ſunne
                  Ecclipſed is, and thou art deſolate
                  Of comfort, and in manner cleane vndone:
                  Thy light is out, and thou doſt plunged lie
                  In darkneſſe, for this day moſt certainlie
               
               
                  Is ſlaine the braueſt, and the worthieſt,
                  The moſt renowmed and chivalorous,
                  And of all valiant knights the hardieſt
                  la battaile, and the moſt victorious
                  That ever was or ſhall be borne moſt ſure
                  Within the world, while that it doth endure▪
                  
               
               
                  No maruell then it is thou weepſt ſo ſore
                  For him, ſith he both in thy woe and weale,
                  Was thy defence and comfort euermore,
                  And he whome thou didſt loue and like ſo well:
                  That ſure thou canſt not proue ſo much vnkind,
                  As not to thinke ſtill of him in thy mind.
               
               
                  For as the ſtorie maketh mention,
                  There was not any one (of what degree
                  Or ſtate ſo ere he was) within the towne,
                  But rather would (in that extreamitie)
                  Haue loſt his child, to ſaue his life, if ſo
                  The Gods would haue beene pleas'd to graunt therto.
               
               
                  The women for their parts of every age,
                  Throughout the towne did ſtand along the ſtreet,
                  And for his death moſt pittiouſly did rage,
                  And with great flouds of teares their faces wet▪
                  
                  And tearing of their haire for griefe and woe,
                  In furious wiſe ran crying too and fro.
               
               
                  Such extreame dolor at that time they made,
                  That pittie great it was the ſame to ſee,
                  The maids likewiſe no leſſer ſorrow had,
                  And wringing of their hands moſt pittiouſly,
                  Did ſob and ſith, and lowdly cry and call,
                  And ſaid alas, now ſhortly t'will be fall,
               
               
                  That we ſhall ſee our fathers daily ſlaine
                  Before our eyes with great extreamitie,
                  For no man will our quarrell now ſuſtaine,
                  Sith Hectors dead, for he was woont to be
                  Our onely truſt, and in his valor ſtood
                  Our chiefeſt ſtay, our ſafety, and our good.
               
               
                  Whoſe bodie when King Priam did behold,
                  His heart it was ſo fild with extreame griefe,
                  That both his hands together he did fold,
                  And like a man cleane void of all reliefe,
                  His face with bitter teares did bath and drown'd,
                  And could not ſpeake, but fell into a ſownd.
               
               
                  And ſo as cold as any ſtone did lie,
                  And neither ſtird nor mooued foot nor hand,
                  Deſiring rather preſentlie to die,
                  Then in ſo great extreamitie to ſtand:
                  And in that ſort on Hectors body lay,
                  Till that his ſons by force puld him away.
               
               
                  Who alſo ſad and ſorrowfull to ſee
                  Their brother there lie dead before their eies,
                  Did fall into ſo great perplexitie,
                  That caſting out moſt bitter ſigths and crie,
                  They far'd as if their hearts would burſt in ſunder,
                  Which made all thoſe that ſaw thē much to wōder,
               
               
                  For every one of them ſuch dolor made,
                  And were ſo fild with griefe and great remorſe,
                  That they did ſeeme as if no care they had,
                  But onely to haue dyed vpon the corſe:
                  And did ſuch lamentation make, that ſure
                  A heart of flint could not ſo much endure.
               
               
                  
                  What ſhall I ſay of Hecuba the Queene,
                  Or Caſſandra that was eſteem'd ſo wiſe,
                  Or of his ſiſter Lady Policene,
                  
                  Or how ſhould I the ſorrow great deuiſe,
                  To ſhew to you of his moſt woefull wife,
                  That loued him as dearely as her life?
               
               
                  Who all in great extreamity and woe,
                  As if they would haue kild themſelues did weepe,
                  And rent and tare their golden haire, and ſo
                  Torment themſelues, and ſuch a noyſe did keepe
                  `About his corſe; that if particularly,
                  I ſhould vpon me take to certifie
               
               
                  Their ſorrows, griefes, and lamentations,
                  Their pittious ſighs, and ſalt and briniſh teares,
                  Their woe
                        •
                     ull cries and exclamations,
                  Their ſad complaints, extreamities, and feares,
                  And all their mournfull jeſtures ſpecifie,
                  It would too great a volume occupie.
               
               
                  If I ſhould euery thing in order name,
                  And over long and tedious to be heard,
                  Of any man to liſten to the ſame:
                  For many daies enſuing afterward,
                  They wept before the corſe moſt wofully,
                  And rent and tare themſelues ſo pittiouſly,
               
               
                  That wonder't was they could ſo much endure,
                  But that they're vs'd to weepe & to complaine,
                  For tis a point of womens nature ſure,
                  Teares at command out of their eies to ſtraine,
                  For euery thing wherewith they are diſpleas'd,
                  Till that their harts therby are ſomewhat eas'd.
               
               
                  And ſo 
                        •
                     e let them ſigh and ſorrow ſtill,
                  And wofully with extreame griefe complaine
                  In mourning weeds till they haue cryde their fill:
                  And I to them do turne my ſtile againe,
                  And ſhew how Priam by invention
                  Did find a way without corruption,
               
               
                  To keepe the body ſtill vnburied
                  Aboue the earth, (the which will putrifie,
                  And cleane conſume to duſt when it is dead,
                  If in the aire aboue the ground it lie:
                  For if that Art do not ſurmount nature,
                  It cannot there long vncorrupt endure.)
               
               
                  Which to prevent King Priam did deviſe,
                  To haue the ſame preſeru'd from filthy ſmell,
                  And lothſomneſſe and horror to the eies,
                  To make it ſhew as liuely, freſh, and well,
                  As if that it ſtill quicke and liuing were.
                  The charge whereof he was content to beare,
               
               
                  Whatere it coſt, and ſent men vp and downe,
                  To ſearch and ſeeke with diligence and care,
                  For all the skilfulſt workemen in the towne,
                  That could by Artſuch coſtly things prepare,
                  As might effect the worke that he would haue.
                  And to that end, to them commiſſion gaue
               
               
                  Without delay to take the ſame in hand,
                  Which they perform'd & quickly brought to paſſe,
                  Within an ancient Temple that did ſtand,
                  Hard by the gate cald Timbria, and was
                  By Priam built, which he did dedicate,
                  And to his God Apollo conſecrate.
               
               
                  Wherein hard by the Altar they did frame,
                  A Chappell made of rich and coſtly ſtone,
                  And at the vpper end within the ſame,
                  Vpon a ſtage did frame a Princely throane:
                  (So high as that within it they might ſet
                  An Image of proportion huge and great.)
               
               
                  Supported by foure Pillars all of gold,
                  With Angels ſtanding on them all enchaſt
                  And graven, that moſt ſtately worke t'vphold,
                  The roofe whereof with arches overcaſt,
                  Was plated all with gold moſt ſumptuouſly,
                  Emboſſed, knob'd, & knotted curiouſly.
               
               
                  And in each knob and knot a pretious ſtone,
                  Of value great and price ineſtimable,
                  Which both by day and night ſo brightly ſhone,
                  That they did make it ſhew as delectable
                  And lightſome in the darke & ſhady night,
                  As at noon-day whē 
                     Phoebus ſhone moſt bright.
               
               
                  To mount vp to this Princely throane there was
                  Twelue goodly faire and ſtately ſteps, that were
                  Moſt curiouſly compos'd of Chriſt all glaſſe,
                  Which ſhowd ſo ſmooth, trāſparant, bright, & clere,
                  That men did them admire; & on each one
                  A pinacle there ſtood of Iaſper ſtone,
               
               
                  At either end with Rubies rich enchaſt,
                  Vpon the points moſt ſtately to behold,
                  And on the top of all this worke was plaſt
                  A huge and mighty Image made of gold
                  Like Hector, which with countnance fierce did ſtand,
                  And lookt vpon the Greeks with ſword in hand.
               
               
                  And in this throane king Priamus did place
                  The body of dead Hector, which by art
                  Was made to ſhew as liuely in the face,
                  Eies, colour, looke, and skin, and every part,
                  As when it liu'd, apparelled alſo,
                  As commonly on earth he vs'd to goe.
               
               
                  
                  For that through pipes of gold which bowed down
                  By skilfull Art, and cunning policie,
                  A precious liquor ran into his Crowne,
                  And from that place with great ſubtiltie
                  Into his vaines, and ſine
                        •••
                      did deſeend,
                  And by the vertue thereof did defend
               
               
                  And keepe his body from corruption,
                  And made his skin and colour ſhow as pure
                  And liuely without alteration▪
                  
                  As when he was a liuing creature:
                  And at his head there ſtood a voyoll full
                  Of precious balme, which ran into his ſoull,
               
               
                  And from the ſame by pipes compoſd by skill
                  Into his necke, and euery other place
                  Did penetrate, and with the ſame did fill
                  The vaines, and all the poores of his face,
                  And made it ſhow as liuely and as freſh,
                  As if't had been a quicke and liuing fleſh.
               
               
                  (The balme therein wrought ſo effectually,
                  Much like vnto a ſpirit vegitable,
                  The which without all ſence in things doth lie,
                  And yet hath power and is availeable▪
                  
                  By liuely force, and kind humiditie,
                  Life to infuſe in flower, hearb, and tree.)
               
               
                  And likewiſe did the power thereof extend
                  Into each vaine, and ſinew in his breſt,
                  Backe, armes, & hands, and downeward did diſcend
                  Through all his bones, and ioynts, and ne're did reſt
                  Till it did run into his thighs, and feet,
                  At which a voyoll full of gumme moſt ſweet,
               
               
                  And balme was ſet, which neuer would decay,
                  Nor yet impaire by no diſtemperature,
                  But ſtill increaſt and waxed euery day
                  Of greater force, and ſweeter did endure.
                  Where of the vapor vpward did aſſend,
                  And ſuch a pleaſant ſavor forth did ſend,
               
               
                  And made all round about the aire to riſe,
                  (For that it t'was moſt exquiſitely good)
                  That it did ſeeme an earth by Paradize.
                  And fore the corps foure lamps of gold there ſtood
                  Within that place continually gaue light,
                  And neuer ceaſed burning day nor night.
               
               
                  All 
                        ••
                     ld with oyle, (if it be credible)
                  The which is ſayd to be of ſuch a kind,
                  That it was ſound 
                        ••
                     be impoſſible
                  To 
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                      tempest, 
                        〈◊〉
                      or wind.
                  Not neuer 
                        〈…〉
                      in many yeares,
                  Which lampes did hang high 
                        〈…〉
                      by wiers.
               
               
                  And ſuch 
                        〈…〉
                     ,
                  That 
                        〈…〉
                      the ſame to ſ
                        •
                     ell.
                  And when this worke was brought vnto an end,
                  And euery thing was done exceeding well,
                  And pleaſd the eies of all that did it ſee,
                  They made a grate of wood of Heban tree:
               
               
                  (Which wood a
                        ••
                     rmed is will ere indure,
                  And being cut doth ſmell exceeding ſweet,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     d can by no meanes waſt, for this is ſure,
                  T▪will neuer burne by any extreame heat
                  Of fier, as it hath been tried oft.
                  
                     
                        ••
                      wa
                        •
                     er 
                        ••
                      n
                        •
                     re ſwimmeth vp alo
                        •
                     t,
               
               
                  But downe into the bottome ſtraight doth go.
                  And as ſome men thereof make mention,
                  This tree hath been long ſince eſteemed ſo
                  And heldon in ſuch reputation,
                  That in the fertile ſoyle of India
                  
                  And in the land of Ethiopia,
                  
               
               
                  They vſd to pay a tribute as tis ſound,
                  Of Ivory, fine gold, and Heban tree,
                  To th'Emperor as they thereto were bound)
                  And when King Priam ſaw the worke to bee
                  Performed in ſo braue and ſumptuous wiſe,
                  That he in heart no better could deuiſe,
               
               
                  He did ordaine a quier of Prieſts to pray
                  Continually with great deuotion,
                  Before that Princely throne both night and day
                  For Hectors 
                     
                        •
                     oule, and gaue them pentions
                  To liue vpon, and roomes wherein to lie,
                  And bound them to do't perpetually.
               
               
                  But while that they are in their orations,
                  With Hectors death my third Booke I will end.
                  And for a while will leaue the Troians
                  
                  In ſorrow great, and woe the time to ſpend.
                  And ſhow you what the Grecians meane while do,
                  If that you pleaſe to hearken therevnto.
               
            
            FINJS.
         
         
            
            THE LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR.
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. 1.
               
                  ¶ How the Grecians depriued Agamemnon of his place of Genorall of their Armie, and made Pallamides Generall in his place.
               
               
                  
                     THe worthy Champion Hector, beeing ſlaine,
                  And fierce Achilles borne vnto his tent.
                  Whereas he lay in danger great, and paine.
                  King Agamemnon for the Grecians ſent,
                  Next day betimes aſſooue as ſonne did riſe,
                  To aske of them their counſell and adviſe,
               
               
                  What would be beſt for them as then to doe,
                  Sith they by vallant Hectors death were free
                  From danger great which he had put them two,
                  And out of feare of his great crueltie.
                  And when that they were altogether met
                  Within his tent, and there in order ſet,
               
               
                  And ſilence made, he ſpake vnto them all,
                  And ſayd my Lords and Princes euery one
                  That now are heere: If you to mind will call
                  What good the Gods of late for you haue done.
                  You ought to giue them thanks with humble voice,
                  And inwardly in heart and mind reioyce,
               
               
                  To thinke on Hectors death, for he alone
                  Was th'onely prop and chiefe ſupport of Troy,
                  
                  Their whole defence, and their protection,
                  Their chiefeſt truſt, their honour, and their ioy.
                  And vnto vs confuſion and death,
                  For that while he enioyed vitall breath.
               
               
                  We neuer could his valor great withſtand,
                  Nor victory againſt our foes obtaine.
                  For when that we did firſt ſet foot on lend,
                  
                     Protheſalus by him was fiercely ſlaine.
                  And next day when in field againe we met,
                  He did vpon Patroclus fiercely ſet,
               
               
                  And with his ſword did cleaue his breſt in twaine,
                  And after kild King Menon furiouſly
                  And next by him Archilagus was ſlaine,
                  And in his wrath and extreame crueltie,
                  He ſlew the moſt renowned Prothenor,
                  
                  And then the valiant King cald Alphenor.
                  
               
               
                  
                  King Phillis alſo and Epiſtrophus,
                  
                  And Merian a Prince of great renowne.
                  And after him a King cald Zantipus,
                  
                  And in the field as he road vp and downe,
                  He flew two Kings, the one cald Dorius,
                  
                  The other had to name King Cedius.
                  
               
               
                  And after that he kild ſtrong Polibet,
                  
                  
                     L
                           ••
                        aboni
                           •
                        , Policenes, and more,
                  For in his wrath he ſlew King Phi
                           •
                        b
                           ••
                        ,
                  
                  And to the ground in ſurious wife he bore,
                  And kild the valiant King Iſidius,
                  
                  And then the noble King cald Humorus,
                  
               
               
                  For eighteene great and worthy Kings, and many
                  Braue Earles, Dukes, and Princes he hath ſlaine,
                  With thouſands more. So that not euer any
                  Likevalor to him ſhowd, nor could obtaine
                  Such victory gainſt vs, for that his hand
                  Was th'onely terror to vs in this Land.
               
               
                  But'now he's dead, to our no little ioy,
                  (The Gods be thankt therefore) and to the woe
                  And great diſtreſſe of all that are in Troy,
                  
                  As by experience time to them will ſhow.
                  Laud alſo and much honor giuen be
                  To Fortune, for her great benignitie
               
               
                  Vnto vs ſhowne in helping vs ſo well,
                  To bring that furious Champion to his end,
                  By turning of her 
                        •
                     alſe and fickle wheele,
                  And vnto vs ſuch fauor did extend.
                  That by his death while this warre doth endure,
                  All we that now are here, may liue ſecure.
               
               
                  With comfort great and eaſe of extreame care
                  And feare we had of him while that he liu'd.
                  Where contrary the Tr
                           •
                        ians all now are
                  (By death of him that onely them relieud)
                  Texpect nought els but their deſtruction,
                  And finally their townes ſubverſion.
               
               
                  For now he's gone, they cannot long endure,
                  For be aſſur'd we will them ſo much grieue,
                  (That from hence forth we may our ſelues aſſure
                  To haue our wils on them ere we them leaue.)
                  And make this ſiedge to them importable,
                  If we doe hold together firme and ſtable.
               
               
                  Their ſhip in th'end is like to proue a wracke,
                  And ready with huge billowes t'orewhelme,
                  For all their hope and comfort goeth backe▪
                  
                  And deepe deſpaire is guider of the
                        ••
                      helme.
                  And maketh them continually depend
                  On death, while we our ſtate do ſtill amend;
               
               
                  By ayd of God both on the ſea and land,
                  For now without all ambiguitie,
                  We may expect the victory at hand;
                  And boldly light with great ſecuritie
                  Againſt our foes, without all feare or dread▪
                  
                  But yet my counſell is ere we proceed
               
               
                  T'aſſaile our foes, as we intend to doe,
                  To ſtay a while and not to paſſe our bonds,
                  Till that Achilles to the fieild may goe
                  With vs, when he is healed of his wounds.
                  And then we will aſſaile them valiantly,
                  And put them to moſt great extreamitie.
               
               
                  And till we haue deſtroid them neuer ceaſe,
                  Meane time wele ſend vnto King Priamus
                  
                  A meſſenger for to entreat with him for peace
                  For two moneths ſpace, if he will graunt it vs:
                  Whereto I doe not doubt but he'le agree,
                  Sith for his good as well as ours twill bee.
               
               
                  For he thereby may libertie obtaine,
                  To celebeate the funeralles of thoſe
                  Dead Troians that within the field lie ſlaine,
                  And ſerue for food to beaſt and carrion Crowes:
                  And ſuch a ſhincke into the aire doe caſt,
                  That t'cannot chuſe but breed the plague at laſt.
               
               
                  And we the while may doe the ſame likewiſe,
                  And heale our wounds, and giue our bodies reſt.
                  And ſo when they had all agreed by good aduiſe,
                  Conſidered of his ſpeech, and found it beſt
                  For them to do't. They did thereto conſent,
                  And preſently a meſſenger was ſent
               
               
                  To Troy for truce, which graunted was full ſoone
                  By Priamus, and he returned againe
                  With ſpeed, and made to them relation▪
                  
                  What he had done while he did there remaine,
                  And for that truce, their counſell brake vp ſo,
                  And euery one vnto his tent did go.
               
               
                  And while the truce endur'd, and they lay ſtill,
                  And leiſure had to thinke on their eſtate:
                  
                     Pallamides whoſe heart began to fill
                  And ſwell with pride, diſclaine, and deadly hate▪
                  
                  Grutch in his mind that King Agamemnon,
                  
                  Becauſe he had the ſole dominion,
               
               
                  And ore the Grecian houſe was Generall,
                  And for that cauſe did envy him ſo much,
                  (And into ſuch a great conceit did fall
                  Of his owne worth,) that he began to grutch,
                  And murmured with indignation
                  At him, and in his furious paſſion▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  Did ſeeme to vſe ſuch tearmes to his diſgrace,
                  That all that heard the ſame might eaſily know
                  What he did meane, and yet he let it pas,
                  As thought he made no account thereof in ſhow.
                  Till in the end that King Agamemnon,
                  
                  Who was a Prince of great diſcretion,
               
               
                  Did heare thereof, and knowing his intent,
                  Determind with him ſelfe to moue the ſame
                  Vnto the Grecian Princes in his 
                        •
                     en
                        •
                     ,
                  And when they all together thither came,
                  And orderly were ſet. That worthy King
                  
                     Agamemnon, a Prince in euery thing
               
               
                  So cercumſpect, ſo wiſe, and prouident,
                  So temperate, demure, and vertuous,
                  So prudent, well adviſd, and patient,
                  And neuer giuen to be malicious:
                  Although he knew Pallamides intent,
                  And ſaw how much his heart to pride was bent.
               
               
                  With decent tearmes and great diſcretion,
                  (As he that could well frame and tell his mind,
                  And ſo reſtraine the ſame from paſſion
                  And haſtines, or any other kind
                  Of bad behauiour, or vnſeemelineſſe,
                  That nothing paſt but with adviſedneſſe
               
               
                  Out of his mouth, as firſt conſidered
                  Within his heart with great ſincerity,
                  And neither for affection nor for dread,
                  Would ſeeme to breake the bonds of modeſty.
                  Nor in his ſpeeches ſuperfluouſly let pas
                  One word, or ſentence that vnſeemely was.)
               
               
                  He firſt ſaluted all his company:
                  And when he had cauſd ſilence to be made,
                  In ſeemely wiſe and in great curteſie,
                  He ſpake vnto Pallamides and ſayd,
                  You need not King Pallamides ſaid he,
                  As I ſuppoſe, if you adviſed be,
               
               
                  To muſe o
                        •
                      grutch that I am Generall
                  Of our great hoaſt, if you conſidered
                  How I attaind thereto by choiſe of all
                  The Princes here, and that t'was offered
                  To me by full and free Election,
                  And not hy any compoſition
               
               
                  By me, or any for me, to procure
                  The ſame in my behalfe once giuen or made,
                  For there of in my heart I am moſt ſure,
                  No ſuch ambitious thought I euer had:
                  Nor neuer dreamt of any ſuch pretence,
                  But am moſt cleare thereof in conſcience.
               
               
                  Which neuer moued was with ſuch vaine glory,
                  As to aſpire, or any waies conteſt
                  For this eſtate, which is but tranſitory,
                  Though I muſt ſay that I haue done my beſt,
                  To ſee and looke that all things might be well,
                  And for the good of this our common wele.
               
               
                  And alſo that I had a ſpeciall care,
                  As tis my charge while I the ſame do hold,
                  Of every mans eſtate particular.
                  And euer an indifferent eye did hold
                  To all degrees of perſons high or low,
                  To help them in their need, when I did know
               
               
                  That they had need of ayd, and day and night,
                  Was alwaies moued with great carefulnes,
                  And ſpeciall heed as much as ere I might;
                  To ſee that none did fall into diſtreſſe.
                  And ſuch a iealous eye thereto I had,
                  That in my heart I was exceeding glad
               
               
                  To do the beſt I could to pleaſe each one,
                  And that no man ſhould at me take offence,
                  Nor haue in me the leaſt ſuſpition,
                  Of envy, ſloath, or any negligence
                  In my eſtate, but euer more deſir'd
                  To doe my beſt, as time and place requir'd,
               
               
                  For euery man without exception.
                  And therefore I aſſure my ſelfe full well,
                  That in the hoaſt there is not any one
                  Of high or low eſtate that I can tell,
                  That can or may accuſe me certainely
                  Of falſehood, or of partiality,
               
               
                  In his behalfe, for I haue alwaies had
                  So great a care to nouriſh vnitie
                  And friendſhip mong you all, that I was glad
                  To ſee you liue in loue and amitie.
                  So that till now I am full well aſſur'd,
                  That while I in this office haue endur'd,
               
               
                  No ſuch occaſion hath been miniſtred,
                  And all the Gods well know I neuer feard,
                  Nor cared, though you had determined
                  An other in my place to haue preferd:
                  And giuen him the ſoueraintie,
                  And let me liue at eaſe and libertie
               
               
                  In quietnes of mind, as many more
                  Great Lords, and Princes here amongſt you may,
                  That I might with my whole deſire and power,
                  Fight for our common weale both night and day.
                  And ere in this our quarrell (if ſo be
                  It pleaſe the Gods) it ſhould ſo hap to me.
               
               
                  
                  Which for my part I ſpeake and doe not faine,
                  For t'were no boot for me herein to lie.
                  And where you ſay, and thereof do complaine
                  That I was choſen without your priuitie:
                  Tis true indeed, as euery man can tell
                  You were not here, if you remember well.
               
               
                  Nor came not hither vnto Troy, well nere
                  After that we our voyage had begun,
                  And planted this our ſiedge, in two whole yeare,
                  And for to let ſo long time ouer-run,
                  To ſtay till you had come, it might perchance
                  Haue been to vs a mighty hinderance,
               
               
                  And extreame hurt, for if that we had ſtaid,
                  And laine ſo long at Athens ſtill for you,
                  (As by your ſelfe it cannot be denaid,)
                  It's like we had remained there till now.
                  And where you did eſteem't vncredible,
                  And held it for a thing impoſſible
               
               
                  For Grecians to preſume in any wiſe,
                  (Without the ayd and helpe of yours and you;)
                  To take on them ſo great an enterprize,
                  It's nothing ſo, as you ſee plainely now.
                  For they without offence (to you be't ſayd)
                  By force and power without you or your ayd,
               
               
                  Performed haue with moſt victorious hand,
                  And by their valor great, and worthines,
                  Great matters both by water and by land:
                  And where you thinke, and ſay of me no leſſe,
                  That I am proud of this my great eſtate,
                  To ſee my ſelfe ſo highly eleuate:
               
               
                  And that I ſeeme becauſe of my degree
                  Of Generall, t'extoll and magnifie
                  My ſelfe too much: It is ſo farre from mee,
                  That for to proue and ſhow the contrarie,
                  And put you cleane out of ſuſpition,
                  I will thereof make reſignation
               
               
                  Vnto you now, my ſelfe thereby t'excuſe,
                  And for that cauſe I doe aduiſe you all,
                  Againſt to morrow in the morne to chuſe,
                  Whom you will haue to be your Generall:
                  For I therein will make no more delay,
                  And ſo their counſell ended for that day.
               
               
                  And they went to their tents to reſt all night.
                  And next day in the morning ere the ſun
                  Began with radiant beames to ſhine moſt bright,
                  They met againe for the Election:
                  And when they were aſſembled all together,
                  And knew the cauſe why they did then come thither:
               
               
                  
                     Agamemnon with ſober ſmiling cheare,
                  Roſe vp vpon his feet, and to them ſpake,
                  And ſayd, my Lords that are aſſembled here,
                  I need no long diſcourſe vnto you make,
                  To ſhow how I with heart and good intent
                  Haue laboured in this my gouernment.
               
               
                  To ſee that all things might be done ſo well,
                  That they vnto your good would wholy tend,
                  And for th'aduancement of your common weale,
                  By ayd of Gods, and Fortune that did lend
                  Their grace and helping hand therein to me,
                  Whereby your ſtate as yet doth ſeeme to be
               
               
                  Maintaind in honor great, and nobleneſſe,
                  So that while you do flouriſh, and vphold
                  The ſame entire, and in great happineſſe,
                  I thinke it beſt for me that now I ſhould
                  My gouernment vnto you all reſigne,
                  While Fortune to the ſame is ſo benigne.
               
               
                  For of ſo many that here preſent are,
                  I know my ſelfe moſt inſufficient,
                  Alone to take ſo great a charge and care
                  On me, and for that cauſe tis my intent,
                  To leaue the ſame, for he may ouerwhelme
                  A ſhip, that knowes not how to guide the helme.
               
               
                  My whole deſire therefore is, that you would
                  Giue leaue to me t'reſigne my gouernment,
                  And charge which I of all this hoaſt do hold,
                  So that no man therewith be diſcontent.
                  And let vs now with one intention,
                  Without all ſtrife, and all diſſention,
               
               
                  Amongſt vs find and chuſe out ſuch a one
                  As we do like, and is moſt fit and meet
                  To gouerne vs by good diſcretion,
                  And in the place of Generall to ſet.
                  Whereto they all agreed with one conſent,
                  And as he ſayd▪ to chuſe one were content.
               
               
                  Here you may ſee, that tis a vſuall thing
                  With men to take delight in novelties,
                  And that there thoughts are alwaies wauering;
                  And led away with fooliſh fantaſies.
                  In them moſt ſure ther's no ſecuritie,
                  For all their minds are on varietie.
               
               
                  And their delights in alteration;
                  And change of ſtate, and neuer are content
                  Nor ſeldome hold in one opinion.
                  To day to loue ſome one man they are bent,
                  Next day theyle hate that man as much againe,
                  And neuer doe in conſtant mind remaine.
               
               
                  
                  For in a vaine of meere new 
                        •
                     anglenes,
                  Which at that t
                        •
                     me mou'd their affection
                  With great oreſight, and much vnthankfulnes,
                  In ſteed of valiant King Agamemnon,
                  
                  They all agreed with one conſent and voice,
                  Of King Pallamides to make their choice
               
               
                  To beare the rule and gouernment of all
                  The Grecian hoaſt, and with moſt great applauſe,
                  Gaue him the ſtate and name of Generall,
                  To rule and gouerne them by Martiall lawes.
                  Like as the worthy King Agamemnon,
                  
                  Had done before with great diſcretion.
               
               
                  Which done, they brake vp counſell for that day,
                  And euery man vnto his tent did goe.
                  But when Achilles, who then wounded, lay
                  Sore ſicke within his tent, thereof did know,
                  And heard how they all with one will and voice,
                  Of King Pallamides had made there choiſe:
               
               
                  He was much grieu'd thereat, and flatly ſayd,
                  
                     Agamemnon in his opinion,
                  Much fitter was the place ſtill to haue had
                  Then th'other, and that their Election
                  In that caſe was not good, nor commendable,
                  Nor by their Martiall law available,
               
               
                  Becauſe t'was done without conſent of all
                  The Princes in the hoaſt, he being one
                  Whom they did neither ſummon, nor yet call
                  To be with them at their Election.
                  And did eſteem't to him a great offence,
                  That they did make that choiſe in his abſence.
               
               
                  And for that cauſe he was exceeding wroth,
                  And cha
                        •
                     ed ſore, but t'was to little end,
                  For whether he therewith was leefe or loth,
                  They would no eare vnto his ſpeeches lend.
                  For no Election more the Grecians would
                  For that time make, But ſayd, it ſhould ſo hold.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  ¶ How King Priamus in perſon iſſued out of Troy with a puiſſant 
                        ••
                     aſt to reuenge Hectors death, and fought moſt valiantly againſt the Grecians.
                  
               
               
                  THe time of truce aforeſayd being out,
                  The next enſuing morrow Priamus,
                  
                  Though old in yeares, yet valorous and ſtout
                  Of heart, was in his mind deſirous,
                  Againſt the Grecians valiantly to fight,
                  T'reuenge the death of Hector if he might.
               
               
                  Which when the Troians knew, and did behold
                  Their aged Kings great courage, and his might,
                  They were exceeding glad, and ſayd they would
                  Aduenture life and lim with him to fight
                  Againſt the Greeks, and therefore euery one
                  Did arme himſelfe with reſolution:
               
               
                  That day to iſſue forth with Priamus,
                  
                  And thoſe of Troy that armor bare as then,
                  Were as my Author Dares 
                     
                        •
                     elleth vs,
                  An hundred and iuſt fiftie thouſand men,
                  Beſides all thoſe of other countries
                  That ayded him againſt his enemies.
               
               
                  And firſt into the field went Deiphobus,
                  
                  And after him his brother Paris led
                  The ſecond ward, the third King Priamus,
                  
                  Then Menon, and Aeneas followed.
                  And laſt of all Pollidamas did goe
                  The rere-ward to conduct in warlike ſhoe.
               
               
                  And that ſame day vpon the Grecians ſide,
                  With mighty troopes all in good order ſet,
                  
                     Pallamides with heart replcat with pride,
                  The Troians in the field moſt brauely met.
                  And when the Battailes ioynd on either ſide,
                  King Priam to Pallamides did 
                        •
                     ide,
               
               
                  And like a worthy Prince of great renowne,
                  Moſt valiantly vnhorſt him with his launce,
                  And cleane out of his ſadle bare him downe
                  Vnto the ground, and forward did aduance
                  Himſelfe, and road among the Grecians,
                  
                  And with his trenchant blade in both his hands,
               
               
                  So heawd, beat downe, and mightily ore-run
                  The Grecians in the field where he did ride,
                  That they for feare his puiſſant blowes did ſhun,
                  And durſt not in his furious ſight abide.
                  And them ſo faſt and cruelly did ſlay,
                  That whereſoere he road they made him way.
               
               
                  And ſhund his ſword he was ſo furious.
                  For all that day he fought ſo valiantly,
                  And ſhewd himſelfe ſo ſtrong and valorous;
                  That wonder t'was he could ſo puiſſantly,
                  And long in field againſt his foes endure,
                  Being of ſo great an age, for tis moſt ſure
               
               
                  
                  That by his valor great and puiſſant might,
                  Which he that time couragiouſly did ſhoe,
                  He put the proud and haughtie Greeks to flight.
                  His Sonne Deiphobus valiantly alſo,
                  That followed him, ſo fiercely on them ſet,
                  That he did kill and beat downe all he met.
               
               
                  King Sarpedon likewiſe that time did fall
                  Vpon the valiant King Neptolemus,
                  
                  The prowdeſt Greeke at that time mongſt them all
                  And he likewiſe with heart couragious
                  At Sarpedon did run, and with great might,
                  Out of his ſadle fiercely did him ſmight.
               
               
                  But Sarpedon with fell and wrathfull hart,
                  The which with rage and anger burned hot,
                  Did ſuddainly vpon his feet vp ſtart,
                  And with his ſword Neptolemus he ſmot
                  Into the thigh a great and cruell wound,
                  Wherewith he made him fall vpon the ground.
               
               
                  But when the King of Percia did perceiue
                  King Sarpedon ſtand fighting on his feet
                  In danger great, he did him ſtraight relieue,
                  And on the greeks ſo furiouſly did ſet,
                  That in deſpight of them by mighty force
                  He holpe him ſoone againe vnto his horſe.
               
               
                  But at that time King Menelaus came thither,
                  And Meneſtes Th'athenian Duke, who both
                  With many troopes of Grecian Knights together,
                  In furious wiſe and with exceeding wroth,
                  Vpon the King of Percia did fall,
                  And did encloſe him round amongſt them all.
               
               
                  Who fighting with them valiantly and long,
                  At laſt when he their force could not ſuſtaine,
                  They did ſo thicke and faſt vpon him throng,
                  He was by them with diſaduantage ſlaine.
                  Whoſe death ſo much the Troians did diſmay,
                  That they retird and gaue the Grecians way.
               
               
                  Till Sarpedon with bloody ſword in hand,
                  Couragiouſly did many Grecians ſlay,
                  And did their force and furie ſo withſtand,
                  That he not onely forſt the Greeks to ſtay,
                  But draue them all before him on the plaine,
                  And made the Troians win their ground againe.
               
               
                  While Priamus vpon the other ſide,
                  With all his ſonnes that bare him company,
                  Amongſt the Grecians valiantly did ride,
                  And kild, and beat them downe: but ſpecially
                  King Priamus with many a bloody wound,
                  Did kill and ſlay all he before him found.
               
               
                  So that not any Troian young or old,
                  What ſoere he was though nere ſo high and ſtrong
                  Of body and of lim, nor nere ſo bold,
                  That time did fight ſo furiouſly and long,
                  As Priamus himſelfe, for he alone
                  That day was many a Greeks deſtruction,
               
               
                  And vtter ouerthrow. For that theire
                  Wherewith he was at that time wholy led,
                  And made his heart to burne as hot as fire,
                  For cauſes two was then redoubled.
                  One for th'inveterate hatred which he bare
                  Vnto the Greeks, the other cauſe he ſware,
               
               
                  And vou'd to be reuenged if he might,
                  For Hectors death, which put him in ſuch rage,
                  That while he had the Grecians in his ſight,
                  He could his choller by no meanes aſſwage.
                  But doubling his ſtrength ſo fiercely fought,
                  That many a Greeke that day t'his death he broght,
               
               
                  And ſo continued in ſuch furious wiſe
                  To take reuenge on them, that in deſpight
                  Of all his fierce and cruell enemies,
                  By valor great he put them all to flight.
                  But they by ſlight the Troians to beguile,
                  When they had fled before them for a while,
               
               
                  Did wheel about and ſuddenly went downe
                  Into a very great and ſpacious plaine,
                  That lay betweene the Troians and the towne,
                  Intending ſome aduantage ſo to gaine
                  Vpon their foes, and to that end did ſet
                  Great Ambuſcadoes euery way to let.
               
               
                  And keepe them from going into Troy againe,
                  And certainely had don't by likelihood:
                  If Priamus had not with mighty paine,
                  And valor great moſt brauely them withſtood
                  Who at that time like Lyon fierce and ſtrong,
                  With ſword in hand did ride into the throng
               
               
                  And thickeſt of the Greeks, and valiantly
                  Brake all their rancks, & with deepe wounds & wide,
                  Hact, hewd, & beat them downe ſo puiſſantly,
                  That no man durſt his trenchant ſword abide.
                  For whoſoere he ſtroke was ſurely ſlaine,
                  Whereſoeuer he did ride throughout the plaine.
               
               
                  At which time alſo Paris did ſo faſt
                  Purſue them with his bowes and crosbowes ſhot,
                  And piercing darts, which through their armors paſt
                  And by that meanes ſuch vantage on them got,
                  That they began to giue the Troians place,
                  And Priamus did them ſo hotly chaſe,
               
               
                  
                  That being put to great extremitie,
                  By meanes of his exceeding force and might,
                  And to avoyd his extreame crueltie,
                  They did with mighty feare and great deſpight
                  Flie to their 
                        •
                     ents, glad they eſcaped ſo,
                  And they of Troy into the towne did go.
               
               
                  Becauſe as then it drew faſt toward night,
                  For Phoebus with his chariot weſt did hie
                  Vnto the Indian coaſt to giue them light.
                  And ſo the honour of the victory
                  Was wholy giuen to Priamus alone,
                  Who by his valor great the ſame had wone.
               
               
                  To eaſe his heart of that exceeding ſorrow
                  Which he therein conceiud for Hectors ſake,
                  But yet vpon the next enſuing morrow
                  He ſent vnto the Greekes a truce to make
                  With them, whereto they gladly did agree,
                  But how long time the ſame ſhould holden bee,
               
               
                  It's not expreſt. In which time they of Troy
                  
                  Great preparation made with dilligence,
                  The Percian Kings dead body to conuoy,
                  According to his ſtate with reuerence,
                  And honor great into his countrie,
                  That he in decent wiſe entombe might be:
               
               
                  And buried mongſt his progenitors
                  The Percian Kings, and ſo moſt ſolemnely
                  His Captaines and his other officers,
                  Did take the corps embalmed ſumptuouſly,
                  And layd it in a Chariot couered ore
                  With blacke, and ſo in mournfull weeds it bore
               
               
                  To Percia, conuaied with a rout
                  Of his owne worthy Knights, and many more,
                  That in moſt dolefull wiſe did ride about
                  The body, and behind, and eke before
                  The ſame did goe vnto the buriall.
                  And at that time the ſumptuous funerall
               
               
                  Of Hector was in Troy ſolemnized,
                  According to the manner in thoſe daies,
                  The which with honor great was hallowed,
                  (As Guido and his Author Dares ſaies.)
                  For ſpace of fourteene daies continually,
                  And all that while within the ſanctuary.
               
               
                  Great ſtore of lights did burne and neare went out,
                  Which cuſtome they continually did keepe
                  From yeare to yeare as it did run abo
                        •
                     t,
                  Wherein they neuer ceaſt to mourne and weepe,
                  And watcht and praied there both night and day,
                  In mourning weeds, and neuer went away
               
               
                  From thence, but on there knees continued there,
                  Before the tombes of their dead friends: and ſo
                  The Troians who great griefe in mind did beare
                  For Hectors death, in woefull wiſe did goe,
                  All clad in blacke to mourne and to lament
                  His death, till that full fourteene daies were ſpent,
               
               
                  The which they did, with great ſolemnitie,
                  While that th'aforeſaid truce continued was
                  When as the Greeks might with free libertie
                  Go into Troy, and without danger pas
                  The gates thereof, and they of Troy alſo
                  As freely might vnto the Grecians go.
               
               
                  At which time when Achilles wounds were curd,
                  And that he could well trauell vp and downe,
                  He had a great deſire while truce endur'd
                  To enter into Troy to ſee the towne,
                  And to behold the ſumptuous funerall
                  For Hector made, by all in generall
               
               
                  Within the ſame, and ſo vnarmd (without
                  Aſſurance, other then the truce then made,
                  Whereof in thoſe daies men ſtood not in doubt▪)
                  He went to Troy, and entring in nere ſtaid,
                  But to Apolloes Temple ſtraight did go,
                  Wherein as then with braue and warlike ſho,
               
               
                  According to the Pagans ancient rights,
                  The funerall was there accompliſhed
                  In preſence of great multitudes of Knights,
                  And Lords and Ladies faire, who then did ſhead
                  Great ſtore of teares with much affection,
                  And on their knees fell downe before the throne
               
               
                  Whereas the corps of that moſt worthy Knight
                  Vnburied ſtood vpright vpon his feet,
                  And ſeemd as freſh and faire vnto the ſight,
                  (By vertue of the precious gums moſt ſweet,
                  And balme) the which his fleſh did ſo reuiue,
                  That he did ſhew as he had been aliue.
               
               
                  And at this feaſt and great ſolemnitie,
                  Queene Hecuba with Policene and other
                  Faire Dames, and Princes of great dignitie
                  Sat weeping, and in company together
                  Apparelled in ſad and mournfull blacke,
                  Such lamentation at that time did make
               
               
                  For Hectors death as nere the like was ſeene.
                  And yet for all the ſorrow that they made,
                  The faire and goodly Lady Pollicene,
                  
                  No part of her great beautie changed had,
                  But ſtill a crimſon red and white moſt cleare
                  Within her face and countnance did appeare
               
               
                  
                  For all the teares that ſhe as then did ſhead,
                  Which trickled downe her cheeks like poa
                        •
                     les fine:
                  Her haire that then hung round about her head
                  In careles wi
                        •
                     e, like golden wier did ſhine,
                  And ſhow'd like Phebus gliſtring beams moſt bright
                  When he doth caſt on vs his radiant light.
               
               
                  Which with her fingers ſmall 
                        ••
                     e rent and tare,
                  Whoſe beautie when Achilles did behold,
                  He did eſteeme the ſame to be ſo rare,
                  That he did muſe how God and Nature could
                  Deuiſe and make ſo faire 
                        ••
                      creature,
                  For comlines of face, and feature:
               
               
                  So Angell-like ſhe did to him appeare,
                  That he to looke on her could not indure,
                  For with her chriſtall eies moſt faire and cleare,
                  She ſtroake him then into the heart ſo ſure,
                  That for her loue which was his whole deſire,
                  He burnt within as hot as any fire.
               
               
                  And ſodainely againe with griefe he ſhooke
                  Like one that is in feare, yet euermore
                  Vpon her he did caſt a glancing looke,
                  For Cupids dart had pierced him ſo ſore
                  Into the breſt, and giuen him ſuch a wound,
                  That it was likely neuer to be ſound.
               
               
                  And as he durſt he lookt her in the face,
                  And ſtill approacht vnto her with his eie,
                  For whom (if that in her he found no grace,)
                  He made account aſſuredly to die.
                  For he was fallen and caught in ſuch a ſnare,
                  That of his health he was in great deſpaire,
               
               
                  And in his heart he was perplexed ſo,
                  That care of all things els he did reiect,
                  For knowing not what he were beſt to do,
                  He did himſelfe and all his ſtate neglect,
                  To ſet his thought on her, and in this wiſe
                  He fed himſelfe with ſight of her faire eyes.
               
               
                  Till Phoebus with his char
                        •••
                      did decline,
                  And to the Weſterne coaſts began to draw,
                  And on their hemiſphere no more did ſhine.
                  When as he caſt his eies about and ſaw
                  Queene Hecuba with Pollicene, and mo,
                  Out of the Temple to the Pallace go.
               
               
                  On whom he neuer ceaſt to haue a ſight,
                  As ſhe did pas along, till that ſhe went
                  Out of the gate, and he no longer might
                  With her faire eies giue to his heart content.
                  And then no longer in the towne be ſtaid,
                  But going to his tent himſelfe he layd
               
               
                  Vpon his bed with ſad and heauy cheare,
                  Whereas he lay ſtill thinking on his loue,
                  Whoſe beauty in his ſight did ſo appeare,
                  And as he thought ſtill more and more did moue
                  His heart the ſame with great deſire to craue,
                  That he no reſt no
                        •
                      any eaſe could haue.
               
               
                  For loue of whom ſuch burning heat he felt,
                  And extreame paine, which did torment him ſo,
                  That with the ſame he thought his heart wold melt,
                  And in that ſort he tumbled too and fro.
                  And like a man halfe dead and fore diſmaid,
                  Vnto himſelfe he ſpake, and thus he ſayd,
               
               
                  Alas quoth he, that fortune ſo vnkind
                  Should be to me, to make me feele and know
                  Such griefe that I no end thereof can find,
                  For that it doth my heart ſo ouerflow,
                  As I ſuppoſe that ſince the world began,
                  There nere was found a more diſtreſſed man.
               
               
                  (For I that whilome was of ſo great might,
                  Renowned throughout the world of high and low,
                  And honoured and feared of euery wight,
                  For no man euer heard no
                        •
                      yet did know,
                  Of any Knight that was more valorous
                  Then I, nor euer more victorious.
               
               
                  For neither Hector that moſt valiant Knight,
                  That was my Lady Pollicenes deare brother,
                  Although he was of moſt exceeding might,
                  And hardy therewithall, nor any other,
                  The power had when he on me did ſet,
                  The leaſt aduantage vpon me to get.
               
               
                  Nor in the field my courage once could daunt,
                  Or make me yeild, of fearefully to flie,
                  Whereof I may vnto my ſelfe now vaunt.)
                  Becauſe I am aſſurd i
                        •
                      is no lie.
                  Now, now alas, a mayd of tender age,
                  Hath ſuddenly ſet me in ſuch a rage:
               
               
                  And with the ſtreames of her faire Chriſtall eies,
                  Hath pierſt my woefull heart and euery vaine,
                  That I cannot by any meanes deuiſe
                  How to relieue my ſelfe, or eaſe my paine.
                  On whom ſhall I for counſell now re
                        ••
                     e?
                  Or who can giue me any remedy,
               
               
                  To eaſe and cure my griefe and heauines?
                  For this is ſure, that hope for me ther's none,
                  If death end not my woe and great diſtreſſe,
                  But her good will, and that from me is gone:
                  For neither prayer, wealth, nor comlines,
                  Strength, power, courage, nor yet Noblenes,
               
               
                  
                  Birth, honor, blood, nor great affinitie,
                  Can ought availe to helpe me now in need,
                  To moue her ſtony heart (to pittie me)
                  For whom my heart with inward griefe doth bleed.
                  What fury hath poſſeſt my reſtles braine,
                  That it ſhould ſo gainſt nature me conſtaine,
               
               
                  And make me proue ſo much vnfortunate▪
                  
                  As for to ſeeke mine owne confuſion,
                  To loue and like of her that doth me hate?
                  But truth to ſay, when as I thinke thereon,
                  No marvell tis that ſhe doth me deſpiſe,
                  Sith I am come to Troy in warlike wiſe▪
                  
               
               
                  To kill, and to deſtroy her kindred,
                  And all her friends by fierce and cruell warre,
                  Wherein the blood I haue already ſhead
                  Of Hector her deare brother, who both farre
                  And neare was known to be the valiantſt knight
                  That euer liu'd, for valor, and for might.
               
               
                  Alas for woe, now may I quake for feare,
                  And of my life diſpaire both day and night,
                  For with what face can I fore her appeare,
                  Or be ſo bold to come into her ſight?
                  That haue offended her in ſuch a faſhion,
                  As that in truth I merit no remiſſion
               
               
                  Nor pardon at her hands, but certainely
                  Muſt yeild my ſelfe the ſentence to abide
                  Of cruell death, to end my miſerie,
                  Which doth encloſe me round on euery ſide.
                  And ſo with many ſobs and ſighes moſt deepe,
                  He did begin ſo bitterly to weepe,
               
               
                  And made ſuch woefull lamentation,
                  That pittie it was for any man to heare,
                  Or ſee the griefe and cruell paſſion,
                  Which he with great extremitie did beare
                  Within his mind, and outwardly expreſt,
                  And ſo he lay, and by no meanes could reſt
               
               
                  But tumbled on his bed till night came on,
                  Wherein as little comfort he receau'd
                  As in the day, for reſt he could get none,
                  So that of all reliefe, and ioy bereau'd,
                  He did continue ſtill in griefe, and ſorrow,
                  Till that the ſtarre cald Lucifer next morrow
               
               
                  Began in th'eaſt (ere Phoebus did ariſe,)
                  To ſhew itſelfe, and brightly to appeare.
                  When drencht in teares, with wet and heauy eies
                  For want of reſt, and quaking with the feare▪
                  
                  And griefe he had conceiued in his hart:
                  He held his peace, and preſently vp ſtart,
               
               
                  And calling one to him he truſted well,
                  And whom he knew deſird and wiſht his good▪
                  
                  He did from point to point vnto him tell
                  What he had done, and how with him it ſtood,
                  And ſent him to the towne of Troy to ſpeake
                  With Hecuba, and vnto her to breake
               
               
                  The matter, and by his diſcretion
                  To find a meanes if poſſible it were,
                  To giue to him ſome ſatisfaction,
                  In that which he ſ
                        •
                     mpatiently did beare.
                  Who preſently vnto the Queene did go,
                  And handled the matter with her ſo,
               
               
                  And did ſo wiſely play his part therein,
                  Before that he did vtter their pretence,
                  That he had licence graunted of the Queene
                  To tell his mind to her without offence:
                  With promiſe whatſoever that it were,
                  She would vouchſafe the ſame of him to heare.
               
               
                  To whom he did his meſſage ſo explaine,
                  That no man euer heard a better p
                        ••
                     d,
                  For from his mouth there paſt no word in vaine,
                  No
                        •
                      ſentence, but was ſpoken to ſome end:
                  And at the laſt he brought it finely out,
                  With many circumſtances fetcht about,
               
               
                  And told her, that the full concluſion,
                  And purpoſe of his meſſage verily,
                  Was with a ſtedfaſt reſolution,
                  To ſet a perfect peace and vnitie
                  Betweene the Greeks and Troians that ſame day,
                  Whereto he ſayd, he knew no better way,
               
               
                  (If he might be beleeu'd) for both their eaſe,
                  (And t'end the mortall ſtrife and bitter rage
                  Of warre, and all diſſention to appeaſe)
                  Then ſpeedily to make a marriage
                  Betweene Achilles and faire Polixene
                  
                  Her daughter, if that ſo t'wold pleaſe the Queene
               
               
                  Whereby he ſayd, all enmitie would ceaſe▪
                  
                  If ſhe could by her good diſcretion,
                  Find meanes King Priams anger to appeaſe,
                  And by her wit and mediation,
                  Get him to be well pleaſed, and content
                  With willing mind to giue his free conſent
               
               
                  That Polixene his daughter ſhould be made
                  
                     Achilles wife, vpon condition,
                  As he at firſt vnto her then had ſayd,
                  That all the Greeks ſhould preſently be gon
                  And leaue that bloody warre, aſſoone as euer
                  They two by marriage ſhould be linckt together.
               
               
                  
                  Whoſe meſſage when the Queene did vnderſtand,
                  And know th'effect of that he did require.
                  She did a while as one amazed ſtand,
                  And ere ſhe anſwere made to his deſire:
                  She ſighed ſore, and then with heauy cheare,
                  She ſpake and ſayd vnto the meſſenger:
               
               
                  My friend, concerning that thou doſt requeſt,
                  I cannot of my ſelfe thereto conſent,
                  Yet for my part I will be alwaies preſt,
                  And with my heart am willing and content
                  Thy maiſters will therein to ſatisfie,
                  
                     
                        •
                      And ſo I would thou ſhouldſt him certifie.
               
               
                  But firſt I must King Priams pleaſure know,
                  If he will graunt to that which thou doſt moue,
                  And I muſt likewiſe vnto Paris ſhow
                  Th'effect and meaning of thy maiſter loue.
                  To ſee if he will giue conſent thereto,
                  The which as ſoone as ere I can, ile doe.
               
               
                  Whereof I will an anſwere make to thee
                  Within three daies, and then ile ſatisfie
                  Thy Lord, if he will ſend againe to me.
                  Meane time thou mai'ſt returne with ſafety,
                  And ſatisfie thy maiſter in ſome part,
                  Of his deſire to eaſe his troubled hart.
               
               
                  And therewithall the meſſenger went backe
                  Vnto Achilles tent, with countnance glad,
                  To whom he did in ſuch wiſe anſwere make
                  Concerning that which he declared had
                  Vnto Queene Hecuba, that he thereby
                  Was ſomewhat eaſd, and looked cheerefully.
               
               
                  In hope that by that meanes he ſhould in th'end
                  Attaine to that which he ſo much deſird,
                  And ſo well pleaſ'd in mind, he did attend
                  The three daies time by Hecuba requird:
                  To anſwere vnto that he did propound.
                  Who preſently when ſhe King Priam found
               
               
                  At leiſure all alone, to him did moue
                  The matter touching that Achilles had
                  Made knowne to her, and that he was in loue
                  With Pollicene, and for her ſake had made
                  A profer to procure a finall peace
                  Betweene the Greeks and Troians, and to cea
                        ••
                     
                  
               
               
                  All warre and mortall ſtrife, ſo that he would
                  Giue her to him. The which when he perceiud,
                  He did the Queene with countnance 
                        •
                     ad behold
                  And as it were a man of ſpeech bereau'd,
                  Sat mute, and woundred to himſelfe wherefore
                  
                     Achilles ſhould loue Pollicene ſo ſore,
               
               
                  That he would make that offer for her ſake.
                  And at the laſt he ſigh'd and ſayd, alas
                  What griefe is this, that I no peace can make?
                  For can Achilles wrong ſo lightly pas
                  Out of my head, when as I thinke how he
                  Slew my ſon Hector by his crueltie?
               
               
                  Who while he liu'd, as't cannot be deni'd,
                  Of me and mine was th'onely ſafety,
                  And ſpeciall ſtay, ſupporter, and the guide
                  Of all that vnder my command now be.
                  And to ſpeake truth, he was as t'were the light
                  Of both mine eies, for by his puiffant might
               
               
                  He did protect and ſaue me from the rage
                  And cruell furie of my Grecian foes,
                  And was the ſtaffe of all my age.
                  But now alas (which filles me full of woes.)
                  
                     Achilles hath him ſlaine, which from my mind
                  Shall neuer pas, for who in heart can find
               
               
                  To be alied vnto his mortall foe?
                  And hard it were to bend my heart, to loue
                  Him that is cauſe of all my griefe, and woe,
                  And by that meanes the Grecians proud doth moue
                  T'inſult on me, now fortune doth m
                        •
                      croſſe
                  And frownes on me, and onely for the loſſe
               
               
                  Of Hector my deare ſon that was my ſtay.
                  Yet gainſt my heart (which doth for anger riue)
                  Sith that as now there is no other way,
                  I will, (though loath) againſt my nature ſtriue▪
                  
                  For truth to ſay, it grieueth me full ſore,
                  Yet to eſchew great dangers many more,
               
               
                  Which likely are to happen vnto me,
                  And to preſerue my ſonnes that yet do liue,
                  I am content and therevnto agree,
                  My youngeſt daughter Pollicene to giue
                  Vnto Achilles, on condition he
                  Shall hold his promiſe he hath made, to be
               
               
                  The meanes to make a truce and finall peace
                  Betweene the Greeks and Troians, and that wee
                  Our mortall warre from hence-forth ſhall ſurceaſe▪
                  
                  But leaſt that he ſhould meane ſome treacherie,
                  I will that he ſhall firſt performe the offer,
                  Which he ſo freely of himſelfe doth proffer:
               
               
                  Without all fraud or falſe colluſion.
                  Which Paris alſo did conſent vnto:
                  (The rather for that no exception
                  What they with faire Queene Helena would do,
                  Was made therein, whereby he did ſuppoſe
                  That Menelans ſhould her for euer loſe.
               
               
                  
                  And neuer haue her into Greece againe,
                  And therefore he did freely without ſtrife
                  Agree thereto, that he might ſo obtaine
                  His will to haue Queene Helen for his wife,
                  Without all doubt or contrariety,
                  For in her was his whole felicitie.
               
               
                  And when the three daies foreſaid ended were,
                  
                     Achilles vnto Hecuba ſtraight ſent
                  His meſſenger againe, of her t'inquire
                  What Priam ſayd, concerning his intent.
                  To whom ſhe told at large what had been don,
                  And how that ſhe the King thereto had won.
               
               
                  And Paris likewiſe to conſent thereto,
                  As alſo that her ſelfe well willing was
                  With them t'agree, and graunt it ſhould be ſo,
                  If he could find the meanes to bring't to pas,
                  That peace betweene them, (as he ſaid he would)
                  Perpetually for euermore ſhould hold.
               
               
                  The which ſhe ſayd he muſt firſt bring about,
                  And ſure and perfect make in each condition:
                  And then he ſhould not need to ſtand in dout
                  Of ſpeeding in his loue, with expedition.
                  Wherewith Achilles meſſenger content,
                  Out of the towne vnto his maiſter went.
               
               
                  To whom he told the anſwere that was made
                  By Hecuba to him, wherewith well pleaſ'd,
                  And ſeeing that no other way he had
                  But peace whereby he might of griefe be eaſ'd:
                  He purpoſed to bring the ſame t'effect,
                  And did no time, nor any meanes neglect,
               
               
                  To find a way t'impart the ſame vnto
                  The Greeks, the which while he did goe about,
                  Suppoſing certainely that they would do
                  The ſame for him, and yet thereof did doubt.
                  At laſt into a deſperate mind he fell,
                  And did perſwade himſelfe in heart full well,
               
               
                  That he the power had to worke his will,
                  And that without all cauſe of doubt or feare,
                  The Grecians would moſt redily fulfill
                  His mind, and graunt to that he ſhould require,
                  And in that ſort he did himſelfe perſwade
                  All ſhould fall out, (as he deviſed had,)
               
               
                  According to his will and fantaſie,
                  As louers vſe to doe. Who whatſoere
                  They take in hand thinke, it muſt certainely
                  Fall out, though nere ſ'impoſſible it were.
                  So much their minds with folly are poſſeſt.
                  And ſo Achilles did ſet downe his reſt,
               
               
                  And was in hope his mind to ſatisfie,
                  Suppoſing that for his great worthines,
                  His mighty ſtrength, and his actiuitie,
                  His high renowne, and paſſing valiantnes.
                  (Whereof with no ſmall pride great boaſt 
                        ••
                     e made,
                  And in himſelfe therefore much glory had.)
               
               
                  The Grecians would be in diſpaire and feare
                  For euer winning Troy, if he withheld
                  His helping hand, and that by him they were
                  Forſaken, when they went into the field:
                  And would at laſt, and onely for his ſake
                  The ſiedge of Troy and all their warre forſake.
               
               
                  Vnleſſe that he among them ſtill did ſtay
                  To helpe them till that they had made an end.
                  And for that cauſe he made no more delay,
                  But did procure Pallamides to ſend
                  For all the Lords vnto his tent to know,
                  What vnto them he did intend to ſhow.
               
               
                  And when that they aſſembled were together,
                  
                     Achilles ſpake, and ſayd as you ſhall heare:
                  My Lords, ſith it hath pleaſ'd you to come hither,
                  And that at my requeſt you ſummond were;
                  Let me deſire you without offence
                  To tell my mind before this audience:
               
               
                  I know ſayd he, that for the prouidence,
                  The wiſedome, and the great diſcretion,
                  The valor, mighty force, and ſapience,
                  The honour, wealth, and excellent renowne.
                  Wherewith you are endowed, your worthy name
                  From Eaſt to Weſt is ſpread by trompe of Fame:
               
               
                  But neretheleſſe that theſe things doe belong
                  Of right to you, yet this I muſt you tell,
                  That though that you be nere ſo huge and ſtrong,
                  (As truth to ſay you doe in force excell
                  All Nations, yet if you doe conſider
                  The very cauſe wherfore you are come hither,
               
               
                  You muſt confeſſe and ſo it will be found,
                  That you in this your quarrell had no right,
                  Nor reaſon wherevpon you might it ground;
                  For ſure, it is moſt euident to ſight
                  Of euery man that beares an vpright hart,
                  That you herein did play a fooliſh part,
               
               
                  Without forecaſting with adviſednes
                  What cauſe you had to make this mortall warre:
                  For when as we by fooliſh haſtines
                  Did come out of our countries ſo farre,
                  Into the Troian land our liues to venter
                  Againſt our foes; The quarrell we did enter,
               
               
                  
                  At that ſame time into, as euerie one
                  Of vs well knows, was for the iniurie,
                  And to revenge the priuate cauſe alone
                  Of Menelaus; for who can it denie,
                  That th'raviſhing of Helena his wife,
                  Was th'onely cauſe of all the warre and ſtrife
               
               
                  Betweene vs and the Troyans which as now
                  We do maintaine with great hoſtilie,
                  And for the which we all haue made a vow
                  To ſacke the towne of Troy, with ieopardie
                  Of life and goods, and for that cauſe haue left
                  Our Countries and our Cities, and bereft
               
               
                  Our children and our wiues of all delight
                  And ioy, & make them mourne in great diſtreſſe,
                  While we remaine here in the field to fight
                  Againſt our foes, in griefe and heauineſſe,
                  Aſſailed and enclos'd on every ſide
                  With enemies, and nought but death abide.
               
               
                  For ſith the time that this our warre began,
                  (Which onely of meere pride we do maintaine)
                  It hath vs coſt the life of many a man
                  Of great and meane account, that now are ſlaine,
                  Who might haue liu'd at home in wealth & ioy,
                  If they had not come hither vnto Troy,
                  
               
               
                  To looſe their liues by their owne wilfulneſſe,
                  Here in this place with great extreamitie.
                  And for my part I muſt in truth confeſſe,
                  That by the Troyans force and crueltie,
                  So much bloud I haue loſt ſince we began
                  This warre, that it hath made me pale & wan.
               
               
                  And not long ſince I had a wound againe,
                  Which Hector with a Dart did giue to me
                  Vpon the thigh, that day that he was ſlaine,
                  Which put me to ſo great extremitie,
                  That it hath made me long in bed to lie
                  To heal't, and yet I doubt thereof to die,
               
               
                  Ift be not quickly cur'd; for tis yet greene,
                  And very ſore, and puts me to great paine,
                  With many other wounds that yet are ſeene
                  Vpon me ſtill, which make me oft complaine:
                  And truth to ſay, (if it conſidered were)
                  We ſhould not buy Queene Helena ſo deare.
               
               
                  As for her t'hazard life and lim, and all
                  Our honors, and our worldly goods and fame,
                  The which vnto vs quickly may befall,
                  If we haue not regard vnto the ſame,
                  And in our minds conſider not how much,
                  This doubtfull warre for Helen doth vs tuch.
               
               
                  For if that we our reckning rightly make,
                  And call to mind what alteration
                  Hath falne ſince we the ſame did vndertake,
                  And what deſtruction of our warlike Nation
                  Hath for her ſake been made, & yet much more
                  Diſhonor we are like to haue therefore,
               
               
                  And to incurre; for as it doth appeare,
                  Although we do ſtill hold this ſiege ſo long,
                  In fine, if that we do continue heare,
                  It will to vs becauſe of greater wrong:
                  And more and more redownd vnto our ſhame,
                  If order be not taken for the ſame.
               
               
                  Which may be, if that we on either ſide,
                  Together would agree with one conſent,
                  That Helena, in Troy ſhall ſtill abide,
                  And that King Menelaus would be content
                  To take another wife, and let her go,
                  That to him doth her ſelfe vnfaithfull ſhoe.
               
               
                  Which he by law and without blame mya take,
                  And be diuorſt from Helena, ſith she
                  So ſhameleſly in Greece did him forſake
                  For Paris, and commit adulterie
                  Thereby, with foule diſgrace vnto her name,
                  And truth to ſay, to her perpetuall ſhame.
               
               
                  For many great examples extant be,
                  And through the world are to be heard & ſeene,
                  How that for filthie foule adulterie,
                  Great Princes from their wiues divorſt haue beene.
                  And therefore it can be no preiudice,
                  If for that moſt accurſed ſinfull vice:
               
               
                  King Menelaus doth iuſtlie her forſake,
                  And of another wife doth make his choiſe,
                  The which of him much more account will make.
                  Whereto if that you all will giue your voice,
                  T'will for our good, be cauſe this warre to end,
                  Wherein our liues and blood we vainly ſpend.
               
               
                  And likely is, if it continue long,
                  To coſt much more both of our liues and bloud,
                  For Troy is ſo invincible and ſtrong,
                  And furniſhed with worthy Knights and good,
                  And in ſo great a number, that though wee
                  Should ſtay here ſtill the vttermoſt to ſee,
               
               
                  We neuer ſhould be able to attaine
                  To that we do pretend and ſo deſire.
                  And therefore ſith tis ſo, it were in vaine
                  For vs to ſtay, and proudly to aſpire
                  With wilfulnes to that we cannot get:
                  But rather let's our minds on reaſon ſet,
               
               
                  
                  And thinke more of our profit then our glorie,
                  And wiſely in good time withdraw our power,
                  While honor graceth vs with victorie,
                  Sith we cannot make fortune (if ſhe lower)
                  To ſtay her wheele which is ſo variable,
                  And therefore ere ſhe waxeth mutable,
               
               
                  And doth begin on vs to change her cheere:
                  Let vs leaue off the warre and liue in peace,
                  And go our way, and ſtay no longer heere.
                  For better tis from bloodie warre to ceaſe,
                  While we may doo't, & ſo our honor ſaue,
                  For of the warre th'advantage yet we haue.
               
               
                  For all men know that by our valor great,
                  Our principalleſt foe Prince Hector's ſlaine,
                  My counſell therefore is we ſhould not let
                  Th'advantage goe, while we do ſtill retaine
                  Our honor, and ere fortune gins to lower,
                  And ſeekes to croſſe vs by her mighty power,
               
               
                  With one conſent and ſole opinion
                  Of heart and mind, we ſhould no more ſoiourne
                  Hold at this ſiege, but let vs euery one,
                  With ſpeed into our natiue Land returne:
                  For if that we our quarrell ſtill maintaine,
                  Which now ſo long hath held, I tell you plaine,
               
               
                  I am in doubt great detriment will be
                  Our ſhares at laſt. Wherefore I thinke it beſt
                  Our follie to reiect, and ere we ſee
                  Worſe happen vnto vs, ſet vp our reſt
                  To leaue the warre, while as tis knowne to all,
                  We are in fame and honor peregall
               
               
                  With them of Troy, and them ſurpaſſe if we
                  Our ſtate he hold in his aſſention,
                  And while that it is in the highſt degree.
                  But leaſt ſome men ſhould make obiection,
                  And ſay, that we cannot our honor ſaue,
                  If we returne to Greece, and cannot haue
               
               
                  Our wills to beare faire Helen backe againe
                  Into our natiue land, for whome ſo many
                  Of vs haue in this cruell warre been ſlaine:
                  I ſay, if that amongſt vs there be any,
                  That thinks and is perſwaded in his mind
                  If we go hence, and leaue her here behind,
               
               
                  It will to our moſt great diſhonour bee:
                  I ſay, that it to vs can be no ſhame,
                  (If that into the depth there of we ſee)
                  Sith we haue one for honor and for fame
                  As great as ſhe, and by her birth as good,
                  For ſhe deſcends of high and royall blood.
               
               
                  As all you know the Princeſſe Exion
                  
                  King Priams ſiſter, who againſt their will,
                  In Greece is holden by King Thelamon,
                  
                  As Helen is by Paris gainſt our will:
                  And therefore ſith it now can be no other,
                  My counſell is to ſet th'one gainſt the other.
               
               
                  And all the wrath and envie that doth reſt,
                  Betweene vs and the Troyans to appeaſe,
                  The which I thinke and know would be the beſt
                  For vs and them, and for our good and eaſe:
                  Which otherwiſe (ſaid he) will never end,
                  If you vnto my counſell will not bend.
               
               
                  To whome with extreame wrath King Menelaus,
                  
                  Who with Achilles words did ſeeme moſt tucht,
                  And Thoas alſo, and Duke Meneſtes,
                  
                  Who likewiſe at his inſolency grucht:
                  All with one voyce vnto Achilles ſpake,
                  And into mightie choller gainſt him brake.
               
               
                  And with them all the reſt impatientlie,
                  The Court perturb'd, and did begin to fall
                  Into great words much vnadviſedlie
                  Againſt Achilles, and at laſt ſaid all,
                  They would not to his counſell then conſent,
                  Nor to make peace in any wiſe were bent.
               
               
                  Wherewith Achilles full of wrath and ire,
                  The which did ſeeme to burne within his heart,
                  To ſee they would not grant to his deſire,
                  Did ſodenlie vpon his feet vp ſtart:
                  And in a furie great did go away,
                  And ſaid he would no longer mongſt them ſtay:
               
               
                  Nor aid nor ſuccor them in any wiſe,
                  (What need ſo euer they of him ſhould haue)
                  To fight againſt their Troyan enemies,
                  And to his men a ſpeciall charge he gaue,
                  To ſee they did not aid the Grecians
                  
                  In any wiſe againſt the Troyans,
                  
               
               
                  When ſo euer they to battaile forth ſhould go.
                  In which his reſolution firmely ſtanding,
                  He did a while himſelfe ſo conſtant ſhow,
                  That while gainſt them in that ſort he was banding,
                  The Grecians many overthrows receau'd,
                  And thouſands of them were of life bereau'd.
               
               
                  And while this controverſie thus remaind,
                  The Grecian hoſt great want of victuals had,
                  Whereby as then much hunger they ſuſtaind,
                  For which mongſt them great muttring there was
                  For at that time they were ſo much diſtreſt (made:
                  For want of food, that they were ſore oppreſt.
               
               
                  
                  Till that their Generall Palamedes,
                  
                  To remedie the ſame a Court did call
                  Of all the Princes in the hoſt, t'appeaſe
                  Their murmuring, and by conſent of all
                  That then aſſembled were, did order take,
                  A fleet of ſhips in readineſſe to make.
               
               
                  Whereof the King Agamemnon ſhould be
                  Commander, and with ſpeed with them ſhould ſaile
                  To Meſſa for ſome victuals, if that he
                  In that ſame Iſle of ſo much could prevaile,
                  As need requird for their neceſſitie,
                  To put them out of that extremitie.
               
               
                  Who being there arriu'd, ſuch favor had
                  Of Thelaphus the King that therein raign'd,
                  That he not onlie ready was and glad
                  To aid the Greeks therein, but ſtraight obtaind
                  Commiſſion preſently, and with all ſpeed
                  Of him to take as much as they ſhould need
               
               
                  Of euery kind of victuals in that jſle,
                  Commanding all his ſubiects to fulfill
                  The ſame with ſpeed, and ſo in little while,
                  According to his pleaſure and his will,
                  They made ſo great prouiſion of each thing
                  That ſeru'd for food, that preſently the King
               
               
                  Did fraught and fill their ſhips with mighty ſtore
                  Of victuals, that ſo much as then they had,
                  That in them they could put nor lade no more.
                  Whereof King Agamemnon being glad,
                  He tooke his leaue of Thelaphus, and ſo
                  With all his ſhips full laden forth did go,
               
               
                  And put to ſea, and ſo with wind and weather,
                  Soone did arriue before the Troyan coaſt,
                  Where ſafely landing all his ſhips together,
                  He preſently relieu'd the Grecian hoaſt
                  With victuals, who thereof had then great need,
                  And thankt him that he broght it with ſuch ſpeed.
               
               
                  The Grecian hoſt relieu'd as you haue heard,
                  
                     Palamedes went to their ſhips to ſee,
                  If they had any need to be repair'd,
                  And what ſo euer requiſite to bee
                  Beſtowd on them was found, he did with care
                  Cauſe to be done. And likewiſe did not ſpare,
               
               
                  Of every thing what ſo ever it did coſt,
                  To ſee prouiſion made, and to ſupply
                  All things that needfull were within the hoſt,
                  The which he did performe moſt carefully,
                  While time of truce endur'd & was out-run,
                  And that their bloudy warre againe begun,
               
               
                  Which many on each ſide moſt dearely bought.
                  Whereof to write at large is my pretence,
                  And ſhew how they together fiercely ſought,
                  Each th'other to deſtroy in their defence,
                  And ſtill continued in their deadly hate,
                  The which they held between the without date.
               
               
                  Vnto the great deſtruction and decay
                  Of many valiant knights while it did laſt,
                  For as they were accuſtomed next day
                  Enſuing, after that the truce was paſt:
                  In warlike wiſe well arm'd with ſpeare & ſhield,
                  They entered againe into the field.
               
               
                  Where with their banners wavering in great pride,
                  And drums and trumpets ſounding fearefully,
                  They met together brauely on each ſide,
                  And at the firſt encounter valiantly,
                  
                     Deiphobus like a Lyon furious,
                  Met with a Grecian King cald Creſeus.
                  
               
               
                  And with his ſtrong & puiſſant ſpeare in reſt,
                  Ran at him with ſo great and mighty force,
                  That he did pierce him deepe into the breſt,
                  Wherewith ſtarke dead he fell off from his horſe:
                  Whoſe death ſo much the Greeks did terrifie,
                  That ſore amaz'd they did begin to flie
               
               
                  Vnto their tents, as faſt as ere they could
                  To ſaue themſelues, with mighty feare and dread,
                  The which when as the Troyans did behold,
                  They chaſed them till that King Diomede,
                  
                  And with him alſo King Palamodes,
                  
                  With moſt deſpightfull hearts, and merciles,
               
               
                  With twenty thouſand knights accompanied,
                  Vpon the Troyans ſodainly did ſet,
                  And where the Grecians then before them fled,
                  They did ſo fiercely kill, caſt downe, and beat
                  The Troyans, that their furious 
                        〈◊〉
                      vs to ſhun,
                  Then made them fore the Greeks as faſt to run.
               
               
                  And at that time came Thelamon Aiax in,
                  Conducting of another Grecian band,
                  At whoſe approach ſuch ſlaughter did begin,
                  On Troyans ſide by his victorious hand:
                  That many of them then were fiercely kild,
                  And all the plaine with Troyans blood was fild.
               
               
                  And as he thus in furious wiſe did ſet
                  On them, and like a Lyon fierce for pray
                  Did range about the field, by chance he met
                  The worthy knight Sicilian in his way,
                  (A baſtard Son of 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     ) whome he
                  Aſſailed with ſuch extreame crueltie,
               
               
                  
                  That with his ſword he cut his arme in twaine,
                  And he therewith fell dead within the field.
                  Whome when Deiphobus ſaw ſo fiercely ſlaine
                  By Thelamon, and his dead corps beheld:
                  With ſpeare in hand he ſmote ſo great a ſtroke
                  At Thelmon, that his Launce on him he broke.
               
               
                  And yet did hit him with ſo great a might,
                  That with the trunchion which did whole remaine,
                  He did him cleane out of his ſadle ſmight,
                  And laid him all along vpon the plaine:
                  Which ſtroke when King Pallamides beheld,
                  And ſaw how he vnto the ground was feld,
               
               
                  He was therewith ſo vexed at the heart,
                  That to revenge King Thelamon he ſware
                  On Deiphobus, and ere he thence did part,
                  With mighty ſpeare which in his hand he bare,
                  He ran and ſmote Deiphobus ſuch a ſtroke,
                  That therewithall he pierſt his breſt, & broke
               
               
                  The ſpeare within the ſame, and therein left
                  The trunchion and the head ſtill ſticking faſt,
                  Wherewith he was of vitall breath bereft,
                  But ere the ſame out of his body paſt,
                  Which long within his breaſt could not abide,
                  It was his brother Paris chance to ride
               
               
                  That way, where he lay in a manner dead,
                  Whome when he did behold in ſuch a caſe,
                  He was therewith ſo much aſtoniſhed,
                  That he did looke with pale and deadly face:
                  And for him grieu'd and wept moſt bitterly,
                  And bad his knights conuay him ſpeedily
               
               
                  Out of the field and preaſe wherein he lay,
                  Aſide into a place to take the aire,
                  Who preſently did beare him thence away
                  Vpon a ſhield, with eaſie pace and faire:
                  And with great griefe & ſorrow laid him downe
                  Hard by the wall, cloſe vnderneath the towne.
               
               
                  Where when he had a little while ſtill laine,
                  With heauie cheare he lifted vp his eies,
                  And being in extreamity of paine,
                  Vnto his brother Paris ſoftlie cries:
                  And ſaid, good brother let me one thing craue
                  Of thee, that thou wilt pittie on me haue,
               
               
                  And kindly, and for lone and brother hood,
                  Remember what to thee I now ſhall ſay,
                  Sith that thou canſt do mono other good,
                  Becauſe I muſt depart from thee away:
                  Thou ſeeſt what woefull caſe I here lie in,
                  For Atropos will now no longer ſpin
               
               
                  My thread of life, nor favor to me ſhoe.
                  Good brother let me craue ſo much of thee,
                  Before that I out of the world hence goe,
                  That by thy meanes I may revenged bee,
                  Of him that hath bereau'd me of my breath,
                  And in this ſort hath giuen me my death.
               
               
                  That I may be aſſur'd before I die
                  That he is ſlaine, and firſt gone downe to hell,
                  And in that ſoule in
                        •
                     ernall lake doth lie
                  With P
                           •••
                        to, there eternally to dwell,
                  Amongſt the damned ſoules in griefe & woe,
                  The which whē my poore dying hart ſhal kno
                        •
                     ,
               
               
                  I ſhall depart contentedlie and glad
                  Out of this world, and will eſteem't a bliſſe
                  To me, that he his death before me had,
                  And that with me thereof he did not miſſe:
                  Wherein I pray thee do me not denie,
                  And then pull out this ſpeare and let me die.
               
               
                  Which his deſire t'accompliſh Paris went,
                  With ſpeed into the field (in mightie griefe
                  Sore weeping) to revenge with full intent
                  His brother, who meane time without reliefe
                  Lay languiſhing and drawing on to death,
                  Expecting everie hower to yeeld his breath.
               
               
                  And ſeeking vp and downe, he came whereas
                  
                     Pallamides was fighting hand to hand
                  With Sarpedon, (a valiant King, that was
                  Come vnto Troy to Priam with a band
                  Of valiant Knights to aid him gainſt his foes)
                  And while that they together fiercely cloſe,
               
               
                  And each the other furiouſly did ſmight,
                  (For Sarpedon was valorous and ſtrong,
                  And ſhewd himſelfe to be a puiſſant knight)
                  
                     Pallamides (when they had 
                        •
                     ought ſo long,
                  That both of them were wearie) puiſſantly
                  Stroke Sarpedon a blow vpon the thigh,
               
               
                  And cut it cleane a ſunder, wherewithall,
                  King Sarpedon not able to endure▪
                  
                  Vpon his horſe, dead on the ground did fall,
                  Whoſe death vnto the Troyans did procure
                  Such feare, that they were forced to retire,
                  For that with heart repleat with wrath & me,
               
               
                  
                     Pallamides ſlew them ſo furiouſly,
                  That they durſt not abide before his face.
                  Whoſe cruelty when Paris did eſpie,
                  And thought vpon his brothers woefull caſe:
                  He bent his bow that was exceeding ſtrong,
                  And therein put an arrow ſharpe and long,
               
               
                  
                  Which had the head ſo ſtrongly poyſoned,
                  (That who ſo ere he chanſt therewith to ſmight,
                  Was ſure to die) and then he followed
                  
                     Pallamides, and with exceeding might
                  Shot at him, and did giue him ſuch awound
                  Into the throat, that he fell to the ground,
               
               
                  And died forthwith. Whoſe death mou'd ſuch a cry
                  And feare amongſt the Greeks, that (with great griefe
                  Complaining for his death moſt pittiouſly
                  Becauſe he was their Generall and chiefe
                  Of all the hoaſt, and their eſpicall ſtay)
                  Like vnto ſheepe that without ſheapheard ſtray
               
               
                  Amaſed ſore for want of one to guide
                  And gouerne them, they reſolutely bent
                  Themſelues to flie, and ſpeedily did ride
                  Each man to ſaue himſelfe within his tent.
                  Which when the Troyans ſaw, with mighty pace
                  They followed, and ſo hotely did them chaſe,
               
               
                  And ſlay and beat them downe ſo cruelly
                  (Receauing none to mercy nor to grace)
                  That all the plaine with dead Greeks full did lie,
                  And ſtill continued fiercely in the chaſe:
                  Vntill the Grecks to ſhun their cruelty,
                  Conſtrained were of meere neceſſity,
               
               
                  To turne againe to fight, and to defend
                  Themſelues a while, but t'would them not availe,
                  Becauſe the Troyans did ſo faſt deſcend,
                  And did them in ſuch furious wiſe aſſaile:
                  That what reſiſtance s'ever they then made,
                  They were ſo beaten downe and ſo diſmaid,
               
               
                  That they could not againſt them make defence,
                  But were conſtraind to flie away in haſt,
                  The Troyans did with ſo great violence,
                  Beat downe, purſue, and follow them ſo faſt
                  Along the plaine, and not contented ſo,
                  In furious wiſe vnto their tents did go.
               
               
                  And therein fiercely kild and beat them downe,
                  And all their gold and treaſure that they found,
                  They tooke and carried it into the towne,
                  And overthrew their tents vnto the ground▪
                  
                  And after that fierce Troyelus did ride
                  With Paris downe vnto the water ſide:
               
               
                  Who as they went ſlew all that with them met,
                  Or ſcattering here and there they could eſpie,
                  And there the Grecians ſhips on fire ſet,
                  The flame whereof aſcended vp ſo hie
                  Into the aire, that they that were in Troy
                  
                  Might ſee't, for which they made no little ioy.
               
               
                  And at that time had burnt them all, if then
                  King Thelamon Aiax had not ſpeedilie
                  Run to the ſhips with many thouſand men,
                  To ſtay their furious courſe, and valiantly
                  Withſtood them like a braue and worthy knight.
                  And then began a new and cruell fight,
               
               
                  Betweene the Greeks and Troyans in ſuch wiſe,
                  That many valiant knights as then were ſlaine,
                  And yeelded vp their ghoſts with wofull cries,
                  And all the field about, and all the plaine
                  Was fild with dead and maimed men that lay,
                  All 
                        •
                     ack
                        •
                      and hewd on euery ſide the way.
               
               
                  The which ſo ſore and cruelly did bleed,
                  That all the graſſe and ground was dyed red (ſhead,
                  With blood which they out of their wounds did
                  And ſtill the cruell fight continued
                  Amongſt them, to decide their deadly hate,
                  Which they with blows betwixt thē did debate.
               
               
                  And like to Bores and Tygars fell did fare,
                  Each tearing and ſore mangling others fleſh,
                  And to beat downe their enmies did not ſpare,
                  As thicke as men do corne when they do threſh.
                  At which time worthy Thelamon did fight
                  So valiantly, and ſhewd ſuch paſſing might,
               
               
                  The Grecians by his proweſſe to deliuer
                  From Troyans hands, that no man could do more,
                  And by maine force ſo furiouſly did ſeuer
                  Their troops, that all before him downe he bore:
                  And ſhewd himſelfe ſo valorous and ſtout,
                  That had't not beene for him without all doubt,
               
               
                  Their ſhips had all been ſpoiled vtterly
                  By Paris and yong Troyelus, who there
                  So fiercely fought, and did ſo furiouſly
                  Aſlaile them & aſſault them, that there were
                  Full fifty ſhips cleane burned and deſtroyd,
                  Before the Greeks could any way avoyd
               
               
                  Their furious force, or Thelmon Aiax came,
                  To reſcue all the reſt that did remaine.
                  And yet although by force he did the ſame,
                  There were ſo many Greeks at that time ſlaine:
                  That Troyans had the honor of that fight,
                  And onlie by the valor and the might
               
               
                  Of Troyelus, who for his part did ſlay
                  So many Greeks, that they compelled were
                  To make retreat, and faſt to run away
                  Out of the field in mighty dread and feare:
                  For't was no boot for them to ſtay, when as
                  They ſaw they were brought vnto ſuch a paſſe.
               
               
                  
                  Amongſt the which Prince Heber Sonne vnto
                  The King of mighty Thracian land, was one
                  Who moou'd with indignation therevnto,
                  (And wounded ſo that hope of life was none
                  In him as then, for in his breſt their ſtacke
                  The trunchion of a mightie ſpeare that brake
               
               
                  Within the ſame) went to Achilles tent,
                  Where he had laine, and came not out that day,
                  (For loue of Pollicene) for his intent
                  Was not to aid the Grecians any way,
                  Becauſe they would not grant to his deſire,
                  And him reproacht (with extreme wrath & ire)
               
               
                  Of faintneſſe, and of verie cowardiſe,
                  That he that day to his no little ſhame,
                  Had not come forth, nor would in any wiſe
                  Giue aid vnto the Greeks, whereby his fame
                  (He ſaid) would befor euer blemiſhed,
                  Eſpecially when he was certified,
               
               
                  Into what miſchiefe and confuſion
                  They were reduſt, and at the verie brinke
                  And mouth of extreame deſolation,
                  And he thereat did ſeeme as't were to winke:
                  And nere made ſhew for them at all to grieue,
                  Nor would of knighthood them therin relieue.
               
               
                  And while he thus vnto Achilles ſpake,
                  And him ſo ſharpely did reproue therefore,
                  They did out of his breſt the trunchion take,
                  Which (as I ſay) broken in the ſame he bore:
                  And therewithall he turned vp the white
                  Of both his eies, and in Achilles ſight
               
               
                  Fell downe and died. At which time ſodenlie,
                  One of his Knights into his tent did come,
                  Of whome he did enquire earneſtly
                  What that day of the Grecians was become,
                  And how the caſe at that time with them ſtood.
                  Who anſwered him with ſad and angry mood,
               
               
                  And ſaid, in ſooth my Lord vnhappilie,
                  For Greeks, alas, haue had the worſt in fight,
                  And by the Troyans haue moſt cruelly,
                  And to their ſhame been put vnto the flight:
                  And ſuch a number ſlaine and ſpoild this day,
                  That few or none of them could ſcape away,
               
               
                  Vnmaymed, or without ſome deadlie wound,
                  The Troyans vs ſo cruelly purſu'd,
                  Who as I thinke (if truth thereof were found)
                  Were in the field ſo great a multitude
                  This day, that I am of opinion,
                  That they left not a man within the towne
               
               
                  That able was to fight with ſpeare or ſhield,
                  Or any other weapon what ſo ere,
                  But he came forth with them into the field,
                  Gainſt vs, ſo great a multitude they were:
                  So that't was hard for vs to take in hand,
                  Againſt ſo huge a company to ſtand.
               
               
                  But now my Lord (ſaid he) it waxeth night,
                  And they will ſhortly to the towne go backe,
                  For they are faint and wearied with the fight▪
                  
                  Wherefore if that your armor you will take,
                  And valiantly go out and them aſſaile,
                  While they are in that caſe, you could not faile:
               
               
                  To your perpetuall honor and your fame,
                  But win a great and noble victorie
                  On them, and make the Grecians by the ſame,
                  For evermore ore them triumphantlie
                  To raigne, and while the world doth ſtill endure,
                  To Troyans euerlaſting ſhame procure.
               
               
                  But to his words Achilles tooke no heed,
                  Nor yet of Hebers bodie ſeemd to haue
                  The leaſt reſpect, though't lay before him dead,
                  Nor in a manner leaue vnto them gaue
                  To ſpeake their minds, for't was to him allone,
                  Whats'ere they ſaid, for counſell he wold none.
               
               
                  But like a man that's deafe and dumbe he ſtood,
                  And made as though he did not heare at all,
                  And neuer ſeemd in countenance nor mood,
                  In any paſſion for the ſame to fall:
                  For in one eare no ſooner entred't was,
                  But out againe at th'other it did paſſe.
               
               
                  Herein a man may ſee a louers ſtate,
                  That wholly therevnto addicts his mind,
                  Who rather then he'le prooue vnfortunate,
                  And in his loue deſireth ioy to find:
                  All honor, worſhip, manhood, valiantnes,
                  Strength, reputation, might, and hardines:
               
               
                  Encreaſe of vertue, fame, and victorie,
                  Knighthood, renowne, and every other bliſſe,
                  Glorie in armes, and all activitie
                  He will forſake, and count them none of his:
                  And as vaine toyes will lay them all aſide,
                  When he in Cupids bands himſelfe hath ti'd.
               
               
                  Such power Cupid hath on him to ſeaze,
                  When once his heart within his ſnares is cought,
                  That he is loath to anger or diſpleaſe
                  In word or deed, in countenance or thought,
                  Her whome he doth eſteeme his Lady deare,
                  For with a looke of her faire eies and cleare,
               
               
                  
                  She onlie tis can daunt his pride of heart,
                  For Venus with her flattring tong can bind
                  His ſences, thoughts, and euery other part
                  So ſtrictly, that nought elſe in his mind
                  But his ſweet loue, and ſo doth make him lie
                  In Cupids bands, reſtraind from libertie.
               
               
                  Which was the onlie cauſe without all doubt,
                  Why all that day Achilles was not ſeene
                  Abroad, nor t'aide the Grecians would go out
                  Into the field, for he fear'd Pollicene;
                  
                  Leaſt ſhe ſhould be offended▪ if he went
                  Into the field, and gainſt the Troyans bent
               
               
                  His force, and ſo ſhould ſeeme her enemie,
                  Whome he eſteemd his deare and ſpeciall friend.
                  And while he lay in this extreamitie,
                  And with conceits of her the time did ſpend;
                  The Grecians fought againſt them of the towne,
                  Till Phoebus with his Chariot went downe:
               
               
                  At which time all the Troyans did begin,
                  (Becauſe they wanted light) to go their way
                  With ſpeed to Troy, but ere they entred in,
                  Yong Troyelus and Paris made them ſtay:
                  While they tooke vp Deiphobus (whom they found
                  Complaining ſore of his moſt deadly wound.)
               
               
                  And when they ſaw him in that pittious caſe,
                  They could not chooſe but weepe & ſore lament,
                  And with ſalt teares bedew'd their eies and face,
                  And were ſo fild with griefe and diſcontent
                  Within their hearts, and did ſuch ſorrow make,
                  As if they would haue died for his ſake.
               
               
                  And while that they in this ſort by him ſtood,
                  He waxt ſo weake that he began to die,
                  For he had loſt ſuch quantity of blood,
                  That t'ſaue his life there was no remedy:
                  Yet while his valiant brethren did lament,
                  Becauſe they ſaw his vitall breath was ſpent,
               
               
                  He lifted vp his eies, and when he heard
                  That Paris King Pallamides had ſlaine,
                  He ſeem'd therewith to be a little cheard,
                  And to releaſe the ſore and deadly paine,
                  He bad them draw his ſpeare out of his wound,
                  Which done, he fell down dead vpon the ground▪
                  
               
               
                  Whoſe body ſtraight they bare in mournfull wiſe
                  Into the towne with great ſolemnity:
                  I need not ſhew what ſorrow and what cries
                  For him was made, with much extreamity,
                  By all the men and women in the towne,
                  (As alſo for the death of Sarpedowne,)
               
               
                  And ſpecially by old King Priamus,
                  
                  Queene Hecuba, his ſiſters Pollicene,
                  
                  
                     Caſſandra, and his brother Helenus,
                  
                  With other of his worthy bretheren:
                  This ſhall ſuffice that vnto you I tell,
                  That't was moſt great as you may iudge full well.
               
               
                  And to be briefe, for him and Sarpedon,
                  
                  King Priamus in haſt two toombs did make
                  In ſumptuous wiſe, of polliſht Marble ſtone,
                  And when that they were finiſht, for their ſake
                  He made a great and coſtly funerall,
                  Whereat the people all in generall
               
               
                  Were preſent, & did mourne & make great mone,
                  According to their old and ancient right.
                  And while that this within the towne was done,
                  The Grecians with all ſpeed and haſt they 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  Did make a tombe for their moſt worthy 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  
                     Pallamides, and at his burying
               
               
                  Did vſe ſuch ancient cuſtomes as they had
                  Amongſt them, and their ſorrow to expreſſe,
                  Great griefe and extreame dolor for him made,
                  And in that ſort brought him with heauineſſe,
                  In royall wiſe vnto his ſepulture,
                  And then becauſe they might not long endure
               
               
                  Without a Prince to be their gouernor,
                  By full and free election of them all,
                  They made King Agamemnon (who before
                  Had held that place and rul'd them) Generall▪
                  
                  And chiefe Commander of their hoaſt againe,
                  In ſtead of King Pallamides then ſlaine.
               
               
                  Which done, on either ſide without delay
                  The Troyans ſtrongly arm'd did iſſue out
                  Of Troy, and went into the field next day
                  T'aſſaile the Greeks, who without feare or doubt,
                  In warlike wiſe, and face to face them met.
                  But Troyelus on them ſo fiercely ſet,
               
               
                  That by his valor great and mighty force,
                  The Greeks durſt not abide before his face,
                  For he ſo many of them did vnhorſe,
                  And did begin ſo ho
                        •
                     ely them to chaſe:
                  That where ſo ere he road the field about,
                  They fled from him, in mighty feare & doubt.
               
               
                  And with him were the Knights that he then led,
                  Yong, luſty, and well arm'd with ſpeare & ſhield,
                  Who ſo much Grecian bloud that day did ſhed▪
                  
                  That all the ground ſhowd red within the field,
                  And ſtreames of blood ran downe along the plaine.
                  At which time there did fall ſo great a raine,
               
               
                  
                  And huge a miſt that men could hardly ſee,
                  But moſt of all vpon the Grecians ſide,
                  By means whereof, and with th'extremitie
                  And ſmart of wounds which they did then abide:
                  And through the valiant prowe
                        ••
                     e and the might
                  Of Troyelus, the ſtrong and hardie Knight,
               
               
                  They were conſtraind to ſhun his crueltie,
                  And to avoyd the ſtorme which then did riſe,
                  To ſaue their liues, in mightie feare to flie,
                  And to giue place vnto their enemies,
                  Ran to their tents, ſome ſuccor there to find,
                  The Troyans them purſuing faſt behind
               
               
                  In cruell wiſe, and with exceeding pace.
                  But for becauſe the ſtorme did ſtill encreaſe,
                  At that time they no longer held the chaſe,
                  But both from it and fighting did ſurceaſe,
                  And entred into Troy; and there did ſtay
                  Till morning, when the Larke did ſing next day.
               
               
                  That Troyelus betimes did iſſue out,
                  Determining the Greeks againe t'aſſaile,
                  Where in the field as he did ride about
                  Among his foes, he did ſo much preuaile
                  Gainſt them, that who ſo euer he did ſmight
                  With his ſtrōg ſword, was maim'd or kild ou
                        •
                      right.
               
               
                  And in that furious manner ſtill did hold▪
                  
                  His enemies in chaſe and beat them downe,
                  All that day with couragious heart and bold,
                  And brought them vnto great confuſion:
                  So long till that the Sun withdrew his light,
                  And euening when it waxed toward night,
               
               
                  That he returnd to Troy victoriouſly,
                  And ſeven daies enſuing without reſt,
                  He did aſſaile the Greeks ſo cruelly,
                  And in ſuch furious manner them oppreſt:
                  That they could not his puiſſant force ſuſtaine,
                  But forced were to flie out of the plaine,
               
               
                  T'avoyd the ſtrong and mighty blows which he
                  Amongſt them dealt, for where ſo ere he paſt,
                  He put them to ſo great extreamitie,
                  That they ſhrunke backe and were in heart abaſht,
                  To ſee the field all dy'd and coloured red
                  With bloud of Greeks that on the plaine lay dead.
               
               
                  And were that day oppreſſed in ſuch wiſe,
                  That next day after they did all agree,
                  Betimes aſſoone as ere the Sun did riſe,
                  To fend a meſſenger to Troy, to ſee
                  If Priamus vnto a truce would yeeld
                  For two months ſpace, wherwith king Priam held
               
               
                  A counſell of his Lords to that intent.
                  And by conſent of them he did agree
                  Vnto the Greeks deſire, and was content
                  That peace for two months time ſhould holden be
                  Which done, the Greeks out of the towne ſtraight (went,
                  And comming vnto 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      tent,
               
               
                  Declared vnto him what was decreed
                  By Priamus concerning his deſire.
                  And after that their Generall with ſpeed,
                  Sent meſſengers to pray and to require
                  
                     Achilles, (who was obſtinately be
                        •
                     t,
                  And reſolutely held in his intent:
               
               
                  Not to relieue nor aid the Grecians
                  
                  In any wiſe what need ſo ere they had,
                  Againſt their mortall foes the Troyans,
                  
                  According to the vow he then had made)
                  To mollifie his anger, and t'agree,
                  With them t'aſſaile their Troyan enemie
               
               
                  As he had done before, the which to doe
                  
                     Uliſſes, Diomede, and Neſtor were
                  Appointed to perſwade him therevnto,
                  That they might not ſuch loſſe & damage beare
                  As daily they endur'd, and ſpecially
                  Becauſe he did to them his aid deny,
               
               
                  And would not with them in the field appeare.
                  Whome when Achilles ſaw he did receaue
                  And welcome them with ioy full heart and cheare.
                  And when they had of him deſired leaue
                  To ſpeake their minds according to their charge:
                  
                     Uliſſes their Commiſſion to diſcharge,
               
               
                  An eloquent diſcourſe vnto him made,
                  And following his firſt inſtruction,
                  In this ſort did begin him to perſwade:
                  And ſaid, my Lord Achilles whoſe renowne,
                  Exceeding might, and glory paſſing great,
                  For memory perpetually is ſet
               
               
                  Within the Booke and regiſter of fame:
                  And who (the truth to ſay) doth certainlie
                  At this time well deſerue to beare the name
                  Of all that vnderneath the chriſt all skie
                  Do liue and breath, for knighthood to excell.
                  Be not diſpleas'd (I pray you) that I tell
               
               
                  My mind to you, nor be it none offence
                  At all vnto your honor, that I ſay,
                  For this is ſure, it is my full pretence,
                  To tell the truth as neere as ere I may:
                  As well your Lordſhip ſhall perceiue and ſee,
                  If you but marke what ſhall be ſaid by me.
               
               
                  
                  You know full well if you to mind will call,
                  The chiefeſt cauſe and reaſon, why that we
                  With all the Grecian Princes (which excell
                  For puiſſant ſtrength and power) that now be
                  Aſſembled here, whereof your ſelfe was one
                  Of thoſe that firſt did make the motion,)
               
               
                  Was by a full conſent and will t'invade,
                  Beſige, and to deſtroie the puiſſant towne
                  Of Troy, and when that we performed had
                  Our wills therein, to raiſe and caſt it downe
                  Vnto the ground, to our e'relaſting fame.
                  But now (my Lord) you varrie from the ſame,
               
               
                  And ſo denlie haue altered your mind,
                  And to that end do vtterlie denie
                  To aid vs in our warre, the which we find
                  To be exceeding ſtrange, eſpeciallie
                  When you ſhould thinke vpon the mightie wrong
                  Done vnto vs in Greece, and that not long
               
               
                  Nor many yeares agoe by Troyans,
                  
                  That ſent a mightie force out of their towne,
                  And therewith ſlew and kild the Grecians,
                  
                  And entring into Cithera, beat downe
                  Our Caſtles and our houſes, and did beare
                  Our treaſure thence, and not contented were
               
               
                  With all that ſpoile, but to our great deſpight,
                  Did raviſh faire Queene Helena, and made
                  Her go with them, and hold her ſtill by might,
                  And would not once confeſſe the wrong they had
                  Then done, and now ſtill vnto vs procure,
                  But in the ſame do obſtinate endure.
               
               
                  And ſince our being here in ſiege, haue wrought
                  So much and ſo great hurt and iniurie
                  To vs, by burning of our ſhips, and brought
                  So many Greeks vnto their ends, that we
                  Cannot but muſe at your great careleſnes,
                  That will not now (when they as we confeſſe,
               
               
                  By your exceeding might and valor great,
                  Are brought vnto moſt hard extreamitie,
                  S
                        •
                     th you haue Hector ſlaine, in whome they ſet
                  Their ſpeciall truſt and chiefe ſecuritie:
                  And he who onlie did their towne ſuſtaine.
                  And ſith Deiphobus likewiſe now is ſlaine,
               
               
                  And they by likelihood continuallie,
                  And day by day to fall into deſpaire,
                  Now fortune on them caſts a lowring eie,
                  And vnto vs doth ſhew a countnance faire:
                  Even now I ſay, when you are ſo renownd,
                  And that your praiſe by trump of fame doth ſound
               
               
                  Through euerie Land and Nation far & neare.)
                  Take time while it doth ſerue t'extoll your praiſe,
                  And by dame Fortunes aid which doth you beare
                  So great good will to worke by all aſſaies,
                  To bring your long deſired wiſh t'effect.
                  For't were great wrong in you ſo to neglect
               
               
                  Dame Fortune, when to you ſhe is ſo kind,
                  And obſtinately to refuſe her aid,
                  When you do her ſo friendly to you find,
                  And ſo extols your fame (as I haue ſaid)
                  That ſhe puts victorie into your hand,
                  And vnexpectedly your foes withſtand,
               
               
                  So that you need no helpe of her to craue.
                  Why then ſhould you ſo wilfullie let fall
                  The noble fame which at this time you haue,
                  And ſuffer that men ſhould't in queſtion call,
                  When as it is now in the highſt degree?
                  Me thinks you ſhould much better thereto ſee,
               
               
                  And haue a greater care the ſame to keepe.
                  For euerie knight that is of valiant mind
                  Would grieue thereat, & with great ſighs & deepe,
                  Lament to ſee you proue ſo much vnkind
                  Vnto your ſelfe, as to abaſe your ſtate,
                  When fame doth it ſo highlie eleuate.
               
               
                  Wherefore we you deſire heartilie,
                  To haue remorſe of conſcience in your mind,
                  And that you would vnto vs not denie
                  Your aid, but let vs ſo much favor find
                  At your hands, to helpe vs in our need,
                  T'effect the thing which we haue all decreed,
               
               
                  To bring to paſſe ere we leaue off the ſame.
                  That your renowne may ſtill be magnified
                  Throughout the world, to your perpetuall fame,
                  And ſtill encreaſe and be reedified:
                  And that the trivmph of our victorie,
                  May evermore be had in memorie,
               
               
                  And ſo recorded that forgetfulneſſe,
                  May not your fame & valor greatt deface,
                  Nor power haue by malice to ſuppreſſe
                  The ſame, which now doth ſhine in euerie place,
                  Without ecclipſe, as we muſt needs confeſſe,
                  Which to preſerue you ſeeme with careleſneſſe.
               
               
                  Not to reſpect, and to obſcure the light
                  Of your renowne, which euer was ſo cleare,
                  And through the world did ſhine exceeding bright,
                  In field to fight with vs you do forbeare.
                  Remember how the Grecians haue been ſlaine
                  Before your tent, and alſo in the plaine
               
               
                  
                  In cruell wiſe, and euery place throughout
                  The field, and you no pittie on them take.
                  Why ſhould you then refuſe, and be ſo ſtout
                  Without a cauſe them whollie to forſake?
                  Who vntill now haue been their Champion,
                  Their chiefeſt helpe, and their protection.
               
               
                  And for their ſakes haue oſten ſhedyour blood
                  Againſt their foes, when they with thē haue fought,
                  And by your aid not onely them withſtood,
                  But their confuſion valiantlie 
                        •
                     aue wrought,
                  And mightilie their enemies did aſſaile.
                  Without whoſe aid they may not long prevaile
               
               
                  Againſt their foes, no more may any one
                  Of vs, how ſtout and ſtrong ſo ere we bee,
                  For tis you onlie that can do't alone,
                  If that you will vouchſafe with vs t'agree
                  To fight againſt the Troyans, and thereto
                  Lend vs your aid as you were woont to do:
               
               
                  And as we doubt not but you'le grant the ſame,
                  To ſuccour vs in our neceſſity,
                  N
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      for your owne perpetuall fame,
                  But to redeeme vs from extreamitie:
                  And to that end we come to you as now,
                  To craue of you your mind herein to ſhow.
               
               
                  Whereto Achilles preſentlie began
                  (Aſſoone as ere Uliſſes ended had
                  His tale) to ſpeake, with viſage pale and wan
                  For ang
                        ••
                     , and in this ſort anſwere made:
                  
                     Uliſſes, if ſo be our meaning were
                  As you to me at this time do declare,
               
               
                  Of purpoſe, and with one entire conſent,
                  The famous towne of Troy to overthrow,
                  And vtterlie to ſpoile't, and that we bent
                  Our minds thereto, and thereby meant to ſhow
                  Our power and might, I muſt you plainly tell,
                  That we of truth therein haue not done well,
               
               
                  To put cur ſelues by indiſcretion,
                  So careleſly without adviſednes,
                  Into ſo dangerous an action,
                  To hazard the eſtate and happines,
                  With liues and goods of all the Chivalry
                  Of Greece, that put the ſame in ieopardy,
               
               
                  For little cauſe or none, the truth to tell.
                  For hath 
                        •
                     ot many a worthie King and Knight,
                  (Who both in fame and honor did excell)
                  Conſum'd his wealth and loſt his life in fight
                  Here in this ſiege, that might haue liu'd in peace
                  And honor ſtill, if he had ſtaid in Greace?
                  
               
               
                  For hath not King Pallamides been ſlaine
                  But now of late, whoſe life was of more worth,
                  Then all the cauſe for which we here remaine
                  And hold this dangerous ſiege, to tell the troth?
                  And many other Knights and Princes great,
                  That on both ſides are here together met,
               
               
                  To ſhew their puiſſant valor and their might,
                  And to attaine to honor and to fame,
                  Haue loſt their liues vnhappily in fight,
                  And many more are like to do the ſame,
                  If that long time this cruell warre doth laſt▪
                  
                  For euery day the number leſneth faſt,
               
               
                  Both on the Greeks and Troyans ſide likewiſe.
                  So that, if this moſt cruell rage and mood,
                  Continue long, and in ſuch furious wiſe,
                  If that it be not otherwiſe withſtood:
                  It's likely that it will ſuch hauocke make
                  Of Princely bloud, that clownes will vndertake
               
               
                  To rule and gouerne here vpon the earth,
                  And of the ſame haue ſole dominion,
                  And ſuch as are of no degree nor birth,
                  Will Lords become when Princes there are none:
                  For is not Hector that moſt valiant Knight,
                  That was the onlie mirror and the light
               
               
                  Of Chivalrie, vnfortunatelie ſlaine
                  In this ſame warre, and ſo may I likewiſe
                  Perchance be kild, that neuer ſhall attaine
                  To Hectors worth, while light is in mine e
                        •
                     es:
                  For there's no way deaths furious dart to ſhun,
                  If we vpon the point thereof will run,
               
               
                  And ſeeke it of our ſelues while we are here.
                  And therefore ſuch a motion now to make,
                  Concerning this our warre, as you require,
                  Is but in vaine, for I do meane to take
                  Another courſe, and in this bloudy ſtrife,
                  No more to ſtand in hazard of my life.
               
               
                  For I had rather to impaire my name,
                  Then wilfully to die or to be ſlaine,
                  Thereby to be eternized by fame,
                  For honor after death is but a vaine
                  And needleſſe thing, and ſoone is ſet aſide:
                  For though that fame be ſpred both far & wide,
               
               
                  Obliuion and forgetfulnes may ſoone
                  Impaire't by tract of times, & length of daies,
                  And make thereof a wrong concluſion:
                  For that the fame of Knighthood, and the praiſe
                  Of honor, wiſedome, and of worthines,
                  Of freedome, bounty, and of gentlenes,
               
               
                  
                  Of vertue, and of euery other grace
                  Wherewith a man is in this world endowd,
                  Forgetfulneſſe can darken and deface,
                  And in oblivions mantle doth them ſhrowd:
                  And with a falſe report maliciouſly,
                  Doth crop the Palm
                        •
                      of worthy Chivalrie.
               
               
                  And therefore for my part I do intend
                  Such folly now to leaue, and henceforth liue
                  In peace, and all mine actions thereto bend:
                  And for that cauſe this counſell to you giue,
                  To make a peace with Troyans if you may,
                  And therein do no longer time delay,
               
               
                  Before that further miſchiefe doth ariſe,
                  And cruell death ſhould chance to be your ſhare.
                  And therefore good my Lords if you be wiſe,
                  Of this my counſell ſee you take ſome care:
                  This is (ſaid he) my purpoſe and intent,
                  Which you may ſhow to him that hath you ſent.
               
               
                  With which his reſolute concluſion,
                  
                     Uliſſes, Diomede, and Neſtor went
                  Vnto their Generall Agamemnon,
                  
                  And vnto him declared the intent
                  And anſwere of Achilles which he made
                  To them, as I before vnto you ſaid.
               
               
                  And there vpon he preſently did call
                  The Princes of the Greeks vnto his tent,
                  And when they were aſſembled, to them all
                  Did ſhow whereto Achilles mind was bent:
                  And that he was deſirous of a peace
                  With them of Troy, that all their warre might ceaſe.
               
               
                  Refuſing flatlie t'enter in the field
                  With them againſt the Troyans any more,
                  And for that cauſe a counſell with them held,
                  To know of them what will thereto they bore:
                  And what therein they did intend to do,
                  Sith that the caſe with them as then ſtood ſo.
               
               
                  Whereto the firſt of them that did reply,
                  Was Menelaus, who with an angry mood
                  Began to chafe, and flatlie did denie
                  To make a peace, and therein boldlie ſtood,
                  And ſaid, that it was never his intent,
                  By any meanes thereto to giue conſent,
               
               
                  Sith that the towne of Troy was in ſuch need,
                  And at the brinke of their deſtruction,
                  Now Hector and Deiphobus both were dead,
                  That whilome were their ſole protection:
                  So that they might all comfort cleane reiect,
                  And nothing elſe but cruell death expect.
               
               
                  And therefore flatlie ſaid without all feare,
                  Though that Achilles will vs helpe no more.
                  The burthen of our enterpriſe to beare,
                  We need not any whit to doubt therefore,
                  But that without him we ſhall overthrow
                  Our enmies by our force, as well I know.
               
               
                  Whereto Uliſſes ſpeedilie repli'd,
                  And Neſtor, both of one opinion,
                  And gainſt his falſe aſſertion iuſtifi'd,
                  That touching peace whereof the motion
                  As then was made, it was no maruaile why,
                  King Menelaus did it ſo much denie.
               
               
                  And to the ſame by no meanes would giue eare.
                  Sith that he was the ground of all their warre,
                  And that he and Queene Helena both were
                  The cauſe that made the Greeks to come ſo farre
                  Out of their natiue Countrie, there to loſe
                  Their liues & goods amongſt their deadly foes.
               
               
                  And therefore ſaid, he cared not what paine
                  Nor loſſe the Greeks endur'd, ſo that he might
                  Recouer his Queene Helena againe.
                  And where he ſaith the ſtrong and valiant knight
                  
                     Hector is dead, his heire as yet doth liue
                  For knighthood, who in manner doth reviue
               
               
                  And raiſe him vp, which is his yonger brother
                  Prince Troyelus, whome we may rightlie call
                  Yong Hector, for there is not ſuch another
                  In all the world, for he's as't were the wall
                  And ſole defence of Troy now Hector's gone,
                  Which is well ſeene vnto vs euery one.
               
               
                  (If we the truth thereof acknowledged.)
                  Whoſe trechant blade in his moſt furious heat,
                  Doth oft and euerie hower make vs bleed
                  Within the field, when he with vs doth meet.
                  And in the ſtead of worthie Deiphobus,
                  
                  That was a puiſſant knight and valorous,
               
               
                  His valiant brother Paris yet doth liue,
                  That's vnto him for knighthood peregall,
                  Who alſo doth Troy mightilie relieue,
                  Whereby of them advantage none at all
                  We haue as yet, ſo that ſince we begun
                  This warre, in truth there is but little woone
               
               
                  By vs, but we are likelier to looſe
                  Yet more and more, if we it ſtill 
                        ••
                      hold,
                  And therefore ſith that we ha
                        •
                     e power to chooſe,
                  My counſell is, twere good if that we would
                  T'agree with them of Troy, and ſeeke for peace,
                  And let vs from this bloudie warre ſurceaſe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Uliſſes hauing ſpoken in this wiſe,
                  The Troyan traitor Calohas vexed ſore
                  To heare the ſame, vpon his feet did riſe,
                  And forthe hatred which to Troy he bore,
                  Said, worthy Kings and Princes euery one,
                  Why ſhould you change & varie like the Moone,
               
               
                  From that your firſt and reſolute intent,
                  Which was by you ſo fully greed vnto,
                  Againſt the will and the commandement
                  O
                        •
                      all the Gods, that power haue to do
                  What ere they liſt, and rule and governe all
                  The actions of man-kind, both great & ſmall?
               
               
                  Why ſhould you not vnto them credite giue,
                  Whoſe heſts and doings are infallible?
                  For this you muſt all conſtantly belieue,
                  That tis moſt true and not impoſſible,
                  That Troy by their preordinance and will,
                  Shall be deſtroyd within a little while,
               
               
                  If you do not neglect and ſlacke the ſame,
                  Whereby great honor, praiſe, and victory
                  Reſerued is for you by Lady Fame,
                  And will be euer had in memory:
                  If you with courage bold purſue your foes,
                  And do not your good fortune fondly loſe.
               
               
                  The which I dare affirme and boldly ſay,
                  And further muſt you tell, that wilfully
                  To dallie with the Gods, is th'onlie way
                  To make them change their purpoſe ſpeedilie:
                  Wherefore my counſell is, that vnitie
                  Should be maintaind, and all amb'guitie,
               
               
                  Diſpaire and dread, or any kind of doubt,
                  Forecaſting perill, ſloath, or cowardiſe
                  Cleane laid aſide, you ſhould with hearts moſt ſtout
                  And valiant courage, vtterlie deſpiſe
                  All feare of death, and once againe reſume,
                  Your force with reſolution to conſume
               
               
                  And ſpoile your foes: for feare makes men to faint,
                  And leaue the enterpriſe they take in hand,
                  And doth mens minds with cowardiſe attaint,
                  And make them that they dare not thereto ſtand:
                  That as the Gods ordaind haue by decree
                  And providence divine, that you ſhould bee
               
               
                  Victorious ore your enemies in th'end,
                  (If you with valiant hearts thereto aſpire)
                  You may attaine to that you do pretend,
                  And ſo you ſhall fulfill the Gods deſire:
                  Which ſpeech when Calchas with ſmooth words & (faire
                  Had ſpoken, and thereby put all deſpaire
               
               
                  Out of the Grecians hearts, they did proteſt
                  And vow, that feare and danger laid aſide,
                  They would fulfill his counſell, and nere reſt
                  (Though that Achilles flatly them denide
                  His aid therein) till that they had orethrowne
                  The Troyans, as hereafter ſhall be ſhowne.
               
               
                  The two months truce aforeſaid finiſhed,
                  The Grecians did prepare themſelues to fight
                  Againſt their foes, and brauely entered
                  Into the field, gainſt whome in great deſpight
                  The Troyan Knights with hearts couragious
                  Did iſſue forth. At which time Troyelus
                  
               
               
                  Such valor ſhewd, that with his trenchant blade,
                  He kild and wounded them ſo furiouſlie,
                  That in ſhort ſpace to flie he had them made.
                  For that day, in his extreame crueltie,
                  He vowed for his brother Hectors ſake,
                  Vpon the Grecians full revenge to take.
               
               
                  And (as tis ſaid) that worthie Champion,
                  By his exceeding valor and his might,
                  Did ſlay a thouſand Knights himſelfe alone,
                  And put the Grecians valiantlie to flight
                  All that day long, till Phoebus did deſcend,
                  At which time he of fighting made an end,
               
               
                  And entred into Troy, whereas he reſted
                  Till next day that the Grecians (who t'revenge
                  Their loſſe vpon the Troyans, had proteſted)
                  Did orderly their wings and ſquadrons renge
                  (Aſſoone as Phoebus roſe) within the plaine,
                  With whome the Troyans fiercelie met againe,
               
               
                  Where each the other valiantlie aſſaild.
                  At which time fierce King Diomede did fight
                  So cruellie, and then ſo much preuaild
                  Againſt his foes, that by his paſſing might,
                  Great ſtore of Troyans loſt their liues and died,
                  Till Troyelus his crueltie eſpied.
               
               
                  At whome with ſpeed he ran a mightie pace,
                  And with his ſtrong and puiſſant ſpeare in reſt,
                  Encountred with him brauely face to face,
                  And gaue to him a blow vpon the breſt,
                  So mightilie, and with ſuch paſſing force,
                  That with the ſame he ſmote him off his horſe▪
                  
               
               
                  And bruis'd him ſore. To whom in ſpightfull wiſe,
                  As he vpon the ground did lie, he ſpake,
                  And told him of his loue and treacheries,
                  Which he gainſt him had wrought for Creſids ſake:
                  At which time when the Grecians did eſpie
                  King Diomede vpon the ground to lie,
               
               
                  
                  Amongſt the horſes feet in great diſtreſſe,
                  They did with all the haſt and ſpeed they might,
                  To ſaue him from ſtout Troielus furiouſnes,
                  Take him vp from the ground, and in deſpight
                  Of all his foes, ſore bruſed and diſmaid,
                  Bare him from thence and in his tent him laid.
               
               
                  Whom to reuenge, King Menelaus did ſet
                  His ſpeare in reſt, and furiouſly did ride
                  To Troielus, but ere with him he met,
                  Fierce Troielus that his comming would not bide,
                  Prevented him, with ſuch a furious blow,
                  That to the ground he did him ouerthrow,
               
               
                  And gaue him therewith all a cruell wound
                  Within his breſt, that he was like to die:
                  But when his Knights ſaw him vpon the ground,
                  They▪ layd him on a ſhield, and ſpeedily
                  Bare him out of the preſſe into his tent,
                  At which time while away with him they went.
               
               
                  The Greeks were ſore oppreſſed, ſlaine, and chaſt
                  Throughout the field by Troilus paſſing might,
                  Who then moſt fiercely them purſued faſt,
                  That they were forſt to take themſelues to flight.
                  Vntill ſuch time as King Agamemnon
                  
                  With many Grecian Knights came riding down
               
               
                  Into the field, (whoſe enſignes gliſtring
                  Againſt the Sun, made ſuch a gallant ſight
                  As they within the ayre hung wauering,
                  That to behold them t'was a great delight.)
                  Who in moſt furious wiſe the Troians chaſt,
                  Kild, wounded, and did beat them downe ſo faſt.
               
               
                  And at that time moſt like a valiant Knight,
                  Behau'd himſelfe ſo brauely and ſo well,
                  That by his valor grea
                        •
                      and puiſſant might,
                  To flie from him he did them then compell:
                  But while that he in that moſt furious mood,
                  Amongſt the thick eſt of the Troians road;
               
               
                  Prince Troielus ran at him with a ſpeare,
                  And in the face of all his enemies,
                  Out of his ſadle to the ground him bare▪
                  
                  Wherewith the Greeks with huge and mighty 
                        ••
                     ies,
                  (To ſee their puiſant Lord and Generall,
                  In midſt of them receiue ſo great a fall,)
               
               
                  Ran to him, and by maine and mighty force
                  Relieued him, and made him mount againe,
                  (Deſpight of all the Troians,) on his horſe.
                  At which time many a gallant Knight was ſlaine,
                  And furiouſly on either ſide vnhorſt,
                  But yet the Grecian Knights at laſt were forſt,
               
               
                  (For all the great 
                        〈◊〉
                      that they made,)
                  By Troielus, (whoſe ſword they durſt 
                        •
                     or bide,)
                  To leaue the plaine and bloody fight▪ and glad
                  To make retrait, withdrew themſelues aſide.
                  For when as King Agamemnon perceiu'd
                  How that his men were or there liues bereau'd
               
               
                  So furiouſly, that they could notwithſtand
                  The Troians blowes, he did ſuppoſe it beſt
                  For him to make retrait, and out of hand
                  To leaue the field, and for that time to reſt,
                  And to that end did giue commandement,
                  To euery man t'retire vnto h
                        ••
                     te
                        ••
                     .
               
               
                  And after that ere Ph
                           •
                        bus did appeare,
                  Next day, he ſent to Priam to require
                  A truce for ſix moneths ſpace, i
                        •
                      that he were
                  Content therewith, who graunted his deſire.
                  Although that ſome therein with him did ſtritie
                  And grueth therat, and would not graunt to giue
               
               
                  Such reſpit to the Greeks, but t'was no boot
                  For them to ſtriue, when Priamus had paſt
                  His word and faith vnto the Greeks to do't.
                  In which time while the truce twixt them did laſt,
                  Faire Gr
                           •
                        ſula loth ſo long time to tarry,
                  (Although her Father was therein contrary.)
               
               
                  From vili
                        •
                     ing her friend, and t'haue a ſight
                  Of Diomede, (who 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                      receiu'd a wound
                  Not long before,) that was her louing Knight,
                  Went to his tent whereas when The him found
                  She ſat downe on the bed ſide where he lay,
                  And while that ſhe therein his tent did ſlay,
               
               
                  She did conſider with her ſelfe, and thought
                  That t'was in vaine for her ſo long t'endure
                  Without a loue, and that t'availd her nought
                  For Troielus to ſtay, and to be ſure
                  Of ſtore, for that men ſay it is no ſore,
                  She thought ſhe would delay the time no more.
               
               
                  But preſently with gentle heart and kind,
                  She promiſt loue vnto King Diomede,
                  
                  To ſhew what pietie is in women kind,
                  And how that they b'extremitres are led,
                  T'expulſe old loue, and new to entertaine,
                  Before that men ſhould ſue to them in vaine,
               
               
                  Or ſuffer griefe and ſorrow for their ſake.
                  The exchange is not ſo ready in Lombard ſtreet,
                  Where Marchants do contracts and bargains make
                  For Duckects and for Crownes when as they meet.
                  Each kind of gold and coynes to them's all one,
                  So that it haue a face or ſtamp thereon.
               
               
                  
                  Their letters of exchange pa
                        •
                     ſe currantly,
                  And commonly are payd vpon the ſight,
                  The paſſage boate is ready, and doth lie
                  T'attend all commers both by day and night:
                  No man's refuſde that will deſire grace,
                  Danger ther's none but in diſſembling face.
               
               
                  The Sea is caline, and cleare from Rocks and ſands,
                  T'was neuer heard that man was ere ſaid nay,
                  That crau'd or asked mercy at their hands,
                  As you may plainely ſee by Creſida,
                  
                  Who at that time gaue Diomede her hart,
                  To eaſe, and to releaſe him of his ſmart.
               
               
                  Deſiring him to be of ioyfull cheare;
                  And promiſed t'obay him faithfully
                  In euery thing, as to her Knight moſt deare,
                  Before that he for loue of her ſhould die,
                  Eſteeming't better to want conſtantnes,
                  Then to be held and counted pittiles.
               
               
                  As women are by nature very loath,
                  T'adict their minds t▪reuenge, or crueltie,
                  Gainſt any man for breach of faith or oath,
                  But rather ſeeme to ſhow humilitie,
                  And mercie vnto thoſe that want reliefe,
                  And haue their minds poſſeſt with woe & griefe.
               
               
                  Thus much for her, and now I will proceed
                  According to the Hiſtorie to ſhow:
                  That while the two moneths truce before decreed,
                  Was holden, King Agamenon did goe
                  Vnto Achilles tent, of him to craue
                  That of the Greeks he would compaſſion haue,
               
               
                  And not t'endure not ſuffer them to die,
                  And to be ſlaine and maimed euery hower
                  By them of Troy, who with great crueltie
                  Aſſayl'd the Greeks, and by their mighty power
                  Did put them to moſt great and hard diſtreſſe,
                  The which he ſayd was likely to encreaſe,
               
               
                  Vnleſſe he would vouchſafe his aid to lend
                  With ſpeed, and it no more from them with-hold,
                  And by his mighty power and force defend
                  Them as before he did, with courage bold.
                  But t'was in vaine, for whatſoere he ſayd,
                  
                     Achilles would not yeild to him, to ayd
               
               
                  No
                        •
                      ſuccour them, but with obdurate mind,
                  Still wiſhed them to thinke vpon a peace,
                  And with all ſpeed ſome way and meanes to find
                  That bloody and moſt tedious warre to ceaſe.
                  But yet becauſe he bare affection,
                  And much good will to King Agamemnon.
                  
               
               
                  He would not altogether ſay them nay,
                  But partly to their willes did condiſcend,
                  And ſayd, though he within his tent would ſtay,
                  He was content his Myrmidons to ſend
                  In ſteed of him, into the field to ayd
                  Them gainſt their foes. Wherwith full wel apaid,
               
               
                  
                     Agamemnon and Neſtor tooke their leaue,
                  And left him in a malancholly mood
                  Vpon his bed, where he did ſigh and grieue
                  For Pollicene, in whom then wholy ſtood
                  His ſole delight and comfort, yet in doubt
                  Nere to attaine to that he went about.
               
               
                  And ſo continued ſtill. But as he had
                  Made promiſe when the truce was at an end,
                  He did appoint his Mirmidons to ayd
                  The Greeks to fight, and when he did them ſend
                  Into the field, he gaue a riban red
                  To each of them to were vpon his head,
               
               
                  That they might from the reſt be knowne thereby,
                  And when they tooke their leaues and did depart
                  From him, he was in great perplexitie,
                  And mightily tormented at the hart:
                  Becauſe he ſent them t'ayd the Grecians
                  
                  Againſt his will, t'aſſayle the Troians.
                  
               
               
                  But neretheleſſe with hearts repleat with pride,
                  They went with King Agamemnon to fight
                  Againſt their foes, who for them did abide
                  Vpon the plaine, and when they were in ſight,
                  Each ſide began the other to defie
                  In warlike wiſe with many a ſhout and crie.
               
               
                  And fearefull noiſe of drums and trumpets braue,
                  Wherewith the Troians furiouſly began
                  T'aſſayle the Greeks, and ſuch an onſet gaue
                  To them at that ſame time, that many a man
                  On Grecians ſide were ſlaine, and they compeld
                  To make retrait againe out of the field.
               
               
                  Till that the Duke of Athens entered
                  With mighty force, the furie great to ſtay
                  Of Troians, and did make the Greekes that fled
                  Aduance themſelues againe, but in the way
                  Stout Troielus ſmot him ſo great a blow,
                  That from his horſe he did him ouerthrow.
               
               
                  And then with fury great he entered in
                  The thickeſt of the preſſe, and beat downe all
                  That with him met, and therewith did begin
                  So hotly on the Myrmidons to fall,
                  That many of them loſt their liues, and ſo
                  Farre amongſt the thickeſt of the Greeks did go,
               
               
                  
                  That at the laſt he put them all to flight
                  And by his valor great had them in chaſe,
                  So long till that the day was paſt, and night
                  Began t'appeare, when as he left the place,
                  And went into the towne, and there did ſtay
                  And reſt himſelfe, till that betimes next day,
               
               
                  They did begin a cruell fight againe
                  Within the field, ſo fiercely on each ſide,
                  That at that time great ſtore of Knights were ſlaine
                  And beaten downe, and as they ſtoutly ride
                  To trie their valors one againſt the other,
                  
                     Pollidamas and Philomene together
               
               
                  Did take King Thoas priſoner, whom they ment
                  T'haue carried vnto Troy with ſpeed, had not
                  The Myrmidons (before with him they went
                  Out of the field,) from them by valor got,
                  And reſcued him, for they were very ſtrong.
                  At which time Troilus road amonſt the throng.
               
               
                  And thickſt of them, and like a valiant Knight,
                  K
                        •
                     ld and orethrew great ſtore of them by force,
                  So long till that by their great ſtrength and might,
                  They did encloſe him round and kild his horſe,
                  And thought t'haue tane him priſoner, but he foght
                  So valiantly, that they full dearely bought
               
               
                  His horſes life, with many of their owne.
                  Till at the laſt his brother Paris ſpied
                  Him fighting there on foot with them alone,
                  And with his other brethren ſtraight did ride
                  To reſcue him, and forcibly made way
                  Through all the preſſe, and many of thē did ſlay,
               
               
                  And by their valors ſoone recouered had
                  A horſe for him, whereon he lightly ſprong,
                  And then againe ſuch hauocke of them made,
                  That though he was encloſ'd among the throng,
                  He kild, and beat them downe ſo furiouſly,
                  That many of them dead at his feet did lie▪
                  
               
               
                  But as moſt like a valiant Champion
                  He fought in midſt of them encloſed round,
                  One of his brethren cald Margariton,
                  
                  By Myrmidons receiu'd his deadly wound.
                  Whoſe death ſet Troilus heart on ſuch a fier
                  With cruelty, that in moſt furious ire,
               
               
                  He purpoſed to be reueng'd therefore.
                  And with his ſword by force he made a way
                  Through thickeſt of the preſſe, & downe he bore
                  All that before him ſtood or once durſt ſtay
                  To make reſiſtance, or withſtand him then,
                  The like did Paris with his brethren,
               
               
                  Who altogether furiouſly did ride
                  Amongſt Achilles Myrmidons, and there
                  Such hauocke of them made, that to abide
                  Before them they durſt not, but in great feare
                  They were compeld of mere neceſſiry
                  To ſet ſpurs to their horſes, and to flie
               
               
                  In haſt to ſaue their liues. For Troielus
                  
                  Did kill and beat them downe ſo cruelly;
                  And was on them ſo fierce and furious,
                  And wounded them ſo ſore and terribly,
                  That many of them died in the plaine,
                  And yet they did the fight long time maintaine.
               
               
                  For they were noble Knights and of great worth,
                  And knew full well how they their armes ſhold weild
                  But yet they were by Troielus driuen forth,
                  With many wounds ſore bleeding from the field:
                  Not able to withſtand his extreame might,
                  Although they held together, and did fight
               
               
                  Moſt valiantly, and would not ſeparate
                  Themſelues long time aſunder, till at length
                  They were by Troielus fierce and deſperate,
                  So hotly chaſt, that by maine force and ſtrength,
                  He made them breake their rancks, & in deſpight
                  Their hearts to flie till that with many a Knight,
               
               
                  King Menelaus, and King Agamemnon,
                  
                  
                     Uliſſes, and moſt cruell Diomede,
                  
                  And with them alſo fierce King Thelamon,
                  
                  Came to the field; and when they entered,
                  So valiantly aſſayld the Troians,
                  
                  And with ſuch multitudes of Grecians
                  
               
               
                  Vpon them ſet, that at that time the fight
                  Betwixt them did ſo hot and ſore renew,
                  That it did coſt the life of many a Knight
                  On either ſide; and thereof did enſue,
                  So terrible a noyſe and cry throughout
                  The field of men that maymed lay, & mought
               
               
                  Not helpe themſelues, that all the aire did ſound▪
                  
                  And ring therewith, and many ſhields were ſpleet,
                  And harnes hackt, and hawd, & all the ground
                  Lay couered ore with hands, armes, heads, & feet
                  Of men, that cut and mangled dying lay,
                  And ſtreames of blood ran downe along the way,
               
               
                  And in the plaine, moſt fearfull to behold.
                  At which time they of Troy, for all the might
                  And multitudes of Greeks, with courage bold,
                  Not once diſmaid, ſo valiantly did fight,
                  That many Grecian Knights by them were kild,
                  And wounded ſore: and where within the field
               
               
                  
                  The fight moſt ſtrongeſt, horſt and furious
                  Was held, and where greatſt troopes of Greeks withſtood
                  The Troians and aſſayld them, Troiclus
                  
                  Couragiouſly amongſt the thickeſt road,
                  And with his Knights ſuch ſlaughter of them made,
                  That in ſhort ſpace he them compelled had
               
               
                  To flie, and to auoid his furious ſword,
                  As th'inſtrument of their deſtruction,
                  And which as death they ſhuned, and abhord.
                  And this continued till that Thelamon
                  
                  The fearefull flying of the Greeks beheld,
                  Did turne them backe, & made thē keepe the field
               
               
                  And valiantly the Troian Knights aſſayld.
                  And then againe the fight was hot and ſtrong,
                  And Greeks againſt the Troians ſore prevaild,
                  But that aduantage held not very long:
                  For Troielus relieued them againe,
                  And by him then ſo many Greeks were ſlaine,
               
               
                  That he compeld them mauger all their might,
                  And great reſiſtance which they thē did make,
                  Before his ſword againe to take their flight
                  Vnto their tents, and at that time did take
                  An hundred Percian Knights, whom he did ſend
                  To Troy, and ſo that day the fight did end.
               
               
                  Which being done the Myrmidons with ſpeed
                  Vnto their Lord Achilles tent did go,
                  With many wounds full deepe that ſore did bleed,
                  And in that ſort themſelues to him did ſhow
                  W
                        •
                     o of their number then were leſſened,
                  An hundred Knights within the field lay dead.
               
               
                  With gaſtly wounds, ſlaine by the puiſſant might,
                  And valor great of Troielus alone,
                  Whereof when as Achilles had a ſight,
                  The night enſuing he did nought but grone,
                  And ſigh, and grieue, and was ſo much oppreſt
                  With heauines, that he could take no reſt:
               
               
                  For in his mind he had a double wo,
                  Firſt, for his Knights that had been newly ſlaine,
                  And then for Pollicene whom he loued ſo;
                  For he knew well that he ſhould nere obtaine
                  His will of her, if to reuenge his men
                  He ſhould once ſeeke the meanes, & therfore thē
                  
               
               
                  His heart burnt in his breaſt with double fier
                  Of wrath, and loue, which p
                        •
                     t him to great paine,
                  For wrath prouoked him with great deſire
                  To be reueng'd, and loue did him reſtraine
                  From dooing it, and got the vpper hand.
                  For he in mighty feare and doubt did ſtand,
               
               
                  That if he ſhould within the field be ſeene
                  Againſt them of the towne, King Priam would
                  Thinke much thereof, and Hecuba the Queene,
                  And Pollicene would him for euer hold
                  To be diſloyall and vnkind, whereby
                  He was in ſuch twofold perplexitie:
               
               
                  That he knew not which way himſelfe to wind,
                  He was ſo preſt with feare and fantaſie,
                  As louers in their braines doe often find,
                  When they for loue are ſicke and like to die.
                  And thus it far'd with him for many a day,
                  (In which time as the Hiſtory doth ſay,
               
               
                  For ſeauen dayes enſuing one the other,
                  The Troians with the Greeks did fiercely fight,
                  And in ſuch cruell wiſe then met together,
                  That it did coſt the life of many a Knight
                  On either ſide, that pitiouſly were ſlaine,
                  And wounded ſore, lay dead vpon the plaine.)
               
               
                  Meane time he muſd vpon no other thing
                  But to obtaine his pleaſure, and to win
                  His Ladies loue, and how't to pa
                        ••
                     e to bring,
                  Nere caring what eſtate the Greeks were in:
                  Nor how they ſped whē gainſt their foes they foght
                  Eſteeming it no parcell of his thought.
               
               
                  So much his mind on other things was ſet,
                  Which made him oftentimes to watch and wake,
                  And many ſore and cruell ſighes to fet:
                  And ſo great care and inward thought to take,
                  That from his heart all comfort cleane was gon,
                  Till on a day that King Agamemnon,
                  
               
               
                  Perceiuing what deſtruction ſtill was made
                  By them of Troy vpon the Grecians, ſent
                  To Priamus for two moneths truce, but had
                  No grant thereof, for he would not conſent
                  To longer time then for few daies t'endure,
                  While they prouided for the ſepulture,
               
               
                  Of thoſe that on each ſide lay ſlaine and dead
                  Within the field, which they accordingly
                  Within the daies ſet downe accompliſhed,
                  And after neuer ceaſt continually
                  Each other to aſſayle, while that they were
                  Beſiedging of the towne as you ſhall heare.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  ¶ How Achilles when Troylus was encloſed round about by his Myrmidons, came behind him and ſmot off his head, and after drew his body through the field at his horſes tayle.
               
               
                  THe cruell and continuall ſlaughter made
                  From day to day, ſtill more and more increaſt
                  Th'inveterate malice, that continued had
                  Long twixt the Greeks and Troians, & nere ceaſt,
                  Nor nere was like to ceaſe, till that deaths dart
                  Had killed many Knights on either part:
               
               
                  T'accompliſh by moſt ſterne and cruell Fate,
                  Gods ſtedfaſt, and infalible decree,
                  And t'execute the great and deadly hate
                  On either ſide, which might not ſhunned be:
                  For Atropos that in deaths ſhip doth go
                  For Miſteris, had ſayd it ſhould be ſo.
               
               
                  Nor neuer ceaſe till all did go to wracke,
                  And flattering Fortune with diſſembling cheare,
                  Diſdainefully on Troy did turne her backe,
                  As in this Booke hereafter you ſhall heare:
                  For when the laſt day of the truce was paſt,
                  On either ſide they armd themſelues in haſt:
               
               
                  And in the morning early fore Sun roſe,
                  Into the field they went and fiercely met
                  Together, like moſt ſterne and deadly foes,
                  Where Paris firſt on Menelaus did ſet:
                  And they each other brauely did vnhorſe,
                  For they were both of paſſing might and force.
               
               
                  And then Uliſſes furiouſly did run
                  With mighty ſpeare againſt Pollidamas,
                  
                  Where twixt them both a cruell fight begun,
                  For neither of them vnex perienſt was,
                  How to defend himſelfe againſt his foe,
                  And while they were together fighting ſo,
               
               
                  Not farre from them Meneſtes fiercely ſmot
                  
                     Anthenor with his ſpeare, ſo great a blow,
                  That it in peeces brake, yet fayled not
                  Him to the ground therewith to ouerthrow,
                  And Philomene a King on Troians ſide,
                  To valiant King Agamemnon did ride,
               
               
                  Who at the firſt together fiercely ſought,
                  But in a little while Agamemnon
                  
                  Was by him into ſo great danger brought,
                  That he had ſure been ſlaine, if Thelamon
                  
                  Had not come thither t'ayd him in his need,
                  Who ſetting ſpurs vnto his gallant ſteed,
               
               
                  Stroke Philomene with ſuch a mighty ferce,
                  That with the blow which was exceeding ſtrong,
                  He ſmot him to the ground off from his horſe.
                  And then amongſt the thick eſt of the throng,
                  The young and valiant Knight Archilagus,
                  
                  Ran at a Troian Knight cald Br
                           ••
                        i
                           •
                        s
                  
               
               
                  King Priams Baſtard ſon, to whom he gaue
                  So mighty and ſo puiſſanta blow,
                  That neither ſhield nor armor could him ſaue,
                  But dead vnto the ground he did him throw▪
                  
                  Whoſe death when as the Troians did eſpie,
                  They did caſt forth a huge and piteous crie,
               
               
                  And grieuouſly complaining for the ſame,
                  Were ſore abaſht, and ſtriken in great feare,
                  But when the newes thereof to Troielus came,
                  T'reuenge his death he did proteſt and ſweare:
                  And preſently did make no more abode,
                  But to the place where he was ſlaine, ſtraight rode
               
               
                  And with his ſword ſo furiouſly did ſlay
                  And wound the Greeks, that he did make their blood
                  Run downe in mighty ſtreames along the way,
                  And in the plaine, and all that him withſtood
                  Were fiercely by him beaten downe, and kild:
                  So that the hardieſt Knight then in the field,
               
               
                  Durſt not abide in his moſt furious ſight,
                  He ſlew and wounded them ſo c
                        •
                     uelly,
                  And had that time ſure put them all to flight,
                  But that the Myrmidons moſt valiantly
                  Withſtood him for a while, (who all that day
                  With one conſent in wait for Troielus lay.
               
               
                  For which he was in ſuch a mighty rage,
                  That like a Knight that did in armes excell,
                  His furious wrath and anger to aſſwage,
                  With courage bold vpon them all he fell,
                  And did amongſt the thickeſt of them ride,
                  Where ſome of them he wounded in the ſide,
               
               
                  
                  Some in the breſt, and ſome he did bereaue
                  Of heads, hands, legs, and feet, and ſome he ſmot
                  So puiſſantly, that he did fiercely cleaue
                  Their bodies in two parts, and ſpared not
                  To hac, and hew them downe ſo mightily,
                  That at the laſt they were compeld to flie
               
               
                  Vnto their tents, puſued by Troielus
                  
                  With many Knights, till he did them oretake,
                  Wherewith moſt cruell heart and furious,
                  He did ſo great a ſlaughter of them make,
                  And put them to ſo great extremitie,
                  That they caſt forth a fearefull noyſe and crie.
               
               
                  And ſuch a great and lamentable mone,
                  Was heard of them that lay vpon the ground,
                  And gaſping, caſt out many grieuous grone,
                  That all the field and plaine therewith did ſound:
                  And through the campe the tumult was ſo great,
                  Becauſe their foes ſo fiercely on them ſet,
               
               
                  That at the laſt it came t' Achilles eare,
                  Who calling to his men, demanded why
                  The Grecians at that time were in ſuch feare,
                  That they did make ſo great a noiſe and cry?
                  Who told him that for want of ayd, as then
                  The Troians in their tents did ſlay their men.
               
               
                  And put them to ſo great extremitie,
                  That they were forſt to cry for griefe and paine,
                  Which they endured by the crueltie
                  Of Troielus, and that his men were ſlaine
                  Likewiſe within his tent, and there did lie
                  In great diſtreſſe without all remedie.
               
               
                  And while they thus vnto Achilles ſpake,
                  A Grecian Knight came running from the plaine,
                  Whoſe heart within his breſt for feare did ſhake,
                  And ſayd to him, how can you now ſuſtaine
                  And beare this great and cruell iniurie,
                  To ſoe your men before your face thus lie
               
               
                  Dead on the ground, and ſlaine in cruell wiſe
                  Within your tent, and take therof no heed?
                  But ſtay ſtill here, when as your enemies
                  Haue ſworne, and with full intent decreed,
                  To kill you thus diſarmed as you ſtand,
                  If by your mighty force and puiſſant hand
               
               
                  You doe them not reſiſt, and valiantly
                  Shew forth your courage, and ere hence they paſſe,
                  Requite them for the extreame cruelty
                  Which they haue ſhowd to vs herein this place.
                  Which when Achilles heard with furious ire
                  Which in his breſt did burne as hot as fier▪
                  
               
               
                  He armd himſelfe and ſoming like a Bore,
                  (Forgetting that whereof ſo much he drempt
                  And thought vpon,) vnto himſelfe he ſwore
                  To be reuengd, (for loue was cleane exempt▪
                  
                  Out of his mind, and Pollicene alſo,
                  For whom he had endured ſo great wo,
               
               
                  And for her beauty felt ſuch griefe in hart▪)
                  Vpon the Troians for their crueltie.
                  That ſuddenly vpon his feet he ſtart,
                  And calling for his horſe, road ſpeedily
                  Into the field, where in ſhort ſpace he had
                  So great a ſlaughter of the Troians made,
               
               
                  And did ſo furiouſly vpon them ſet:
                  (For like a greedy woolfe that ſeeks for pray,
                  He kild, and ſpared none that with him met,
                  Or that durſt him witſtand along the way
                  Whereas he road.) That in a little ſpace
                  He made the Troians flie before his face,
               
               
                  And ſhun his ſword, all died with their blood,
                  (Wherewith he had ſo many of them ſlaine.)
                  For there was none that him as then withſtood,
                  But he was ſoone layd dead vpon the plaine:
                  Till Troielus that by fortune did behold,
                  How he the Troians ſlew with courage bold,
               
               
                  Ran at him with moſt great and puiſſant force,
                  Whoſe comming when Achilles did eſpie,
                  He likewiſe ſpurd his ſtrong and gallant horſe,
                  And ran at him with like dexteritie,
                  And met together with ſuch puiſſant might,
                  That each the other to the ground did ſmight,
               
               
                  Both pierced in their breſts, but differently,
                  
                     Achilles with a wound moſt daungerous,
                  Whereof he was conſtrained long to lie
                  Within his tent to heal't, but Troielus
                  
                  A little prickt: and ſo that day till night,
                  And ſix daies more enſuing they did fight,
               
               
                  And neuer ceaſt in furious wiſe to kill,
                  And to deſtroy each other valiantly,
                  And in that time great ſtore of blood did ſpill,
                  Vnto no little damage certainely
                  On either ſide, for many a worthy Knight
                  Was brought vnto his end with great deſpight,
               
               
                  In that ſame time. But cauſe I doe not know
                  Their names, nor of what dignities they were,
                  For Guydo in his Booke doth it not ſhow,
                  To write them I muſt likewiſe now forbeare,
                  And let their names and titles with them die,
                  And in obliuion reſt perpetually.
               
               
                  
                  But when King Priamus was certified
                  How fierce Achilles in the field had been
                  That day to fight, and thereby falſified
                  His promiſe made for loue of Pollicene:
                  
                  Sore grieud he was, and did himſelfe perſwade
                  
                     Achilles with his words had him betraid.
               
               
                  But truth to ſay, t'was neither fraud nor guile,
                  Nor any treaſon ſecretly decreed,
                  But heat of loue which laſteth but a while,
                  Which for that time did vex Achilles head:
                  And made him ſweare to do more then he could,
                  (And like the wind that none by force can hold.)
               
               
                  Let words from his diſſembling mouth be heard
                  Contrary vnto that he ment to do.
                  The which a man that's wiſe ſhould not regard,
                  And make as though he gaue no eare thereto.
                  For though Achilles had tofore been gotten
                  In Cupids ſnare, he had it then forgotten,
               
               
                  And card not in his furie to diſpleaſe
                  His Lady, whom ſo much he ſeemd to flatter;
                  He had not any will the warre to ceaſe
                  As he had ſayd, but cleane contrary matter
                  Was in his head, then he made ſhew to meane,
                  And promiſt to the Queene and Pollicene.
                  
               
               
                  And for that cauſe King Priam did vpbraid
                  And caſt her in the teeth with light conceit
                  Of falſe Achilles loue, wherein ſhe layd
                  Her truſt, whereas he ment nought but deceit,
                  For which ſhe was ſore grieud, becauſe that ſhee
                  Did to the Queene her mothers will agree
               
               
                  To marry with Achilles, to th'intent
                  That by her meanes and marriage there might be
                  A peace for euer made. But t'was not ment
                  By trecherous Achilles, for when he
                  Was healed of his wounds, he did deuiſe,
                  And in his traitrous heart a way ſurmiſe
               
               
                  To be reuengd on Troielus, who ſtill
                  Stake deepely in his cruell heart and mind,
                  If that he might haue meanes t'obtaine his will,
                  And him at ſome aduantage take or find.
                  Such hatred in his heart to him he bare,
                  That day and night he tooke no other care,
               
               
                  Nor ſet his mind vpon no other thing,
                  But onely how to quench the burning fier
                  Of enuy gainſt him borne, and how to bring
                  The ſame t'eflect according t'his deſire:
                  For he had ſworne and bound it with a vow,
                  That Troielus ſhould die, (he card not how,
               
               
                  Nor by what meanes,) by his hand and none other.
                  And to that end with purpoſe fully bent:
                  T▪effect his will he cald his Knights together,
                  And when they were aſſembled in his tent
                  (One morning when the Grecians forth did go
                  Into the field with braue and warlike ſho,
               
               
                  To fight againſt their Tr
                           •••
                        
                      enemy,
                  Who in like ſort out of the towne were come
                  With all their force the Grecian to defie,
                  And ready ſtood with ſound of fearefull drume,
                  And trumpets ſhrill▪ to call and to invite
                  The Grecians to a fierce and cruell fight.)
               
               
                  He did to them of Troielus complaine
                  For th'iniuries that he to him had done,
                  And prayed them that they would take the paine
                  That day to let all other things alone,
                  And onely watch on Troielus to hold
                  And to encloſe him round if that they could
               
               
                  In midſt of them, and when they had don ſo,
                  In furious wiſe t'aſſayle him altogether,
                  And not by any meanes to let him go,
                  But yet to ſaue his life till he came thither.
                  That with his ſword alone he might him kill
                  To ſatisfie his fierce and cruell will.
               
               
                  Lo here the valor of this worthy Knight,
                  Who enviouſly with rancor and in pride,
                  By treaſon and with rage and great deſpight,
                  All honor and true Knight-hood layd aſide;
                  Doth ſeeke to kill a worthier Knight then he,
                  Alas that ere ſuch trechery ſhould be
               
               
                  Within the heart of any man aliue,
                  That doth profeſſe to be a valiant Knight,
                  And honor ſeekes to win and to achiue
                  Moſt valiant acts, and who is bound by right
                  And law of armes, while life in him doth reſt,
                  All falſehood and fowle treaſon to deteſt.
               
               
                  And to maintaine all truth and equitie,
                  For now he doth in ſecret wiſe conſpire
                  The death of him by great diſloyalty,
                  That onely vnto honor did aſpire.
                  And he that was the brauſt and worthieſt knight
                  That euer ware or put on armor bright.
               
               
                  (But that which by Gods will ordained is,
                  Though nere ſo much men ſeeke it to withſtand,
                  Muſt fall out in the end and cannot mis.)
                  The which his Myrmidons did take in hand:
                  And promiſed to do as he had ſayd,
                  And ſo no longer time therein delaid.
               
               
                  
                  But went into the field, where Troielus
                  
                  With all the Troian troopes did ready ſtand,
                  Who valiantly with heart couragious,
                  And with his ſtrong and trenchant blade in hand
                  Vpon the Grecians ſet, and of them made
                  Such hauocke, that in little time he had
               
               
                  So many of them ſlaine, and ouerthrowne,
                  And furiouſly ſore wounded euery where
                  As he amongſt them road and paſt, that none
                  Of them durſt ſtand againſt him, and appeare
                  Before his face, and did ſo hotly chaſe,
                  And kill, and beat them downe in euery place,
               
               
                  That they began for feare of him to flie,
                  So that deſpight of all the Greeks he won
                  The field of them, and with ſuch crueltie
                  Purſued them, that ere it was full noone
                  That day, he had conſtraind them to retire
                  To ſaue their liues, and ſhun his furious ire.
               
               
                  Till that Achilles Myrmidons began
                  T'incloſe him round about on euery ſide,
                  And with moſt great deſpight vpon him ran,
                  And he to them in furious wiſe did ride,
                  And though alone he was amongſt them all,
                  Like Lyon fierce vpon them he did fall,
               
               
                  And in ſuch furious wiſe did them aſſayle,
                  And valiantly to kill them did not ceaſe,
                  That in ſhort ſpace he did ſo much preuaile
                  Gainſt them, that he their number did decreaſe:
                  For ſome he ſlew out right, and ſome he bore
                  Downe to the ground, & ſome he wounded ſore,
               
               
                  And ſome he maim'd, and ſome he cleft in twaine,
                  And hackt and hewed them moſt cruelly,
                  And did the fight ſo valiantly maintaine
                  Againſt them all, with ſuch dexterity,
                  That they could not his hautie heart ſubdue,
                  But ſtill he ſeem'd his courage to renew.
               
               
                  And them with force and valor great t'aſſayle.
                  And by no meanes to giue them any reſt.
                  But what could all his power and ſtrength preuaile,
                  When as he was ſo mightily oppreſt;
                  And that three thouſand knights did neuer ceaſe
                  In furious wiſe vpon him ſtill to preſſe.
               
               
                  And more and more on euery ſide him held
                  At ſuch a bay, that cowardly, in th'end
                  They kild his horſe, whereby he was compeld
                  To fight on foot, and yet he did defend
                  Himſelfe ſo valiantly that they well felt
                  The puiſſant blowes which he amongſt them delt
               
               
                  But neretheleſſe he was ſo ſore beſet
                  That all he did could him no whit prevaile,
                  By any meanes from midſt of them to get,
                  For they did him ſo furiouſly aſſayle:
                  That mauger his moſt puiſſant force & might,
                  Off from his head they did his helmet ſmight.
               
               
                  And hackt and heawd his armor in ſuch wiſe,
                  That naked both with head and necke he ſtood
                  In midſt of all his furious enemies
                  Without reliefe. Yet like a Lyon wood
                  He ſhewd himſelfe a valiant Champion,
                  And neuer ceaſt to ſmight and beat them down.
               
               
                  And to withſtand them mightily and long,
                  Diſarmed as he was, till in the end
                  
                     Achilles entring in amongſt the throng
                  Of Myrmidons, where Troielus did defend
                  Himſelfe, & gainſt them fought with courage bold:
                  Whom when he did in ſuch a caſe behold
               
               
                  Sore wearied with fighting, and in need
                  Of ayd, (as then,) with extreame cruelty
                  Ere Troilus of him tooke any heed,
                  Behind him fiercely road; and cowardly
                  Smot off his head, and not contented ſo;
                  Vnknightly his great crueltie to ſho,
               
               
                  He cauſd his mangled body to be bound
                  Vnto his horſes tayle, and in a rage
                  Drewt after him along vpon the ground
                  Throughout the field, his choler to aſſwage,
                  And to content his fierce and cruell will,
                  Which tooke delight his enemies blood to ſpill
               
               
                  By treaſon, as too well it doth appeare
                  By that diſloyall act which he then wrought.
                  But he that ſuch a traiterous heart doth beare,
                  All honor and renowne doth ſet at nought:
                  So that he may effect his cruelty,
                  And bad intent againſt his enemy.
               
               
                  But now I muſt a little change my ſtile,
                  And leaue the Greeks and Troians in the fight;
                  And vnto learned Homer ſpeake a while,
                  Who as it ſeemes did take a great delight
                  To praiſe Achilles for his chivalry,
                  And all the Greeks t'extoll and magnifie.
               
               
                  But Homer thou hadſt need to bluſh for ſhame,
                  And to condemne thine owne partiality,
                  For magnifying of Achilles name,
                  That in thy booke extolſt him to the skie:
                  Who while he liu'd was full of fraud and guile,
                  And neuer did deſerue ſo loftie a ſtile.
               
               
                  
                  I muſt confeſſe that with great Eloquence,
                  And Rethoricke, thou haſt ſet forth his praiſe,
                  And like a Poet of great excellence,
                  Doſt ſay he was the beſt Knight in his daies.
                  Yet in one point thou greatly art to blame,
                  Without iuſt cauſe to magnifie his name,
               
               
                  And t'eleuate, commend, and glorifie
                  Him with a title of ſuch happines,
                  As that for euerlaſting memorie
                  Thou doſt declare, that through his worthines
                  And Knight-hood, he the honor did obtaine,
                  By his owne hand two Hectors to haue ſlaine.
               
               
                  (One, who in truth for Knight-hood did ſurpas
                  All men that euer liu'd, for ſuch an other
                  Was neuer found, and Troielus that was
                  A moſt renowned Knight, his youngeſt brother:
                  Who likewiſe well deſerued for his fame
                  And valor great, a ſecond Hectors name.)
               
               
                  If thou waſt moued by affection
                  And loue which thou doſt ſeeme in heart to beare
                  Vnto the valiant Greekiſh Nation,
                  To praiſe him, thou ſhouldſt not for loue nor feare,
                  Refuſe to write the truth of euery thing,
                  And ſet aſide all lies and flattering.
               
               
                  For when that he ſlew Hector in the field,
                  It was when he without all feare or care,
                  To eaſe himſelfe a while had caſt his ſhield
                  Behind him at his backe, and fore him bare
                  A Kings dead corps before his ſadle bow;
                  And of his comming did full little know:
               
               
                  For if he had perceiud his trechery,
                  Thou hadſt not had the cauſe of him to boaſt
                  As now thou haſt, for by his chiualry,
                  He would haue made Achilles, to his coſt
                  To feele his puiſſant force and valor great,
                  And him beſides his purpoſe would haue ſet.
               
               
                  And ſo he did to Troielus likewiſe,
                  Who being all alone encloſed round
                  Amongſt the Greeks, his deadly enemies,
                  And fighting there on foot vpon the ground,
                  Diſarmed head and necke, in great diſtreſſe,
                  And redy for to faint with wearineſſe:
               
               
                  He road behind him and moſt cowardly
                  Smot off his head, when he ſuſpected leaſt
                  He would haue vſed him ſo traiterouſly;
                  Now iudge you all I pray at my requeſt,
                  Ift were an act of any valiant Knight,
                  To kill a man ſore wearied in fight.
               
               
                  Which he had held gainſt thouſands all that day,
                  And much of his moſt Princely blood had ſpent,
                  In midſt of them as he ſtood at a bay,
                  Bare headed, with his armor all moſt rent
                  Cleane off his backe, not able to ſuſtaine
                  Himſelfe, but in great danger to be ſlaine.
               
               
                  And in that caſe to come ſo cowardly
                  Behind his backe, and kill him vnawares,
                  To couer his deviſed trechery,
                  As one that of his honor had no care.
                  Praiſe him not therefore Homer for the ſame,
                  But rather vnto his eternall ſhame,
               
               
                  Out of thy worthy learned Booke deface
                  His name, and of him make no memorie
                  Therein at all, for ſurely in this caſe,
                  When as I heare his name, me thinks the skie
                  Infected is therewith, and that throughout
                  The world all men againſt him do crie out.
               
               
                  For if he had eſteem'd Nobilitie,
                  Knight-hood, renowne, or worthines, or fame,
                  Praiſe, honor, glory or gentilitie;
                  Or in Fames Booke t'haue regiſtred his name,
                  He would haue been aduiſd and taken heed,
                  For honors ſake t'haue done ſo fowle a deed,
               
               
                  To draw ſo great a Prince when he was dead
                  At his horſe tayle, who was ſo braue a Knight
                  That while he liud, and in Troy flouriſhed;
                  To ſpeake the truth and yeild to him his right,
                  Surpaſt Achilles far in each degree,
                  Of Knight-hood, valor, and actiuitie.
               
               
                  But to returne where I did leaue, when as
                  His brother Paris did behold and ſee
                  Him dead, and drawne by Achilles as he was,
                  With ſuch deſpight and ſo great crueltie:
                  Such griefe and ſorrow at that time he had,
                  Within his heart, that like a man that's mad
               
               
                  He fard, and with all ſpeed that he could make,
                  
                     Pollidamas and he together ran,
                  And many more to ſee if he could take
                  His body from Achilles, but as than
                  The Grecians fought ſo hotly, that in vaine
                  They labored, for they could not obtaine
               
               
                  To their deſires, what meanes ſo ere they made,
                  Till Menon who entire affection bare
                  To Troielus, and great compaſſion had
                  To ſee him dead, without all feare or care
                  Of fierce Achilles valor, did proteſt,
                  That he would neuer leaue, nor take his reſt
               
               
                  
                  Till he reuengd his death vpon the man
                  That had him ſlaine, and preſently did take
                  His ſpeare in hand, and at Achilles ran,
                  To whom in fierce and furious wiſe he ſpake,
                  And ſayd, thou traitor falſe and miſchiuous,
                  Thou Scorpion moſt vile and enuious,
               
               
                  That in diſhonor of all chivalry,
                  This day haſt ſlaine the worthieſt Knight that liu'd
                  Vpon the earth, by thy falſe trechery,
                  Who cannot but be vexed, mou'd and griu'd,
                  To ſee a worthy Knight of his degree,
                  Drawne in ſuch wiſe as he is now by thee
               
               
                  At thy horſe tayle in ſcorne and great deſpight?
                  Haſt thou forgotten and abandoned
                  All knight-hood, that thou ſholdſt now take delight
                  To do ſo great diſgrace to him that's dead.
                  Who while he liu'd was better knight then thou,
                  The which I meane to proue vpon thee now,
               
               
                  And for this vile and moſt vnknightly act,
                  Reuenge his death, whom thou this day haſt kild
                  By treaſon, with thy Myrmidons compact,
                  And by this meanes thy trechery fulfild.
                  Whereby thou thinkſt great honor to haue gotten,
                  But thy fowle fact will neuer be forgotten
               
               
                  While that the world endures, and preſently
                  He ſet ſpeare in reſt, and ſpurring's horſe
                  Ran at Achilles, and moſt valiantly
                  Hit him vpon the breſt with ſo great force,
                  That with the blow he ready was to fall
                  Vnto the ground, and brauely therewithall
               
               
                  Drew out his ſword, & that he might well know,
                  That he of him did ſtand in little dread,
                  Strake him therewith a ſtrong and mighty blow,
                  And gaue him ſuch a wound vpon his head,
                  That notwithſtanding all his puiſſant force,
                  He made him fal downe headlong from his horſe.
               
               
                  Vpon the ground, whereon in extreame paine
                  He lay long time as if he had been dead,
                  Till that his Knights did take him vp againe,
                  And notwithſtanding that full ſore he blead,
                  Got him at laſt to mount vpon his horſe,
                  And when he had recouered his force,
               
               
                  And felt himſelfe well eaſed of his paine.
                  With purpoſe to reuenge the iniury
                  He thought he had receiud, in great diſdaine
                  He ſpurd his puiſſant horſe, and furiouſly
                  At Menon ran, whoſe comming when he ſpide,
                  He likewiſe ſet ſpurs to his horſes ſide,
               
               
                  And like a valiant Knight that feard him nought,
                  With courage bold met with him on the plaine,
                  Wherewith their ſwords they both together fought,
                  And twixt them did a combat long maintaine
                  With fierce and mighty blowes, till in the end
                  King Menon did himſelfe ſo well defend,
               
               
                  That he th'aduantage of Achilles had,
                  And in deſpight of all his fury great,
                  (For he as then fought as he had been mad.)
                  So valiantly vpon him then did ſet,
                  That he had ſurely ſlaine him, but that then
                  There came twixt them ſo great a troope of men
               
               
                  On either ſide, that they were forſt to ſtay
                  Their combat, and by that meanes parted were,
                  And each from other borne cleane away:
                  At which time ſuch a cruell ſlaughter there
                  Was made of many a valiant knight and ſtout,
                  That all the field and all the plaine throughout
               
               
                  Was fild with men that ſlaine and wounded ſore,
                  Lay mangled on the ground in cruell wiſe,
                  For neither Greeks nor Troians would giue ore
                  Till Phoebus did begin to leaue the skies,
                  And to deſcend, at which time they withdrew
                  Themſelues out of the field, and did renew
               
               
                  The fight againe next day, and met together
                  Aſſoone as ſunne did riſe, and euery day,
                  For ſeuen daies enſuing one the other,
                  Continually from fighting did not ſtay.
                  While that Achilles in his tent did lie
                  To cure his wounds, and there new trethery
               
               
                  Within his mind did practiſe and deviſe,
                  To be reuengd on Menon, who as then
                  He hated ſore, becauſe that in ſuch wiſe
                  He wounded him, and to him cald his men,
                  And bad them when they fit occaſion found
                  Within the field, t'incloſe King Menon round
               
               
                  On euery ſide, and when they had him ſo
                  Amongſt them, to aſſayle him altogether,
                  And by no meanes from them to let him go,
                  (But not to kill him till that he came thither.)
                  That he himſelfe on him reueng'd might be,
                  And ſo they did: for as he did decree
               
               
                  With them in ſecret wiſe to do the ſame,
                  The next day in the morning when they met,
                  And either ſide gainſt other fiercely came
                  Into the field, with rage and choler great,
                  
                     Achilles and King Menon met together,
                  And valiantly aſſayled each the other.
               
               
                  
                  On horſebacke as they ſat where they did fight
                  So long, and in ſuch furious wiſe, that both
                  O
                        •
                      them compelled were by force t'alight,
                  And ſo on foot in mighty rage and wroth,
                  Fought valiantly. But while that on the ground
                  King Menon ſtood, he was encloſed round
               
               
                  By Myrmidens, and as Achilles bad,
                  When he was in the middeſt of them all,
                  And not one Troian Knight to ayd him had,
                  In furious wiſe they did vpon him fall:
                  And though long time he did the fight maintain
                  Againſt them all; at laſt he was there ſlaine
               
               
                  In traiterous wiſe by falſe Achilles hand,
                  (Who by that meanes did his deſire obtaine.
                  But yet he did ſo valiantly withſtand
                  Him, and them all, ere he by him was ſlaine,
                  That fore that he fell dead vpon the ground,
                  He gaue Achilles ſuch a cruell wound,
               
               
                  That all men thought he would thereof haue died.
                  Now Homer iudge in truth, and with good reaſon,
                  (A
                        •
                     by no vpright mind't can be deni'd,)
                  If this were not moſt vile and filthy treaſon
                  The which Achilles wrought: and ſay with right,
                  If euer he ſlew any worthy Knight
               
               
                  Vnleſſe it were by treaſon as tis true
                  And proued by King Menons death, whom he
                  Slew in that ſort. And then giue him his dew;
                  And thou ſhalt find his knight-hood ſtaind to be
                  With foule diſgrace, and all his praiſe nought worth
                  And contrary to that which thou ſetſt forth.
               
               
                  So that thou canſt not rightly (and ſpeake true)
                  (Though nere ſo eloquently thou doſt write,)
                  Commend him, vnleſſe that thou ſaiſt vntrue,
                  And ſhowſt thy ſelfe one that doth take delight
                  To hide his treaſon with thy ſugred phraſe,
                  And him that nere deſeru'd, the ſame to praiſe.
               
               
                  But now I muſt leaue Homer, and againe
                  Returne to ſhow vnto you how that day
                  When that Achilles Troielus had ſlaine,
                  (Who of the Troians then was th'onely ſtay,)
                  The Greeks (encouragd by King Menclaus
                  
                  And others;) were ſo fierce and furious
               
               
                  Vpon the Troians, and did them purſue
                  So hotly; that they forced them to flie
                  In mighty feare, and many of them ſlew
                  As they before them ran, and cruelly
                  Did wound, orethrow, & chaſe, & beat thē down
                  Euen to the walles and trenches of the Towne.
               
               
                  And made them in deſpight their hea
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     , forſake
                  The field, and t'enter Troy moſt woefully
                  With Troiclus, whoſe body they did take,
                  And bare it in with great ſolemnity.
                  Where all along the towne as it did pas
                  Such ſorrow for his death then made there was,
               
               
                  That no man liuing can diſcribe, or tell
                  The halfe thereof. No not moſt learned Boys,
                  
                  Who hath the praiſe in phraſes fit t'excell,
                  And of moſt dolefull words to haue great choiſe:
                  When as he maketh ſhew to weep and crie
                  In his complaint made to Philoſophie,
               
               
                  Wherein he ſeemeth Fortune to accuſe
                  For her vnconſtant dealing, and doth charge
                  Her by that meanes, all mortall men t'abuſe.
                  Nor Stacie who of Thebes writes at large,
                  The woefull and the moſt vnhappy fall,
                  And doth deſcribe the death and funerall
               
               
                  Of thoſe that were the cauſers of the ſame.
                  Leaue of thy mournfull weeping Niobe,
                  
                  And thou that art reported t'haue the fame,
                  Each yeare ſo farre ore land and ſea to flee:
                  And great complaints and woefull cries to make
                  For thy deare brother Aliagers ſake.
               
               
                  Let Oedipus the Theban King, that ſo
                  Did weepe and waile that he loſt both his eies,
                  Content himſelfe, and many other mo.
                  As Mirha and Calixtone, whoſe cries
                  And dolefull mones ſo well were heard & ſeene.
                  And Dido faire that ſometime raigned Queene
               
               
                  Of Carthage towne, and for her loue did die.
                  Let Phillis mourne no more for Demophon
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  Nor eccho ſtill renew her woefull crie.
                  Let faire Corrinne ceaſe to make ſuch mone
                  As ſhe long did, and nere left night nor day,
                  Becauſe that ſhe had loſt her Popingay,
               
               
                  As Onid in his Booke doth tell. And let
                  All their complaints, their forrowes, & their mone▪
                  
                  Forgotten and cleane out of mind be ſet,
                  For they are nothing in compariſon
                  To that of Troy, which euery one did make
                  Within the towne, for worthy Troylus ſake.
               
               
                  For high, and low, wiues, children, and men,
                  So piteouſly complaind: and for him there,
                  So many ſalt and briniſh teares were then
                  Let fall, that men nought els in Troy did heare
                  But mournfull cries, and lamentations ſad
                  By them caſt forth. That nere the like was made
               
               
                  
                  In any place, nor no man well can tell
                  Nor yet expreſſe the ſame, for it is ſure
                  That Pluto whom men call the Prince of Hell,
                  (For all the torments great he doth indure.)
                  
                     Proſerpin
                           •
                        , nor furious Ticius,
                  
                  Nor Irian, nor hungry Tantalus.
                  
               
               
                  Though they tormented are with extreame paine,
                  With him together in th'infernall lake,
                  Nere could nor did more bitterly complaine,
                  Then all the Troians did for Troielus ſake.
                  For who-could grieue more then King Priamus,
                  
                  Or ſhead more dolefull teares and piteous,
               
               
                  Out of their eies, then Hecuba the Queene,
                  Eaſſandra, Hellen, Paris, Hellenus,
                  And beautifull young Lady Pollicene?
                  
                  Or then the Troians with moſt dolorous,
                  And woefull cries, did all in generall
                  Shed forth, and did gainſt Fortune cry and call:
               
               
                  Accuſing her of great inconſtancie?
                  For they were cleane diſcomforted and out
                  Of hope to be relieud, ſith enviouſly
                  She had bereaued them of Hector ſtout,
                  And of his valiant brother Deiphobus,
                  
                  And in their greateſt need, of Troielus.
                  
               
               
                  So that in ſore diſtreſſe and deſperate mood,
                  They vtterly diſpaird of their eſtate,
                  The which they knew in danger great then ſtood,
                  And made account as men vnfortunate,
                  T'expect nought els but their confuſion,
                  And finally the whole deſtruction
               
               
                  Of them, and of their towne that was ſo ſtrong,
                  And therefore it availeth not to mourne,
                  Nor of their griefe to make diſcourſe ſo long.
                  Sith they by Fate to that hard hap were borne.
                  And for that cauſe ile leau't, and to you ſhoe,
                  How Prianous in that diſtreſſe and woe,
               
               
                  A meſſenger vnto the Grecians ſent,
                  For truce for certaine moneths, which preſently
                  (With all the Grecian Princes full conſent.)
                  
                     Agamemnon did graunt and ratefie,
                  Which either ſide obſeru'd, while it did laſt,
                  And freſhly fought againe when it was paſt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  ¶ How Paris ſlew Achilles, and Archilagus Duke Neſtors Sonne in the Temple of A pollo in Troy.
                  
               
               
                  THe truce aforeſaid laſting, Priamus
                  
                  A Sepulcher did make moſt ſumptuouſly,
                  Of metall and of ſtone, for Troielus:
                  
                  And buried him with great ſolemnity.
                  And hard by him King Menons body lay
                  Intombed, and both buried on a day.
               
               
                  And as the Pagans were accuſtomed
                  By th'ancient lawes, in ceremoniall wiſe,
                  Moſt dolefully for them ſolemniſed,
                  And dewly held their funerall obſequies:
                  With great deuotion and obſeruances,
                  The which to you is needles to expreſſe.
               
               
                  And therefore at this time ile let it pas,
                  As tedious both to heare and tell likewiſe.
                  And ſhew you how Queene Hecuba that was
                  Sore grieu'd for death of Troilus, did deuiſe
                  And practiſe in her mind how to require
                  
                     Achilles, for the trech'ry and deſpight
               
               
                  Which he both vnto her and Troy had don.
                  And to that end ſhe ſent in ſecret wiſe
                  For Paris, (who was then her eldeſt Son,)
                  To whom with teares that trickled downe her eies,
                  Aud mournfully with ſad and heauy cheare,
                  She ſpake and ſayd to him, as you ſhall heare.
               
               
                  
                     Paris thou knoweſt as well as I can tell,
                  How falſe Achilles by his trechery
                  Hath ſlaine my ſonnes, (who liuing did excell
                  Him farre,) and by his extreame cruelty
                  Hath me bereaud of them, and left me none
                  But onely thee, to comfort me alone.
               
               
                  For cowardly thou knowſt how he did ſlay
                  Thy eldeſt brother Hector vnaware,
                  And Troielus likewiſe, that were a ſtay
                  And comfort vnto me in griefe and care:
                  And therefore now I haue determined
                  Within my mind, his traiterous blood to ſhead.
               
               
                  
                  And him to pay as reaſon is and right,
                  With treaſon for his treaſon done to me,
                  And treachery with treach'ry to requite.
                  And thus it is; thou knoweſt well that he
                  Loues Policene thy ſiſter, and doth craue
                  Moſt earneſtly her for his wife to haue.
               
               
                  Now my intent is preſently to ſend
                  For him, without delay to come to me
                  Into Apollos Temple, to the end
                  We may with ſpeed vpon the ſame agree:
                  Where thou well arm'd in ſecret wiſe ſhalt ſtand
                  With certaine knights, and readie be at hand
               
               
                  To kill him there, while he for me doth ſtay,
                  Where let him of his death be ſurelie ſped,
                  And ſee that by no meanes he ſcape away,
                  Out of thy hands, vntill that he be dead:
                  Which I thee heartly pray as't is my will,
                  Effectuall for my ſake to fulfill,
               
               
                  And ſee thou faileſt not to do the ſame.
                  Whereto he did agree, and preſentlie
                  Againſt Achilles to the Temple came,
                  With twentie valiant knights there ſecretly
                  Did ſtay. Meane time Queene Hecuba did ſend
                  A meſſenger t'Achilles to that end,
               
               
                  As ſhe with Paris had determined:
                  By whome ſhe made him certainlie belieue,
                  That ſhe did meane and fullie purpoſed,
                  Her daughter Policene to him to giue:
                  And at his comming would (as ſhe did ſay)
                  Agree twixt them vpon the marriage day.
               
               
                  Where to he did moſt willinglie conſent,
                  As he that no ſuſpition had in mind
                  Of treaſon, for his heart it was ſo bent,
                  And ſet on fire with loue, that he was blind
                  And could not ſee, nor yet perceiue at all,
                  By reaſon and aduiſe what might be fall
               
               
                  To him by going into Troy ſo ſoone
                  At her requeſt, he had offended ſo
                  By killing of her Sons as he had done,
                  But hap what would, needs thither would he go:
                  As louers all are fond, and deſpratly
                  No perill ſhun (although that they ſhould die)
               
               
                  T'enioy the thing wherewith in loue they are,
                  (Their maladie it is ſo furious)
                  Vntill they are intrapped in a ſnare.
                  And ſo Achilles, and Archilogus
                  
                  Duke Nestors Son, that bare him company,
                  Did goe to Troy, and entring preſently
               
               
                  Into the Temple of Apollo went,
                  Where Paris with his Knights for him did ſtay
                  In ſecret wiſe, with purpoſe fully bent
                  Him there (as he deſerued had) to ſlay:
                  And ſodainly aſſoone as he was in,
                  T'aſſaile him altogether did begin.
               
               
                  (By night (as ſome do ſay) but when ſo ere
                  The ſame was done) when as Achilles ſaw
                  Himſelfe aſſaild, abandoning all feare,
                  He did his ſword out of his ſcabberd draw,
                  And in ſhort ſpace deſpight of all their mights,
                  In furious wiſe he ſlew ſeuen Troyan knights.
               
               
                  And did defend himſelfe ſo valiantly
                  Againſt them then, although they were ſo many,
                  And with them fought with ſuch dexterity,
                  That long it was ere vantage they bad any
                  On him at all, till Paris who as then,
                  Stood watching oportunitie, and when
               
               
                  He ſaw Achilles ſuch reſiſtance make,
                  Tooke vp a Dart and aim'd at him ſo well,
                  And ſo directly, that therewith he ſtrake
                  Him through the heart: and therewith all he fell
                  With pale and deadly face vpon the ground,
                  And body mangled ſore with many a wound.
               
               
                  And ſo was ſlaine his treaſon to requite.
                  As reaſon is that ſuch as traitors are,
                  And while they liue in treachery delight,
                  Should at the laſt fall in the ſelfe ſame ſnare
                  Which they for others had prepar'd. And thus
                  
                     Achilles, and with him Archilogus,
                  
               
               
                  Were ſlaine by Paris in the Temple, at
                  Queene Hecubaes deſire and requeſt,
                  Who preſently did giue commandment that
                  Their bodies in the Temple ſhould not reſt:
                  And made them to be drawne out of the bounds
                  Thereof, and to be throwne vnto the hounds.
               
               
                  Loe here the iuſt reward of treachery
                  And of deceit, which while he liued he
                  Delighted in, and how with equitie
                  God puniſheth all ſuch as traitors be:
                  For reaſon is, that he that ſeeks t'obtaine
                  His will by treaſon, ſhould likewiſe againe
               
               
                  With treaſon be requited for his paine.
                  As falſe Achilles was, that tooke delight
                  In treaſon while he liu'd, and ſo was ſtaine
                  Within Apollos Temple in the night:
                  But yet their bodie: were not as tis ſaid,
                  (Although that they in th'open ſtreets were laid,
               
               
                  
                  That with great ioy the Troyans might them ſee)
                  Devour'd by hounds as by commandment
                  Of Hecuba they were ordaind to be.
                  For Helena vnto King Priam went,
                  And on her knees of him did humbly craue,
                  Their bodies from that cruelty to ſaue.
               
               
                  Who willinglie did therevnto conſent,
                  And caus'd them to be kept as ſhe deſir'd,
                  Till that King Agamemnon to him ſent
                  A meſſenger, and leaue of him requir'd,
                  To fetch them, and to giue them buriall,
                  The which he did; for whome in generall
               
               
                  The Grecians did ſuch extreame ſorrow make,
                  And were ſo much diſcomforted therefore,
                  That in great feare each vnto other ſpake,
                  And ſaid alas, now farewell euermore,
                  Our truſt, our hope, our ioy, our confidence,
                  Our welfare, and our ſoueraigne defence,
               
               
                  Sith valorous Achilles now is dead.
                  For he in knighthood did ſo much excell,
                  That while he liu'd, we neuer ſtood in dread
                  To overcome this towne, but now full well
                  We may both feare, and plainlie ſay, that we
                  Nere in our liues ſhall maſters thereof be.
               
               
                  And while that they ſuch ſorrow great did make,
                  And plunged were in extreame doubts & feares,
                  For their great Champion fierce Achilles ſake,
                  
                     Agamemnon two coſtly Sepulchers,
                  For workemanſhip moſt rare and curious
                  Caus'd to made, one for Archilogus,
                  
               
               
                  The other for Achilles, wherein they
                  Intombed were with great ſolemnitie
                  In Paynim wiſe, and both vpon a day.
                  To ſhew the whole particularity,
                  And manner of their ancient buriall,
                  Were over-long to trouble you withall.
               
               
                  It ſhall ſuffice to tell that they did make
                  Much ſorrow, and endur'd great heauineſſe
                  For death of them, and how in mournfull blacke
                  They brought them to their graues, & to expreſſe
                  Their woefulnes with heauie heart and mood,
                  Some threw ſweet gums, & ſome caſt milk & blood
               
               
                  Into the funerall fires, and how they made
                  Playes, which by them were called paleſtrall
                  And wraſtrings at the wakes, and how they had
                  Great ſtore of cuſtomes ceremoniall
                  At burials of the dead, the which much more
                  Then needfull were to tell as now, therefore
               
               
                  Ile leaue herewith. And vnto you declare,
                  How therevpon King Agamemnon ſent
                  For all the Grecian Princes that then were
                  Within the hoaſt, to come vnto his tent:
                  And when they all aſſembled were therein
                  And orderly ſet downe, he did begin
               
               
                  To ſpeake to them and ſaid, my Lords tis now
                  No time to moue nor need t'encourage your
                  Againſt your Troyan foes, ſith that you know
                  And too well find by good experience, how
                  Vnconſtant fortune hath now chang'd her face,
                  And ſodenly cleane altered our caſe▪
                  
               
               
                  And fild your hearts with rage and iuſt deſpight,
                  To thinke vpon the murther horrible
                  Of late done to Achilles, (which in ſight
                  Of God and man is foule and odible,
                  Deſpightfully by Hecuba the Queene)
                  For which I thinke it ſhortlie ſhall be ſeene,
               
               
                  If that within your valiant hearts there be,
                  Or reſteth any man-hood, force, or wit,
                  To make a vertue of neceſſitie:
                  And to refraine till that occaſion fit
                  To take revenge therefore, and t'recompence
                  The iniurie, deſpight, and great offence
               
               
                  Vnto you done and giuen thereby, fall out,
                  As reaſon tis it ſhould requited be,
                  (For very beaſts inſenſible no doubt,
                  Would do the ſame in like extremitie,)
                  But yet as you are wiſe and prouident,
                  I would faine know your meaning and intent,
               
               
                  What you thinke beſt by vs now to be done.
                  And whether that you will the warre maintaine,
                  And hold the ſiege ſtill here before the towne,
                  Till that it be deſtroyd, or go againe
                  Home into Greece, ſith our chiefe Champion,
                  Our ſole defence, and our protection,
               
               
                  
                     Achilles now is ſlaine. Whoſe death alone
                  Vnto vs will a mighty hindrance be.
                  And therefore I entreat you euery one,
                  To giue me your adviſe herein what we
                  Shall doe: ſith that the caſe now ſtandeth thus,
                  For that delay oft proueth dangerous.
               
               
                  Which having ſaid, the Princes all began
                  To fall in great diſſention, and to varrie
                  Amongſt themſelues, and many of them than
                  Were halfe in feare no longer there to tarry:
                  And doubtfull were what they were beſt to do.
                  But ſome reply'd and anſwere made thereto;
               
               
                  
                  That happen life or death they would ſtill ſtay,
                  And never leaue the ſiege till they had woone
                  And cleane deſtroyd the towne: and ſome did ſay
                  They would not ſtay, but preſently be gone,
                  And into Greece returne againe with ſpeed:
                  And in that ſort a while they diſagreed,
               
               
                  And every man was of opinion
                  Contrarie each to other. But in th'end
                  They did all with full reſolution
                  Agree to ſtay, and ceaſing to contend,
                  Said flatlie, they would neuer leaue the towne,
                  Till they had it deſtroyd and beaten downe.
               
               
                  Although their chiefe and onelie Champion,
                  
                     Achilles then was ſlaine, of whome they made
                  So great account, for their opinion
                  Was, ſith that all the Gods decreed had
                  They ſhould deſtroy the ſame, they did not doubt
                  But in ſhort time to bring the ſame about.
               
               
                  And to confirme their reſolution,
                  And that they might ſtill firmelie therein hold,
                  The worthy Grecian Knight cald Thelamon,
                  
                  Surnamed Aiax, did with courage bold
                  Stand vp, and when he had obeyſance made,
                  Vnto them all in this wiſe ſpake and ſaid.
               
               
                  My Lords and Princes all aſſembled now,
                  If you will take my counſell and adviſe,
                  I am perſwaded it is beſt for you,
                  Sith that Achilles in ſuch traiterous wiſe
                  Is ſlaine, that we a meſſenger ſhould ſend,
                  To fetch his Son yong Pyrrhus, to the end
               
               
                  He may revenge his fathers death, and aid
                  Vsto atchieue our enterpriſe in hand
                        •
                     
                  
                  Who at this time as I haue hard it ſaid,
                  Remaineth with King Licomedes, and
                  As men of him repor, tis ſaid to be
                  A valiant Knight and likely, if that he
               
               
                  While he is yong take on him armes to beare,
                  To proue a knight of great renowne and fame:
                  And alſo ift be true as I do heare
                  By propheſie, which doth foreſhow the ſame,
                  
                     Troy nere ſhall be deſtroyd, vnleſſe that he
                  With vs to doe the ſame here preſent be.
               
               
                  And further that till Pyrrhus do come hither,
                  We never ſhall obtaine the victory
                  Againſt our foes, and therefore let's together
                  Agree to ſend one thither preſently
                  To fetch him. Wherevnto they did conſent▪
                  
                  And Menelaus of that Embaſſage went.
               
               
                  Who entring ſhip, ſaild forth the ſelfe ſame day,
                  And ſoone arriu'd where Licomedes dwelt;
                  Where with him for a while ile let him ſtay,
                  And ſhow you how the Greeks and Troyans dealt
                  Together, when (truce paſt) in fight they were,
                  As in the Chapter following you ſhall heare.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  ¶ How Paris and Thelamon Aiax ſlew each other; & how Queene Helena Lamented for the death of Paris; the Grecians remooue their tents necrer vnto Troy, and the truce is ended betweene them.
               
               
                  WHē 
                     Phoebus by due courſe (as time doth paſſe)
                  Into the ſigne of Cancer entrie made,
                  And in the height of his aſſention was,
                  Which vſually men Summer call, and had
                  Drawen from the root of every flower & tree,
                  The vertue, ſweetneſſe, and humiditie,
               
               
                  And made them mount into the hearbs & leaues
                        •
                     
                  
                  And when each flower doth freſh & gay appeare,
                  Till Cancer place by courſe to Leo giues,
                  Which is the time and ſeaſon of the yeare:
                  When as the Sun being in the higheſt degree
                  Deſcends, and is ſaid retrograde to bee;
               
               
                  And with his mighty heat & feruor cleane
                  Dries vp the ſap of roots, trees, hearbs, & flowers,
                  (And that which ſpring time made ſhew freſh and
                  Cōverts to white (for want of April ſhowers) (green)
                  To mollifie his ſtrong decoction.
                  For that by naturall digeſtion,
               
               
                  The moyſture which in fruits & flowers abounds
                  By reaſon of the great humiditie
                  Which is in them, he dries vp & confounds:
                  And with his heat & extreame fervencie,
                  (Which hoteſt is when it is Summer weather,)
                  Doth ripen them, and make them ſit to gather?
               
               
                  
                  And pull off from the branches as they ſpread
                  And hang thereon, in their due time and ſeaſon.
                  When Cheries gin to ripen and wax red,
                  And other kinds of friuts are yong and geaſon.
                  In Iune, and at the latter end of May,
                  When as the hot and pleaſant Summers day,
               
               
                  By courſe of time is ſixteene howers long,
                  The Greeks with hearts repleat with wrath and ire,
                  Preſuming of their force that was ſo ſtrong,
                  And hoping to attaine to their deſire,
                  Into the field couragiouſly did go
                  Well arm'd to fight againſt their Troyan foe.
               
               
                  Conducted by the Kings Agamemnon,
                  
                  
                     Uliſſes, valiant Diomede and mo,
                  As Meneſtes, and furious Thelamon,
                  
                  (Who that ſame day into the field did go,
                  Without an armor, helmer, ſpeare, or ſhield,
                  Onely his ſword which in his hand he held,
               
               
                  And naked in that ſort moſt brauely fought.)
                  Gainſt whom the Trayans (though in feare & doubt)
                  Did iſſue forth, for that King Priam thought
                  His force too weake, ſo often to go out
                  As he was woont, ſith his Sons valorous,
                  
                     Hector, Deiphobus, and yong Troyelus,
                  
               
               
                  Vnfortunatelie were all dead and ſlaine:
                  Yet not to giue the Grecians cauſe to ſay
                  He feared them, he ſent them out againe,
                  And gaue the chiefe command of them that day
                  To Paris, that his eldeſt Sonne then was,
                  Who with King Philomene, Pollidamas,
                  
               
               
                  King Eſdras, and Aeueas valiantly
                  Againſt the Grecians went, and on them ſet
                  With courage ſtout, reſolu'd that day to die
                  In their defence, o
                        •
                      honor great to get,
                  Vpon their deadly and inveterate foes,
                  As't pleaſed God the victorie to diſpoſe,
               
               
                  And furiouſly the onſet on them gaue.
                  Where Paris with his Perſian Archers ſhot,
                  Vpon the Greeks ſo ſwiftly and ſo braue,
                  That ſoone he had advantage on them got:
                  And they compelled were in extreame need
                  To flie to ſaue themſelues. Till Diomede
                  
               
               
                  Perceauing them ſo faſt to run away,
                  T'
                        •
                     eleiue them like a ſtout and valiant Knight,
                  Did turne them backe againe, and made them ſtay
                  Still in the field, and valiantly to fight:
                  And at his entring in amongſt them met
                  King Philomene, on whome he fiercely ſet.
               
               
                  Who brauely vnto him did likewiſe ride,
                  Where each of them the other did aſſaile,
                  And valiantly their ſtrengths and valors tride
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  But neither gainſt the other could prevaile,
                  And yet they fought moſt furiouſly and long,
                  For both of them were paſſing ſtout and ſtrong,
               
               
                  And would not yeeld one 
                        •
                     o
                        •
                      vnto his foe,
                  So much they did in courage great excell.
                  But while they were together fighting ſo,
                  The Troyans fought ſo furiouſly and fell
                  Againſt the Greeks, that they could not ſuſtaine
                  Their mightie blows, but forced were againe
               
               
                  To run out of the field diſcomforted,
                  (Though Diomede did what he could to ſtay
                  And ſuccour them) ſo many of them dead,
                  And wounded ſorevpon the plaine then lay,
                  And caſt out many a great and woefull crie.
                  The which when Duke Meneſtes did eſpie,
               
               
                  And ſaw what great diſorder they were in,
                  And how the Troyans them ſo ſore oppreſt,
                  Into the battaile fiercely did begin
                  To enter, and with mightie Launce in reſt,
                  Brake through the Troyans ranks, till that he was
                  So farre, that he met with Pollidamas.
                  
               
               
                  Gainſt whome at vnawares he ran ſo faſt,
                  That with a blow which he at him let flie,
                  Vpon the ground he did him fiercely caſt:
                  And while that he amaz'd thereon did lie,
                  Had ſlaine him, if with ſpeed he had not beene
                  Relieu'd and reſcued by King Philomen.
                  
               
               
                  Who brauely in deſpight of all the force
                  And might Meneſtes had, did ſet him free,
                  And made him mount againe vpon his horſe,
                  Sore bleeding and in great extreamitie:
                  Meane time fierce Thelmon Aiax careleſly,
                  Vnarmed, with great pride (yet fooliſhly)
               
               
                  Amongſt the thickſt of all his armed foes,
                  Nere ceaſt to kill and mightily to wound
                  The Troyans, and ſuch valor great then ſhoes,
                  That they in heaps lay dead vpon the ground
                  About him, and none durſt againſt him ſtand,
                  So fierce he was with bloudy fword in hand,
               
               
                  To kill and beat them downe ſtill as he road:
                  And yet though in the midſt of them he was,
                  And that ſo many thouſands him with ſtood
                  On euery ſide, as he through them did paſſe;
                  No
                        •
                      any part of him was periſhed,
                  Nor drop of bloud out of his body ſhed.
               
               
                  
                  Which woonder was, conſidering how that he
                  Diſarmed fought. But when dame Fortune will
                  Preſerue and keepe man from extreamitie,
                  Nothing can hurt, nor him by no meanes kill:
                  And yet when as ſhe liſt ſhee'le him beguile,
                  And play and ſport with him a little while:
               
               
                  And ſodainly when he thinkes leaſt thereon,
                  Ore-turne her wheele, and caſt him on the ground.
                  As ſhe that day did vnto Thelamon,
                  
                  Who to his coſt her moſt vnconſtant found:
                  For as he mongſt the Troyans with great pride,
                  Diſarmed through their ranks did fiercely ride,
               
               
                  And many of the Perſian Archers ſlew,
                  With heart cleane voyd of any feare or dread,
                  And more and more with furie did renew
                  His force, and to his ſafetie tooke no heed:
                  
                     Paris perceauing his great hardineſſe,
                  And how he did the Perſian knights oppreſſe,
               
               
                  In great deſpight an arrow at him ſhot,
                  And with the ſame (as he did fiercely ride,
                  Still killing all he met, and ſpar'd them not)
                  Pierſt him at vnawares into the ſide,
                  So deepe a wound, that without remedie,
                  There was no other meanes but he muſt die.
               
               
                  Which when he did perceiue, and ſaw no way
                  T'avoid his death, with heart ſurpriz'd with ire,
                  In furious wiſe he made no more delay,
                  But running through the preaſe with great deſire
                  To be reveng'd on Paris ere he died,
                  Sought him ſo long, till at the laſt he ſpied
               
               
                  Him mongſt the thickſt of all the Greeks in fight,
                  And vnto him (with pale and deadly cheare,
                  But yet with extreame rage and great deſpight,
                  To thinke vpon his death that drew ſo neare:)
                  Said, Paris, the wound which thou haſt giuen me,
                  I know and certaine am my death will be.
               
               
                  For I do feele ſuch extreame griefe and paine
                  Within my heart, that I am well aſſur'd,
                  I neuer ſhall returne to Greece againe.
                  And ſith that thou my death haſt thus procur'd,
                  I meane to giue thee ſuch reward therefore,
                  That thou aliue to Troy ſhalt nere go more:
               
               
                  For as the great deſpight well meriteth,
                  Which thou ſhewſt me, ile make thee firſt to feele
                  (Ere that I die) the bitter pangs of death,
                  And ſend thee down before me into hell:
                  And therefore make account thy glaſſe is run,
                  And that thou canſt thy death as now not ſhun.
               
               
                  For here my troth I plight and firmely vow,
                  That with my ſword ile make diuorſe betweene
                  Queene Helena and thee, and that as now
                  The chaine of fained wedlocke that hath beene
                  So ſurelie made and knit twixt her and thee,
                  Shall now at laſt be cut in twaine by me.
               
               
                  And that falſe knot of thy adulterie,
                  (Which hath beene cauſe ſuch ſlaughter great to make,
                  And made ſo many valiant knights to die
                  In this our warre, and onlie for thy ſake)
                  Shall be vnknit
                        •
                      for without remedy,
                  
                     Paris (ſaid he) of my hand thou ſhalt die.
               
               
                  And with his ſword (ſcarſe able to ſuſtaine
                  Himſelfe vpright) gaue Paris ſuch a wound,
                  That with the ſame he cleft his head in twaine,
                  And therewith he fell dead vpon the ground:
                  Which hauing done, he likewiſe preſently
                  Fell downe and died to beare him company.
               
               
                  Which when the Troyans ſaw, with dolefull cheare
                  They tooke vp Paris body, to convay
                  The ſame to Troy, and in a mighty feare
                  Began to flie, where all along the way
                  The Greeks did kill, purſue, & beat them downe,
                  Even to the walls and trenches of the towne.
               
               
                  And more had done, but that it did begin
                  To draw to night, for then the Sun was downe.
                  And when the woefull Troyans were gone in,
                  And had ſecur'd themſelues within the towne:
                  The Greeks likewiſe retired backe, and went
                  Vnto their Campe, each man into his tent
               
               
                  To eaſe themſelues, but ere (as't them behou'd)
                  They tooke their reſt, that night Agamemnon
                  
                  Commanded that their tents ſhould be remou'd,
                  And ſet and placed neerer to the towne,
                  Not farre off from the walls: and ſo they were,
                  Which put the Troyans in no little feare.
               
               
                  So that they durſt not iſſue out to let
                  And hinder them from doing it, but glad
                  To ſaue themſelues; ſhut faſt their gates, and ſet
                  Watch all that night vpon the walls, and made
                  Such ſorrow, and ſo pittifully far'd
                  For Paris death, that nere the like was heard.
               
               
                  For by that meanes all Priams ſons being ſlaine,
                  They did deſpaire and out of hope cleane were
                  Of any comfort, or releaſe t'obtaine
                  In their diſtreſſe: and ſo poſſeſt with feare,
                  And plunged in moſt great extreamitie,
                  They made account there was no remedie,
               
               
                  
                  Nor any meanes to aid themſelues withall,
                  (But ſtill expecting their deſtruction)
                  To keepe themſelues enclos'd within the wall
                  And rampiers of their ſtrong and mightie towne:
                  And for that cauſe moſt pittiouſlie complaind,
                  And ſo great woe and ſorrow then ſuſtaind,
               
               
                  That nere the like was heard nor ſeene before.
                  But ſpecially King Priam did ſo grieue,
                  For Paris death, and did lament therefore
                  So mightilie, that nothing could relieue
                  Nor comfort him, and from his heart which fild
                  With woe and care then was, ſuch teares diſtild,
               
               
                  And let fall downe his checkes and aged face,
                  That he did ſeeme as if he would haue died.
                  To tell you how in this moſt wofull caſe,
                  Queene Hecuba his mother wept and cried:
                  And what exceeding ſorrow for their parts
                  His ſiſters made, and felt within their hearts:
               
               
                  And how they rent and tare their clothes & haire,
                  And beat and ſmote their breaſts in great diſtreſſe,
                  And all bedewd and wet their faces faire
                  With flouds of teares, t'expreſſe their heauineſſe:
                  Were vnto me a thing impoſſible.
                  And yet in truth it was not comparable,
               
               
                  To that which faire Queene Helena did make,
                  Who with a deadly cheare and wofull face,
                  Caſt forth moſt dolefull cries for Paris ſake,
                  And running furiouſlie vnto the place
                  Whereas his body lay, fell flat thereon,
                  And though that it was cold as any ſtone,
               
               
                  Embraſt it in her armes, and wofully
                  Lamenting on the ſame fell in a ſound,
                  And likely was in that extreamitie
                  To die, and t'haue beene laid into the ground
                  With him, if thoſe that were with her, by force
                  And ſtrength had not pul'd her off frō the corſe,
               
               
                  Wherewith ſhe rent and tare her golden haire,
                  Like one that's mad, & waxt ſo pale and wan,
                  That her moſt comelie face which was ſo faire,
                  Chang'd in ſuch ſort, that it therewith began
                  To looke and ſhow like vnto aſhes cold.
                  And with her hands which ſhe did ring & fold
               
               
                  Together, ſmote her white and deadly face,
                  And ſounding fell againe vpon the ground,
                  And in her armes did Paris corſe embrace,
                  And with her briniſh teares did fill his wound:
                  And was ſo much perplexed in her mind,
                  That ſhe could neither eaſe nor comfort find.
               
               
                  But rather ſeem'd to wiſh with great deſire
                  To die with him, in whome her ſole delight
                  Was placed, and in that moſt furious ire,
                  To end her daies with her moſt louing Knight,
                  And liue no more; ſith that ſhe was bereft
                  Of him, and in ſuch great diſcomfort left.
               
               
                  So that I may well ſay, that neuer any
                  Poore woman felt the like nor more diſtreſſe,
                  Although I could rehearſe and tell of many,
                  That haue been plunged in great heauineſſe,
                  As Cleopatre going to her graue.
                  And Thesbie, that did come out of the caue,
               
               
                  And ſmote her ſelfe for griefe into the heart.
                  And Oriſtilla, who no ſooner ſpied
                  Her Lord take ſhipping and from her depart,
                  Sore grieu'd for loue of him fell downe and died:
                  And Iulia that lou'd her Lord ſo well,
                  That ſodenly dead on the ground ſhe fell,
               
               
                  When ſhe beheld his cloaths all daſht with blood.
                  And Portia that was ſo true a wife
                  To Brutus, that when as ſhe vnderſtood
                  That he was ſlaine, becauſe ſhe had no knife
                  In readineſſe to kill herſelfe withall,
                  To ſhow her loue into the fire did fall
               
               
                  And burnt herſelfe. And that moſt noble Queene
                  Cald Arthemiſia, who when ſhe had found
                  Her Knight Mauſalus graue, and there had ſeene
                  His bones, did take them vp out of the ground:
                  And with an heart repleat with griefe and care,
                  Vnto her Pallace ſolemnly them bare.
               
               
                  And beating them to powder, every day
                  Did drinke thereof, till it was cleane conſum'd.
                  Who with the reſt aforeſaid I muſt ſay,
                  (And as in truth it is to be preſum'd.)
                  No doubt great griefe endur'd, but not ſo much
                  As faire Queene Helen did, nor nothing ſuch.
               
               
                  Who would haue kild her ſelfe for Paris ſake,
                  Deſiring to her graue with ſpeed to go,
                  And rather of her life an end to make,
                  Then to liue after him ſhe loued ſo:
                  And languiſhing in woe long time remaind,
                  And never could from weeping be reſtaind.
               
               
                  (He that doth ſay that women cannot cry,
                  Deceaues himſelfe, for tis a thing moſt ſure
                  They can by nature doo't, and certainly,
                  Though they no griefe nor ſorrow do endure;
                  Yet they can falſe and fained teares diſtraine
                  Out of their eies, & without cauſe complaine.)
               
               
                  
                  I ſay not this Queene Helena t'accuſe
                  Of fained teares, whoſe heart with woe was fild,
                  For then I ſhould you with vntruth abuſe,
                  For ſhe for griefe her ſelfe would faine haue kild:
                  And yet it ſeemes ſhe was not in ſuch haſt
                  As ſhe made ſhew; for when the ſtorme was paſt,
               
               
                  She ſoone forgot the great extreamitie
                  That ſhe was in, for all things haue an end,
                  And every woe how great ſo ere it be,
                  Muſt paſſe away, for follie't were to ſpend
                  Long time in that which may be remedied.
                  For though that faire Queene Helen would haue died
               
               
                  For Paris ſake as then, yet afterward
                  She did repent, for nature did her moue,
                  And told her that it was a thing too hard
                  For her ſo ſoone to kill her ſelfe for loue:
                  She was a woman, what would you haue more,
                  She thought it folly great to die therefore.
               
               
                  But I will ſpeake no more hereof as now,
                  For it would be too long and teadious
                  For me to ſhew and to declare to you,
                  Her grieuous woe and paſſions furious,
                  And all her dolefull lamentation:
                  The which would moue vnto compaſſion
               
               
                  The hardeſt heart aliue to heare it told.
                  For Priam and Queene Hecuba likewiſe,
                  Such pitty had to ſee, and to behold
                  Her ſhead ſuch flouds of teares out of her eies,
                  And in ſuch fort to grieue and to complaine,
                  That they almoſt endured as much paine
               
               
                  Within their hearts for her, as ſhe had had
                  For Paris, but there was no remedy.
                  But to conclude, when they an end had made
                  Of all their woe, King Priam ſpeedily
                  Did cauſe a rich and coſtly ſepulchre,
                  To be ſet vp in Iunoes Temple, where
               
               
                  Moſt ſumptuóuſly, and in their Paynim wiſe
                  His bodie was entomb'd, but to declare
                  The manner of the great ſolemnities
                  Then vſed at their funerals, (which are
                  So many and ſo diuers) it would be
                  Too long to be declared now by me.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  ¶ How Panthaſilia Queene of the Amazons, comming to ayd the Troyans against the Grecians, ſh
                        ••
                      obtained great honor, and was ſlaine by Pyrrhus the So
                        ••
                     e of Achilles.
                  
               
               
                  KIng Priamus in doubt of his eſtate,
                  (And brought into moſt great extreamity
                  By fortune, and his hard and cruell fate,)
                  When he perceiu'd no other remedie,
                  Shut faſt the gates of Troy, and day and night
                  Kept watch and ward as ſtrongly as he might.
               
               
                  For all the Troyans generally were
                  So much abaſht, and did ſuch ſorrow make
                  For Paris death, that they could not forbeare
                  To weepe and waile, and durſt not vndertake,
                  Againſt the Greeks to fight nor iſſue out,
                  But kept within the towne in feare and doubt,
               
               
                  Expecting nought, but finally to end
                  Their daies in woe. Which when the Greeks did ſee.
                  
                     Agamemnon to Priamus did ſend
                  A meſſenger t'intreat with him (as he
                  Before had done) to iſſue with his might
                  Out of the towne, againſt the Greeks to fight.
               
               
                  But Priamus the motion did deteſt,
                  And flatly ſaid it was not his intent,
                  To iſſue out of Troy at his requeſt:
                  And that he was moſt reſolutely bent,
                  Not once to ſet one foot out of the towne,
                  But when he liſt without compulſion.
               
               
                  And yet the cauſe why he ſo long time ſtaid
                  From iſſuing out againſt the Grecians,
                  
                  Was, for becauſe he did expect ſome ayd
                  From Panthaſilia Queene of Amazons:
                  
                  Who at that time was comming with great ſpeed
                  And mighty force, to helpe him in his need.
               
               
                  Whoſe Countrie (as ſome Authors ſay) did ſtand
                  Farre diſtant in the orientall part,
                  Twixt Aſia and Europe. In which Land
                  None elſe but women-kind did dwell, whoſe art
                  And chiefe delight, and onelie exerciſe,
                  Was managing of armes in warlike wiſe,
               
               
                  
                  And valiantly into the field to ride,
                  Arm'd at all points againſt their enemie,
                  Mongſt whom no man might by no meanes abide,
                  Nor they with them at any time did lie
                  But three months in the yeare, which as they ſay,
                  Was in the months of Aprill, Iune, and May.
               
               
                  At which time ſetting armes and wars aſide,
                  They went into an Iſle not farre from thence,
                  Wherein their men did all alone abide,
                  Of purpoſe, and with full and ſole pretence
                  To lie with them, and till they did conceaue
                  And were with child, did not that I ſland leaue.
               
               
                  And after time of their conception,
                  They did in haſt and with all ſpeed returne
                  Into the Couotry where they dwelt, which done,
                  When as the child into the world was borne,
                  They nouriſht it three months, & at the end
                  Thereof, ift were a ſonne, they did it ſend
               
               
                  Vnto the Iſle whereas the men remaind:
                  And if it were a female child, they hold
                  And keepe it ſtill by them, and it ſuſtaind
                  And nouriſhed, till that it waxed old,
                  And was of yeares and ſtrength to vſe & weare
                  An armor, and to mannage ſword and ſpeare,
               
               
                  According to their ancient Country faſhion.
                  And at that time Queene Panthaſilia was
                  The Soveraigne Commander of that Nation,
                  Who did ſo much in valor great ſurpaſſe:
                  That for her puiſſant force the trump of fame,
                  Throughout the world eternized her name,
               
               
                  And yet although ſhe did addict her mind
                  To practiſe armes, & mannage ſword & ſpeare,
                  (Which is a thing not vs'd by women-kind)
                  For wiſedome, and for vertue ſhe did beare
                  The praiſe and commendation, for none ever
                  Surpaſſed her for modeſty what s'ever.
               
               
                  The reaſon that did mooue her then to aid
                  The Troyans was, for that in heart ſhe bare
                  Affection great to Hector, and tis ſaid,
                  Lou'd him ſo well that all her thought and care,
                  Her onely ioy, her pleaſure and delight
                  Was in him, cauſe he was ſo braue a Knight.
               
               
                  And therefore when as by report ſhe heard,
                  The Towne of Troy beſieged was, and how
                  The Greeks and Troyans gainſt each other ward:
                  She did proteſt and made a ſolemne vow
                  To go to Troy, and with her force and might,
                  For loue of Hector gainſt the Greeks to fight.
               
               
                  And with her tooke a thouſand maids that were
                  Well armed, and on horſes braue did ride,
                  Who gallantly could mannageſword & ſpeare,
                  And well durſt gainſt their foes in field abide▪
                  
                  And to that end ſet forward with all ſpeed,
                  To helpe her deare friend Hector in his need.
               
               
                  But when ſhe came to Troy, and vnderſtood
                  That valiant knight in that great warre was dead,
                  And that as then ſhe could do him no good,
                  A flood of teares out of her eies ſhe ſhead:
                  And did ſuch extreame ſorrow for him make,
                  As if ſhe would haue dyed for his ſake.
               
               
                  And tooke a ſolemne oath reveng'd to be
                  Vpon the Greeks therefore, and to that end
                  She did deſire King Priamus that he.
                  His Troyan force into the field would ſend:
                  With whome (ſhe ſaid) the Amazons ſhould go,
                  To ſhew the Greeks what they in armes could do.
               
               
                  And how with ſpeare & ſheild the could thē greet,
                  And make them feele their force and worthines
                  In armes, when they with thē in field ſhould meet:
                  To whoſe requeſt made with great hardines,
                  King Priamus did grant with good adviſe.
                  And next day when the Sun began to riſe,
               
               
                  And on the wals and towers of Troy did ſhene,
                  Sent all his Troyan Knights out of the towne
                  Againſt the Greeks, led by King Philomene,
                  
                  Commander of the knights of Phaflagowne:
                  
                  And next to him Aeneas brauely led
                  The ſecond band, well ſtuft and furniſhed
               
               
                  With warlike knights. And then Pollidamas
                  
                  Conductor of another band did ride,
                  And after them in order forth did paſſe
                  Queene Panthaſilia guarded on each ſide
                  By Amazons, with courage ſtout and bold:
                  Whom when the Grecian armie did behold,
               
               
                  To iſſue forth in battaile brauely plaſt,
                  They likewiſe gainſt them marcht into the field,
                  And firſt of all Meneſtes in great haſt,
                  With mighty ſpeare the which in reſt he held,
                  Againſt the Queene of Amazons did ride:
                  Whoſe comming ſhe moſt ſtoutly did abide,
               
               
                  And did encounter him with ſuch a force,
                  That with her Launce to ground ſhe did him caſt,
                  And forcibly did ſeaze vpon his horſe:
                  And as ſhe further mongſt the Grecians paſt,
                  King Diomede vpon her fiercely ſet,
                  And ſhe as fiercely with him alſo met,
               
               
                  
                  And puiſſan
                        •
                     lie ſtrake him ſo great a blow,
                  That notwithſtanding all his force and might,
                  She did him cleane out of his ſadle throw,
                  And therewithall vnto his great deſpight,
                  Layd hand vpon his ſhield, and took't away
                  Perforce from him, and all that durſt ſay nay.
               
               
                  And then like Tygar fell with greedines,
                  Throughout the field road ranging vp & downe,
                  And as a fierce and hungry Lyoneſſe,
                  Slew many of the Greeks, till Thelamon
                  
                  Beholding what a ſlaughter then ſhe made
                  Of them, ſuch indignation thereat had,
               
               
                  And into ſuch exceeding rage did fall,
                  That he did ſet vpon her furiouſly:
                  But ſhe no whit abaſhed therewithall,
                  Let flie at him againe as valiantly:
                  And ſpight of all the Greeks that bout him were,
                  By force did him out of his ſadle beare.
               
               
                  And by the aid of ſtout King Philomene,
                  
                  Layd hold on him, and caus'd him to be led
                  To Troy-ward, and without all doubt had cleane
                  Ore-throwne the Greeks as then, if Diomed
                  
                  With many Grecian knights had not aſſaild
                  The Troyans, and ſo much gainſt them preuaild,
               
               
                  That ere that they led Thelamon away,
                  He reſcued him out of their hands with ſpeed:
                  Yet after that the Queene all that ſame day,
                  So furiouſly the Grecians blood did ſhed,
                  That many of them cruelly were ſlaine,
                  And by her and her maidens all the plaine
               
               
                  Was cov'red ore with Greeks, that wounded ſore
                  Lay crying out, and they at laſt compeld
                  Thereto by force (becauſe they could no more
                  Suſtaine her mightie blowes) to leaue the field,
                  And run into the ſtrond in mightie feare:
                  Whereas by her ſo many of them were
               
               
                  In furious wiſe beat downe and ſlaine out right,
                  That finally they had beene all ore-throwne,
                  If Diomede moſt like a valiant knight,
                  Had not his proweſſe great at that time ſhowne,
                  And forciblie reſiſtance made gainſt all
                  The Troyans power, for he ſtood like a wall
               
               
                  And bulwarke ſtrong in their defence and aid,
                  And freed them from all extreamitie
                  And feare wherein as then they were, and ſtaid
                  The force and furie of the Queene. Yet ſhe
                  So valiantly behau'd her ſelfe that day,
                  That with great honor ſhe went thence away.
               
               
                  And did returne againe with victorie,
                  Triumphing with her maids vnto the Towne,
                  And ſo left fighting with the enemie,
                  About the time of Ph
                           •
                        bus going downe,
                  And entred with King Philomene that road
                  Cloſe by her. Where King Priamus abode
               
               
                  To welcome her, and with great reverence,
                  In Princely wiſe receaued her, and gaue
                  Her hearty thanks for th'aid and great defence
                  She had vouchſafed him that day, to ſaue
                  His honor, and to ſhow her worthineſſe:
                  Wherein (he ſaid) he could not but confeſſe
               
               
                  That ſhe exceld all others what ſo ere.
                  And offring her his gold and treaſure great,
                  And all things elſe that neceſſary were,
                  For to refreſh her and her maids, he let
                  Her take her reſt, in hope through her to be
                  Revenged of his Grecian enemie,
               
               
                  And all the wrongs and malice to require,
                  Which he long had endured at their hand.
                  For after that ſhe ceaſed not to fight
                  Againſt the Greeks, and daily to withſtand
                  Their power ſo well, that they were ſtill cōpeld
                  With loſſe and great diſgrace to leaue the field.
               
               
                  Till Menelaus returned backe againe
                  From Lyco
                           •
                        edes Land, and with him brought
                  Yong Pyrrhus ſon t'Achilles (that was ſlaine
                  In Troy by Paris hand, and treaſon wrought
                  By Hecuba) whoſe comming did reioyce
                  The Grecians much, for they all with one voyce
               
               
                  Did welcome him, and were exceeding glad
                  To ſee him, and becauſe he was the ſon
                  And heire vnto Achilles, he was made
                  Commander of the Myrmidons. Which done,
                  And homage made to him by full accord
                  Of all his knights, as to their Soueraigne Lord:
               
               
                  King Agamemnon did create him Knight,
                  And t'honor him the more, King Thelamon
                  
                  Did gird his ſword about him (as the right
                  And cuſtome was) and when he put it on,
                  Said vnto him, good Couſin Pyrrhus ſee,
                  Thou prou'ſt in time as good a knight to bee
               
               
                  As ere thy father was. For truth to tell,
                  While mongſt vs he enioyed vitall breath,
                  He did all men for valor great exceed
                        •
                     
                  
                  And ſee likewiſe that thou revenge his death.
                  And after that, two Grecian Dukes did kneele
                  Vpon the ground, and put on either heele
               
               
                  
                  A ſpur of beaten gold, and when that all
                  The ceremonies vſuall ended were,
                  King Agamemnon openly did call
                  For th'arinor which Achilles vs'd to beare
                  Vpon hi
                        •
                      backe, when he in field did fight,
                  And gaue it vnto Pyrrhus as his right,
               
               
                  With all his treaſure and his tent, that was
                  Left in the Grecian campe when he was dead.
                  And after that they had for eight daies ſpace,
                  Throughout the Grecian hoaſt ſolemnized
                  A royall feaſt, to ſhew the ioy they had
                  Conceiu'd for Pyrrhus, that then knight was made.
               
               
                  The next day after when as Phaebus bright,
                  (Which ſpreadeth forth his radiāt beams ſo far,)
                  Had driuen away the browne and obſcure night,
                  And cleane defaſt the beauty of the ſtar
                  Cald Lucifer, which commonly men ſay
                  And tearme to be the meſſenger of day.
               
               
                  They did prepare themſelues againe to fight,
                  And with the Troyans in the field to meet,
                  Determining with all their force and might
                  That day to ſhew their valors, and to ſet
                  On them, and to aſſaile them on each ſide:
                  And to that end out of their tents did ride
               
               
                  In order brauely plaſt, where Pyrrhus bare
                  His fathers warlike armes vpon his ſhield,
                  And his Coat-Armor alſo which he ware:
                  And in that ſort road formoſt to the field,
                  Well horſt. Where he no ſooner entred was,
                  But he encountred with Pollidamas.
                  
               
               
                  Whom with his ſword in hand he fircely ſmot,
                  And he the like did vnto him againe.
                  But Pyrrhus on him ſuch advantage got,
                  That he was in great danger to be ſlaine
                  By him as then, if that King Phylomen
                  
                  Had not come thither t'aid him with his men.
               
               
                  But Pyrrhus ſmote king Phylomen a blow
                  Vpon the helmet with ſuch extreame force,
                  That ſore amaz'd, he was conſtraind to bow,
                  And bend his body backward on his horſe,
                  And without doubt had tane him priſoner then,
                  If he had not been holpen by his men.
               
               
                  Who to relieue and ſaue him, fiercely fought,
                  And ſtroue againſt the Greeks, but neretheleſſe,
                  The valor great they ſhew'd, availd them nought:
                  For Pyrrhus on them did ſo ſtrongly preſſe
                  With Myrmidons, that they could not ſuſtaine
                  His fierce aſſault, but many of them were ſlaine.
               
               
                  And beaten downe, whereby King Phylomene,
                  
                  Still was and ſtood in danger great to die,
                  Or to be tane, if that he had not beene
                  Somewhat relieu'd in that extreamitie
                  By ſtout Pollidamas, that fiercely fought
                  To ſuccour him, but it availd him nought,
               
               
                  For at that time the Myrmidons did fight
                  So furiouſly, and with ſuch valor great,
                  That he could not (to his no little ſpight)
                  Relieue him, nor out of that danger ſet:
                  Till Panthaſilia comming furiouſly
                  Vpon the Greeks aſſaild them valiantly.
               
               
                  And with hermaidens (who for their delight
                  That day did iſſue forth into the field,
                  With Caſſocksore their armors all of white)
                  So hote a skirmiſh with the Grecians held,
                  And did ſo many of them fiercely ſlay,
                  That they conſtrained were to giue her way.
               
               
                  For who ſo ere he was that with her met
                  Was ſure to die, till Thelmon vnaware,
                  With furie great vpon her fiercely ſet,
                  And with his Launce out of her ſadle bare
                  Her to the ground, and laid her on the plaine:
                  But ſhe no whit abaſht ro
                        •
                     e vp againe,
               
               
                  And with her ſword gaue Thelamon a blow
                  That feld him to the ground, & then by force
                  Her Amazons their valors great to ſhow,
                  Deſpight of all the Greeks, brought her an horſe,
                  And made her mount thereon. But neretheleſſe
                  The Myrmidons on Phylomene did preſſe
               
               
                  So hotely and ſo ſore, that all the might
                  And force his men in his behalfe could ſho,
                  Did nought availe, for to their great deſpight,
                  They tooke him priſoner, and began to go
                  With him through midſt of them out of the field.
                  Which when the Queene of Amazons beheld,
               
               
                  Aſſembling all her maids, ſhe did begin
                  To follow them, and did ſo fiercely ſet
                  Vpon them, that with furi
                        •
                     en
                        •
                     ring in
                  Amongſt the thickeſt of the preſſe, ſhe beat
                  Them downe ſo faſt, that ſhe did them conſtraine,
                  Deſpight their hearts, to let him go againe
               
               
                  Out of their hands, and fought ſo cruelly
                  Againſt them at that time, that ſhe compeld
                  Them in great haſt before her face to flie,
                  And backward to retire out of the field:
                  Whoſe valor great, when Pyrrhus did eſpie,
                  He did begin vnto his knights to crie.
               
               
                  
                  And ſaid it was a ſhame for them to loſe
                  Their liues by womens hands, and ſo to yeeld
                  Them ground, and giue occaſion to their foes
                  To ſcorne them, and by them to be held
                  As cowards, that could not the force withſtand
                  Of women, if they did not take in hand
               
               
                  With ſpeed to daunt their pride, and kill them all,
                  And by that meanes requite them for the ſhame
                  They had endur'd by them, and therewithall
                  T'encourage them forthwith to do the ſame,
                  With ſword in hand, and with a knightlie cheare
                  Before thē marcht. Whō when the Queen did here
               
               
                  In that ſort to his knights to crie, ſhe ſtaid
                  Her horſe, (and ſcorning once to turne her backe,
                  Or of his threatning words to be affraid,)
                  With courage ſtout and bold vnto him ſpeake,
                  And ſaid, Pyrrhus, I know thy father well
                  Slew Hector, that all others did excell
               
               
                  Throughout the world for peereleſſe chivalrie,
                  Not fighting with him like a valiant knight,
                  But vnawares, and by falſe treachery,
                  Before that he of him had any ſight:
                  Which traiterous act my hart doth ſo much grieue,
                  That I ſhall thinke vpon it while I liue.
               
               
                  And for the ſame my heart perſwadeth me,
                  That iuſt revenge without exception,
                  Should therefore firſt be taken vpon thee,
                  And alſo in like ſort on every one
                  That vnto thee allied are by bloud:
                  For loue of that moſt valiant knight & good▪
                  
               
               
                  Whoſe death the world cānot enough complaine,
                  And for that cauſe men do not onlie take
                  Revenge therefore, but women do maintaine
                  His quarrell, and haue vowed for his ſake,
                  As right requires without exception,
                  To put the ſame in execution.
               
               
                  Vnto which end here now before thy face
                  I ſtand, and readie am to trie thy might,
                  For to reuenge his death here in this place:
                  And ſith thou haſt at women ſuch a ſpight,
                  Thou ſhalt ſoone find by good experience
                  What we can do, and how in our defence
               
               
                  We can both weld a ſword and warlike ſpeare,
                  Which thou ſhalt try by ſhedding of thy blood
                  Here in the field without all dread or feare.
                  Which words when Pyrrhus heard, he waxt as wood
                  As any Lyon fierce when men him chaſe,
                  And then with colour pale and angry face,
               
               
                  He tooke a ſpeare and ran at her amaine,
                  And ſhe likewiſe (of him no whit in feare)
                  Encountred with him brauelie in the plaine,
                  Where Pyrrhus firſt vpon her brake his ſpeare,
                  But mou'd her not, ſhe did ſo firmely ſit,
                  But ſhe did him ſo ſure and ſtrongly hit,
               
               
                  That with her Launce ſhe did him overthrow,
                  And made him fall downe flat vpon the plaine,
                  At which his heart with rage did overflow,
                  And riſing on his feet an great diſdaine,
                  With ſword in hand ſtrake at her many a blow,
                  But ſhe ſtill firmely ſat, and did not bow:
               
               
                  And in exchange gaue him the like againe,
                  And often made him kneele vpon the ground,
                  And in that ſort the fight betweene them twaine
                  Continued long, and no advantage found
                  On either ſide, till Pyrrhus knights came on
                  And brought his horſe, & made him mount theron▪
                  
               
               
                  And then the Generall Agamemnon
                  
                  With banners rich and pennons braue diſplaid,
                  Marcht forward, & into the field came on,
                  With many Earles, Dukes, & Kings to ayd
                  And ſecond him, and to aſſaile their foes,
                  Whoſe entry made the Troyan knights to loſe
               
               
                  Their grouud, they were ſo fiercely followed,
                  And hotely charged by the Grecians,
                  
                  Till Philomen them brauely reſcued,
                  And by that meanes relieu'd the Troyans,
                  
                  And ioyning with the Queene the Greeks aſſaild,
                  And at that time ſo much gainſt them preuaild,
               
               
                  That by main force they made thē loſe their groūd,
                  And then great ſtore of knights on either ſide
                  Were ſtaine out right, & many more were found
                  That wounded ſore with gaſtly voices cride,
                  And yeelded vp their breath, and many a ſhe
                        •
                     d
                  And helmet broke and cleft, lay in the field.
               
               
                  And many a horſe ran ma
                        ••
                     erleſſe about,
                  And ſuch a noiſe of Drums & Trumpets ſhrill,
                  And cries of men was heard the field throughout,
                  And with the ſound thereof the aire did fill▪
                  
                  That fearefull't was to heare and to behold,
                  How on each ſide with courage ſtout and bold
               
               
                  And moſt confuſed noiſe, they ſlew each other.
                  Where th' Amazons conducted by their Queene,
                  Aſſaild the Greeks ſo furiouſly together,
                  That all the field the which before was greene,
                  Was turn'd into a faire and crimſon red,
                  With blood of Greeks which by them then was ſhed.
               
               
                  
                  Who ſeconded by ſtout Pollidamas,
                  
                  King Eſdras, and Aeneas, and the reſt
                  Of Pr
                           •••
                        s force, which then all entred was
                  Into the field, vpon the Grecians preſt
                  So valiantlie, that they were forſt to loſe
                  Their ground, and to giue place vnto their foes.
               
               
                  And would haue fled if Pyrrhus had not been,
                  Who onlie by his valor made them ſtay,
                  And kild ſo many of the Troyans men,
                  That they were glad to get out of his way.
                  But Panthaſilia brauelie did with ſtand
                  Both him and all the Greeks, and by her hand
               
               
                  And extreame force the Troyans did relieue,
                  And kild ſo many Greeks on euery ſide,
                  And vnto them ſuch mightie wounds did giue,
                  That they durſt not her puiſſant blows abide:
                  And in that fore thoſe Champions fierce & bold,
                  The fight in equall ballance long did hold.
               
               
                  Till Pyrrhus with the Troyan Glaucon met,
                  That brother was vnto Pollidamas,
                  
                  
                     Anthenors ſon, and on him fiercely ſet,
                  To whome at vnawares as he did paſſe
                  By him, he gaue a wound into the ſide
                  So deepely, that he there fell downe and died.
               
               
                  Wherewith Queene Panthaſilia fiercely ran
                  To Pyrrhus, and did brauely on him ſet,
                  At which time ſuch a cruell fight began
                  Betweene them both, when they together met:
                  That with their ſwords in furious wiſe by force,
                  They beat each other downe off from his horſe.
               
               
                  And ſo on foot fought valiantly and long,
                  Without advantage gotten on either ſide,
                  Till that the Greeks and Troyans with a throng
                  Of knights by force betweene them both did ride
                  And parted them: and then Pollidamas
                  
                  (Whoſe heart with griefe & wrath poſſeſſed was
               
               
                  For Glaucons death) vpon the Grecians ran,
                  And without mercie or compaſſion had
                  Of any one, beat downe both horſe and man,
                  And with the Queene ſo great a ſlaughter made
                  Of them at that ſame time, that they compeld
                  Them ſpight their hearts to flie, out of the field
               
               
                  Vnto their tents: vntill that Diomed,
                  
                  And Thelamon, with Pyrrhus, turn'd them backe,
                  And once againe into the field them led:
                  Where for a while they did reſiſtance make,
                  And fought againe till that it drew to night,
                  At which time when they could no longer fight
               
               
                  For wearineſſe: When Phoebus gan to hide
                  Her gliſtering beames, and Weſtward to deſcend,
                  (With greateſt▪ loſſe vpon the Grecians ſide)
                  They did from fighting ceaſe, and made an end
                  Of that daies bloudie battaile, with deſire
                  To reſt themſelues, as time then did require.
               
               
                  And ſo they did 
                        〈◊〉
                      next day gan t'appeare,
                  When as with courage great each ſide began
                  To enter in the field, and without feare,
                  In furious wiſe ſlew many a valiant man:
                  And for a month enſuing every day,
                  From fighting in the field did never ſtay.
               
               
                  But who did beſt, or had the victory
                  In all that time, there is no mention made,
                  Nor yet what men of note therein did die,
                  But onely that Queene Panthaſilia had
                  One hundred of her women therein loſt,
                  For which ſhe ſaid, it ſhould her dearely coſt,
               
               
                  But ſhe would be revenged for the ſame
                  Vpon the Greeks, if Fortune favourable
                  Would be to her, but ſhe (that beares the name
                  To be ſo fickle, falſe, and variable,
                  That no man can his truſt in her repoſe,)
                  By turning of her wheele did make her loſe
               
               
                  Her life, when as ſhe was in highſt degree
                  Of honors throne, preſuming that her ſoes
                  Nere ſhould bereaue her of it. But you▪ ſee
                  That when it is Gods pleaſure to diſpoſe▪
                  
                  Of man, and of his actions none can't ſhun,
                  For what he hath decreed muſt be done.
               
               
                  For that when many battailes had been fought,
                  And Greeks and Troyans long and furiouſly,
                  Had ſlaine and ſpoild each others power, & ſought
                  On either ſide to win the victorie▪
                  
                  And that Queene Panthaſilia brauely had
                  Behau'd her ſelfe in many fights, and made
               
               
                  Such ſlaughter of the Greeks, that for the ſame
                  They feared her, and ſhun'd her in the fight,
                  And by that meanes had much encreaſt her fame:
                  With heart that was poſſeſt with great deſpight
                  That ſhe had loſt ſo many maidens ſo.
                  In furious wiſe into the field did go,
               
               
                  One day betimes vpon the Greeks to ſet,
                  With full intent to be reveng'd therefore,
                  And in the battaile firſt with Pyrrhus met▪
                  
                  Who cauſe he her, and ſhe him hated ſo,
                  With courage ſtout ſhe ſpurd her gallant ſteed
                  So hard, that ſhe did make his ſides to bleed.
               
               
                  
                  And ran at him, and he at her likewiſe,
                  And with their puiſſant ſpeares ſet in their reſts,
                  And countenances ſterne, and wrathfull eyes,
                  Directly aymed at each others breſt,
                  And gaue each vnto other ſuch a ſtroke,
                  That both their ſpeares in many peeces broke.
               
               
                  But neither of them fell vnto the ground,
                  Not once within their ſadles bowd or bent
                  And yet the Queene gaue Pirrhus ſuch a wound
                  With her ſpeare head into the breſt, that went
                  Cleane thrugh his armes that he therwith bled ſore,
                  Which when the Grecians ſaw, they were therfore
               
               
                  So grieu'd, that with hideous noyſe they crid,
                  And like to ſwarmes of Bees vpon her fell,
                  And did encloſe her round on euery ſide.
                  But ſhe did fight againſt them all ſo well,
                  And valiantly, that they did her admire,
                  And ſpight their hearts ſhe made thē back retire.
               
               
                  Whereby long time it was ere they could get
                  Or haue aduantage on her, till at laſt
                  Being ſore oppreſt and round about beſet,
                  So thicke by them, that they ſmot her as faſt
                  As Smiths vpon an Anuile head, they broke
                  Her helmet, and with many a cruell ſtroke
               
               
                  Of axes, ſwords, and other weapons, tare
                  And rent her armes, and cleft her ſhield in twaine,
                  Whereby her ſhoulders naked were and bare,
                  Yet neretheleſſe ſhe did the fight maintaine
                  Againſt them all, ſo long and valiantly,
                  That many Greeks dead at her feet did lie.
               
               
                  Till Pirrhus wounded as before is ſayd,
                  And feeling ſo great anguiſh ſmart and paine
                  Within his heart, that he was ſore afraid
                  To die thereof, in haſt ran to the plaine,
                  Intending whatſoere of him became,
                  To be reuenged on her for the ſame.
               
               
                  Whom when ſhe ſaw come running in ſuch haſt,
                  And doubting ſhe by him ſhould be aſſayld,
                  She turnd about, and to him made as faſt,
                  And with her ſword firſt ſtrake at him, but faild
                  To hit him, for the Greeks on her did come
                  So thicke and faſt that ſhe could haue no roome
               
               
                  To lift and weld her ſword aboue her head,
                  But he ſmot her a blow with mighty force,
                  And cut her arme cleane off wherewith ſhe bled
                  So ſore, that ſhe fell dead off from her horſe.
                  And not contented therewithall to ſhew
                  His cruelty, he did her body hew
               
               
                  And mangle with his ſword in peeces ſmall,
                  And yet the blood did run out of his wound
                  So faſt▪ that he conſtrained was to fall,
                  As if he had been dead vpon the ground:
                  Where groueling in a trance awhile he lay,
                  Till that his Knights did beare him thence away
               
               
                  Vpon a ſhield, with ſad and heauy cheare;
                  Sore bleeching, and deepe wounded to his tent.
                  But when the Amaſoman Maids did heare
                  Their Queene was ſlaine, in furious wiſe they went
                  (Like vnto women deſperate and mad,
                  And as if of their liues no care they had.
               
               
                  Among the thickeſt of the Greeks, and then
                  So crueſly aſſayld them that they ſlew
                  Two thouſand of their beſt and braueſt men▪
                  
                  And did the fight more terrible renew
                  Then it had been all that day long before,
                  And fought that time ſo deſperarely and ſore,
               
               
                  That wonder t'was that women could endure
                  To do ſo much, but all to little end
                  When they had loſt her that could them ſecure,
                  And by her valor great did them defend▪
                  
                  
                     As being ſhe who onely and alone
                  For worthines inferior was to none.
               
               
                  For both they and the Troians then were in
                  Such danger great for want of one to guide
                  Them in the field, that they did all begin
                  Like ſheepe diſperſt to run on euery ſide:
                  And ſcatteringly for their defence to ſtand,
                  To keepe themſelues out of the Grecians hand.
               
               
                  Who then ſo furiouſly vpon them ran,
                  With full pretence their loſſes to require;
                  That they diſmaid to ſaue themſelues began
                  To make retrait, wherein with great deſpight
                  The Grecians did ten thouſand of them ſlay,
                  And they to Troy-ward from them fled away.
               
               
                  For all the Grecians then at once came on
                  Vpon them, & whoſoeuer them withſtood
                  Were by them ſlaine without exception;
                  But ſpecially the Amazons, whoſe blood
                  They chiefeſt ſought to ſpill, becauſe they had
                  Together with their Queene ſuch ſlaughter 
                        •
                     ad
               
               
                  Of them while ſhe did liue, for ſhe alone
                  A terror was to them, and therefore they
                  Without all mercy or compaſſion▪
                  
                  In great deſpight did them ſo fiercely ſlay:
                  And draue the Troians fore them to the towne,
                  And neuer ceaſt to kill, and beat them downe.
               
               
                  
                  Till they in mighty feare and great diſtreſſe
                  Got in, and after them their gates did cloſe,
                  Being out of hope (as men cleane comfortles,)
                  Of euer fighting more againſt their foes
                  In open field, ſith their beſt knights were ſlaine,
                  And therefore thinking it to be in vaine
               
               
                  For them to iſſue 
                        •
                     orth, they purpoſed
                  To keepe themſelues cloſe in their towne, as then
                  Impregnable, (if it were furniſhed
                  As they ſuppoſd of victualls and of men.)
                  And able to reſiſt and hold out all
                  The forces of the world, though they ſhould fall
               
               
                  Vpon it all at once. But for all that
                  The Greeks no whit deſpayring at the laſt
                  To win it, ſet ſtrong watch at euery gate,
                  And ſentinels to ſee that no man paſt
                  Out of the towne, no
                        •
                      victualls were conuaid
                  Into't, while they in ſiedge before it ſtaid.
               
               
                  And they within the towne great ſorrow made
                  For Pantheſillias ſake, who valiantly
                  In their defence againſt the Grecians, had
                  By Pyrrhus hand been ſlaine, but ſpecially
                  Becauſe that they could find no meanes to haue
                  Her mangled corps, to bury it in a graue
               
               
                  With honor which thereto did appertaine.
                  And to that end ſent to the Greeks to pray,
                  And to entreat them for't, but all in vaine,
                  For mooued ſore they flatly ſaid them nay,
                  And ſwore and vou'd with proteſtations great,
                  That they nere ſhould her body from them get.
               
               
                  But to deſpight and grieue them ſayd, it ſhould
                  Be throwne to dogs, and fowles of th'aire to be
                  Deuourd and torne by them, before they would
                  Showd ſo great ſauor to their enemie,
                  To whom they did ſo deadly hatred beare.
                  But though that they to her ſo cruell were,
               
               
                  Yet Pyrrhus ſomewhat milder then the reſt,
                  Would not conſent vnto ſuch cruelty:
                  And ſaid to them, that he did thinke it beſt
                  To giue her body to the enemy.
                  But Diomede ſayd plainely to them all,
                  That ſhe had not deſerued buriall,
               
               
                  That in her life had ſlaine ſo many men▪
                  
                  And in that ſort they ſtroue and did contend
                  With many words about the ſame, but when
                  They had long argu'd mongſt themſelues, in th'end
                  They all agreed, and did the body take
                  Deſpightfully, and caſt it in a lake
               
               
                  Or pond of water, nere vnto the towne.
                  Wherein let it conſume and rot away
                  While vnto you at large I doe ſetdowne
                  What they did in the towne of Troy, that lay
                  Encloſd therein. But firſt I muſt complaine
                  Of thee oh Mars, that mad'ſt them to ſuſtaine
               
               
                  Such extreame loſſe, and by thy furious ire
                  Didſt cleane conſume the worthy Troian blood▪
                  
                  Why didſt thou with inſatiable deſire,
                  Slay all their Knights, & gainſt them was ſo wood▪
                  
                  And furiouſly bent, as to let fall
                  Thy vengance vpon them in generall?
               
               
                  To make them as a Myrror and a ſhow
                  To all the world, of thy great cruelty?
                  But tis moſt true as euery man doth know,
                  Thy nature giuen to all hoſtility,
                  Is th'onely cauſe of ſtrife and of debate,
                  Becauſe thou art a ſtarre vnfortunate:
               
               
                  Hot, hatefull, drie, fiery, combuſtious,
                  Wrathfull, and giuen vnto diſſention,
                  The onely ground of malice, enuious,
                  And cholericke of thy complexion:
                  That doſt in death and murther take delight,
                  And vpon vengance ſetſt thine appetite:
               
               
                  Firſt motioner of anger and of hate,
                  The cauſer of contention and of warre,
                  The root of all diſſention in each ſtate,
                  That mooueſt men to wrangle, fight, & iarre:
                  Fearefull of looke and gaſtly to mans ſight,
                  Whoſe radiant beams ſhine as the lightning bright▪
                  
               
               
                  And twinkle like to ſparkles burning red,
                  Which from great fiers mount vp into the skie,
                  And round about the aire themſelues do ſpred,
                  Conſuming ſuch as by melancholy
                  Within their hearts, fowle enuy do embrace,
                  Giuing to them in whom thy wrath takes place,
               
               
                  Of ſhape to be tall, ſlender, leane, and ſmall,
                  Browne haired, paſle, and ſallow coloured,
                  Vnmercifull, addicted vnto all
                  Bad qualities, to evill eaſly led:
                  Craftie, deceitfull, and ingenious,
                  Backbiting, ſlaunderous, and malicious;
               
               
                  Sad, ſullen, and ſtill full of heauines,
                  Inclined vnto theft, and robbery,
                  Conſenting vnto all accurſednes,
                  To murther, death, and to fowle trechery:
                  Wholy without remorſe of conſcience;
                  And art ſo miſchievous of influence,
               
               
                  
                  That thou of treaſon author art mong men,
                  In ſcorpion thy chiefeſt manſion is,
                  And raigneſt King in Capricorne, but when
                  In Taur
                           •
                        s thou art plaſt, then thou doſt miſſe
                  Of power, ſtrength, and all Dominion
                  Thou alſo haſt in thy ſubiection.
               
               
                  Warre, exile, 
                        •
                     etters, and impriſonment,
                  Bondage, proſcription, baniſhment, and all
                  The miſeries, and miſchiefes that are bent
                  On earth, and chance vpon mankind to fall.
                  Which for to gnaw poore Troy vnto the bones,
                  Thou didſt on it powre them out all at ones.
               
               
                  I cannot chuſe but for the great deſpight
                  Which thou to Troy didſt beare, condemne thee much,
                  For if that men conſider it aright,
                  It may be ſayd there nere was any ſuch:
                  Nor ſo great vengance tane for any thing
                  Gainſt land or towne as thou on Troy didſt bring:
               
               
                  As firſt to kill and ſpoyle them by their foes,
                  And to conſume their Knights by fier and ſword,
                  Then in their towne as priſoners vp to cloſe
                  And ſhut them faſt, and no meanes them aford,
                  To be relieu'd with victualls, or go out,
                  Beſieged by the Grecians round about.
               
               
                  I thinke they haue ſmall cauſe in my aduiſe,
                  With bores, or bulles, beares, Lyons, Tygars fell,
                  Or any ſuch wild beaſts to ſacrifice
                  To thee, (wherewith thou pleaſed art ſo well,
                  
                     As being Patron of them) nor with ſmoke,
                  Of brimſtone, on thine Altars to invoke
               
               
                  Thy name, that to them ſhoweſt ſuch cruelty,
                  And didſt ſuch extreame vengance on them bring,
                  And yet, as if thou couldeſt not ſatisfie
                  Thy ſelfe therewith, (with torments more to ſting
                  And plague thē,) thou mad'ſt treaſon mōgſt them worke,
                  And ſecretly within their hearts to lurke.
               
               
                  And ſo didſt ſet them at diuiſion
                  Among themſelues▪ whereby we plainely ſee,
                  How th'vgly ſerpent Diſcord creepeth on
                  And ſlyly ſlides into mans heart, till he
                  By tract of time hath therein gotten place,
                  And baniſhed from thence all peace and grace.
               
               
                  With venom of his fowle diſſention;
                  When once it ſpreads it ſelfe in any towne,
                  Land, common-wealth, howſe, countrey, or nation
                  Or i
                        ••
                     ens hearts of ſmall or high renowne.
                  For when as men liue not in loue and peace,
                  All happines and ioy with them doth ceaſe.
               
               
                  For where as Diſcord hath his reſidence,
                  And doth begin amongſt men to appeare,
                  It's worſe then any ſword or peſtilence:
                  For who are worſe then foes familiar?
                  Or who can hurt men more if that they luſt
                  Then enemies in whom they put their truſt?
               
               
                  And briefely to conclude without a pauſe,
                  All trouble, miſchiefe, and confuſion
                  In any land, proceedeth from the cauſe
                  And root of hatred, and diſſention.
                  And much more danger in the ſame doth lie
                  If it be wrought and ſtir'd vp ſecretlie:
               
               
                  Record whereof is to be found by Troy,
                  
                  Where while that in the towne they did agree
                  They held the ſame, and did it long enioy,
                  Deſpight their foes. But when they gan to be
                  At ſtrife and hatred mongſt themſelues, & croſt
                  Each other, not long after it was loſt.
               
               
                  (For without doubt, as often prooued is,
                  When men▪ begin together to contend,
                  Or that a land in't ſelfe deuided is,
                  Tis not the means them, nor their ſtate to mend.
                  But rather is a certaine ſigne and way,
                  Of that ſame land and peoples ſure decay.)
               
               
                  For Mars the ſoueraigne Lord of enmity,
                  (That vnto men he might his power ſhow,
                  And bring Troy into all extremity,)
                  The ſeeds of Diſcord did among them ſow.
                  Gainſt which a man no remedy can find▪
                  
                  For I am ſure perſwaded in my mind
               
               
                  That treaſon wrought with fained ſhew of peace,
                  (To be procur'd thereby) is worſe then warre,
                  And more then it, all miſchiefe doth encreaſe:
                  Whereof the principalſt actors weere
                  
                     Aeneas Duke Anchiſes (his old Father,)
                  
                     Pollidmas, and Anthenor, who together
               
               
                  Among themſelues did ſecretly agree,
                  And traiterouſly conſpire with bad intent,
                  If that the towne of Troy ſhould chance to bee
                  Tane by the Greeks (whereof they feard th'vent)
                  How they might ſaue their owne liues, goods & lands,
                  By ſome deviſe out of the Grecians hands.
               
               
                  Which if it might not be (as they did doubt
                  It could not be,) they ment in ſecret wiſe
                  (Before the vtmoſt danger ſhould fall out)
                  To parle with the Grecian enemies.
                  And traitors gainſt their towne of Troy to bee,
                  Before they would their owne ſubuerſion ſee.
               
               
                  
                  Or loyalty vnto their countrey yeild.
                  Intending rather to forget their oath
                  And promiſe made, and vowed to be held
                  By them while life did laſt, and faith and troth,
                  With due alleagance wholy ſet aſide,
                  For them and their owne ſafety to prouide.
               
               
                  Eſteeming it more wiſedome to forecaſt,
                  How they for there owne good ſhould do the ſame,
                  And bring't about before the time were paſt,
                  And rather ſaue their liues, thogh twere with ſhame.
                  Then fooliſhly to fall into a trap,
                  Which otherwiſe they might full well eſcape.
               
               
                  They though: it no diſgrace nor worthy blame
                  For to betray the towne, ſo they went free
                  Away with goods and liues out of the ſame:
                  Nor had no care for others to agree,
                  But how they might vnto that thing attaine,
                  Which they did ſeeke by treaſon to obtaine.
               
               
                  And to that end they went vnto the King,
                  To giue him (as they ſayd) ſome good aduiſe
                  And counſell how to bring about the thing,
                  Which they among themſelues had by deviſe,
                  Forecaſt for their owne good: wherof th'effect
                  Was, that they wiſht that he would not neglect
               
               
                  His owne eſtate, the towne, and common-weale,
                  By obſtinately ſtanding gainſt his foes;
                  But rather to aduiſe himſelfe, and deale
                  With them about a peace, (and not to looſe
                  Time when it ſerued,) if they would graunt therto
                  And that to moue them better thereunto,
               
               
                  He would be pleaſd to offer to reſtore
                  Queene Helena to Menalaus againe,
                  And all that he had taken from them more
                  In Cithera, and ſo he might obtaine
                  That at their hands, which other wiſe could not
                  By force, nor any other meanes be got.
               
               
                  But words and thoughts with them did not agree,
                  They had an other meaning and intent:
                  For they knew well no peace would graunted bee,
                  And that the Greeks nere would thereto conſent
                  With them of Troy, whom they as then had broght
                  Vnto that point, that in a manner cought
               
               
                  Like Birds within a cage, they held them pent,
                  And therefore tw'as in vaine to thinke thereon:
                  For if the Greeks had thereto giuen conſent,
                  And made peace on that condition,
                  King Priamus ſucceſſors might haue raignd
                  Till now in Troy, and neuer had ſuſtaind
               
               
                  Such loſſe and extreame deſolation,
                  As after on them fell. But t'was too late
                  To motion that, for when Agamenon
                  
                  Did by aduiſe of all the Grecian ſtate,
                  Send meſſengers to Troy, from Tenadon
                  
                  To offer Priam peace, vpon condition
               
               
                  That he ſhould ſend againe▪ Queene Helena
                  
                  To Menalus, and reſtitution make
                  Of all the treaſure which in Cithera
                  
                  
                     Parit by force with her from thence did take.
                  King Priam would by no meanes hearken to't,
                  But obſtinately ſayd, he would not do't.
               
               
                  So that by their owne folly and their pride,
                  For want of good foreſight and prouidence,
                  Peace iuſtly might vnto them be deni'd;
                  For thinke you when the Greeks with ſuch expence
                  Of treaſure, loſſe of lims, and of their Knights,
                  Endured had ſo many cruell fights.
               
               
                  And after many a bloody broyle orepaſt,
                  By them to bring that warre vnto an end,
                  They would in fine euen at the very laſt
                  Oreſlip ſo good occaſion giuen, to ſpend
                  The time in making peace when they had brought
                  Their foes to that which they ſo long had ſought.
               
               
                  And without any recompence would leaue
                  Th'advantage by them gotten, and againe
                  Returne to Greece with loſſe, and cleane bereaue
                  Themſelues of that which they with ſo much paine
                  Obtained had? it were without all ſence:
                  For they knew well (thogh to their great expence,)
               
               
                  They had brought Troy to that extremity,
                  That it could not long gainſt their force endure,
                  And that in fine without all remedy
                  They could not faile to win't, whereof being ſure,
                  They made account to haue the victory
                  Againſt their foes without ambiguity.
               
               
                  So that Anthenors counſell (and all thoſe
                  That with him were of that conſpiracie,)
                  To Priam giuen, to ſeeke vnto his foes
                  To make a peace, was but meere trechery,
                  As it vnto King Priam well appeard,
                  When he from thē firſt motion therof heard.
               
               
                  For when he with his ſonne Amphimachus,
                  
                  And many of his Lords in counſell were.
                  
                     Anthenor and his friends mou'd Priamus
                  
                  To ſeeke for peace, the which when he did heare:
                  In pollicy before he would conſent
                  Or graunt thereto, he askt them what they ment,
               
               
                  
                  To motion it, and ſayd before that he
                  Did enter into parle with his foes,
                  He would with more aduiſe inſtructed be
                  How't ſhould be done. Wherewith Anthenor roſe
                  Vp ſodainly, and without reuerence,
                  And countnance ſterne in open audience
               
               
                  Spake to the King, and ſayd, if thou wilt take
                  Our counſell at this preſent time, and do't
                  Thou mayſt, but if that light thereof thou make,
                  Though it ſhould turne to thy deſtruction, yet
                  Thou nere ſhalt be adviſed more by me,
                  But follow them that of thy counſell be.
               
               
                  To whom the King in great ſobrietie
                  Made anſwere, and vnto him ſayd againe;
                  
                     Anthenor, thou oughtſt not ſo haſtely
                  To ſpeake to me, nor take me vp ſo plaine
                  For my intent is no way able to reproue
                  The counſell which thou giueſt me in loue,
               
               
                  So it be good, and for the common-weale
                  Of all men in the towne in generall:
                  But know this for a truth, and marke it well,
                  If it proue bad and cleane contrary fall,
                  And in the end be their deſtruction,
                  I will by no meanes tak't, nor heare thereon,
               
               
                  As reaſon is we ſhould preuent the worſt,
                  Whereof me thinks thou ſhouldſt not thinke amis,
                  Nor ſodainly into ſuch choler burſt,
                  For euery man as it moſt certaine is,
                  Should choſe the beſt, & leaue the worſt, & take
                  The wiſe mans counſell, and the fooles forſake,
               
               
                  And ſeeke a ſalue to cure his wound withall.
                  Wherewith Anthenor roſe vpon his feet,
                  And into ſuch a mighty rage did fall,
                  That leauing honor and obedience meet
                  And dew vnto his Soueraigne Lord the King,
                  Said, ſure me thinks it is a wondrous thing
               
               
                  How you being wiſe and well aduiſd ſhould bee
                  So blinded in conceit, that wilfully,
                  You either cannot, or you will not ſee
                  The miſchiefe, and the great aduerſity;
                  Wherewith we are environd on each ſide,
                  For we cannot although we would it hide,
               
               
                  Deny in what extremitie we ſtand,
                  For are we not beſiedged round about,
                  And fearing to fall in our enemies hand,
                  Dare not aduenture once to iſſue out.
                  Nor be ſo bold to goe forth of our gate
                  To fight with them, that vs ſo deadly hate?
               
               
                  Becauſe our force is weake and theirs too ſtrong
                  For vs to deale withall, for certainely
                  There are yet fiftie valiant Kings among
                  Them in their Campe, who all moſt furiouſly
                  Haue vowed and proteſted with great pride,
                  Euen to the laſt and vtmoſt hower t'abide,
               
               
                  And neuer to depart nor leaue this towne,
                  Till that they haue their wills on vs to ſhed
                  Our blood; and ſee our walls turne vpſide downe;
                  Your moſt renowned Princely ſons are dead,
                  And all your ſtrong and valiant knights are ſlaine
                  That wonted were to help you, and maintaine
               
               
                  Your right againſt your foes: but now bereſt
                  Of them, there is no way for vs to ſcape
                  Out of their hands, nor comfort for vs left.
                  It is in vaine for vs to thinke to ſhape
                  A remedy by force to be relieu'd,
                  Wherefore I ſay, that ere we bereau'd
               
               
                  Of hope, and both our liues and goods do loſe,
                  And ſee the ouerthrow of this our towne,
                  Of two extreames the leaſt of them to chooſe,
                  And for a reſolution to ſet downe,
                  That better twere for vs in time to make
                  Peace with them, and an order thereby take
               
               
                  For our reliefe: which that it may be done,
                  Let vs reſtore Queene Helena againe
                  To Menalus her Lord, for whom alone
                  There hath ſo many worthy men been ſlaine:
                  And many ſince this bloody warre began,
                  Sith Paris now is dead that was the man
               
               
                  Who onely hindred that while he did liue.
                  And alſo to make promiſe by a day
                  To make them ſatisfaction, and to giue
                  Them all which we by force in Cithera
                  
                  Tooke from them, which I thinke to be the way
                  T'appeaſe them, and their furious courſe to ſtay.
               
               
                  Which hauing ſaid, Amphimachus aroſe
                  Vpon his feet, who grieued much to heare
                  
                     Anthenor ſpeake of treatie with their foes,
                  In manner as you heard, could not forbeare
                  In preſence of King Priamus t'vpbraid
                  Him openly with treaſon, and thus ſayd,
               
               
                  
                     Anthenor, by thy ſpeech I well perceiue,
                  That we haue little cauſe to truſt in thee
                  For ayd in need, that ſo much doſt deceiue
                  Our expectations, for we plainely ſee
                  That Faith and troth from thee are baniſhed,
                  And thou in't falſhood art by error led,
               
               
                  
                  When as thou doſt ſo variable ſhow.
                  Where is become thy faith vnto thy Lord?
                  And due alleigance thou to him doſt ow?
                  Where are thy oaths, thy promiſes, and word,
                  Which thou didſt make, proteſt, and giue to be
                  True vnto him, and his poſteritie,
               
               
                  All fled and gone. In ſteed whereof thou haſt
                  Retained mutability, and change
                  Of mind, opinion, and of will, and paſt
                  The bounds of thy fidelity to change.
                  At liberty from all affection,
                  Which thou ſholdſt beare to him, & to this towne.
               
               
                  To liue and die for it, if need ſhould bee,
                  For neither faith, nor troth, nor ſparkes of loue
                  In thee remaines, as now we plainely ſee;
                  When thou darſt be ſo bold t'excite and moue
                  The King by thy perſwaſions to giue eare
                  To that which to his great diſhonor were.
               
               
                  Which is to ſeeke a peace as if that he
                  Did feare his foes. Thou rather ſhouldſt haue been
                  The firſt that ſhould haue proferred him to be
                  A chiefe protector of the Citie, (when
                  So ere the Greeks ſhould ſeeke t'aſſaile the ſame,)
                  With loſſe of life and lim to keepe the ſame,
               
               
                  But know thou well and ſo I thee aſſure,
                  That whatſoere thy meaning is to do,
                  Before we will this iniurie endure,
                  And ere they ſhall ſo far proceed thereto
                  It ſhall the liues of twenty thowſand coſt,
                  And many more, before this towne be loſt.
               
               
                  I hold thy words to be no propheſie,
                  But rather do eſteeme them by good reaſon,
                  To be the ſignes and marks of trechery,
                  Of fained faith, of falſehood, and of treaſon,
                  To bring vs in ſubiection to our foes,
                  But though thou ſetſt on them ſo faire a gloſe,
               
               
                  And outward ſhow, they are but meere deceit
                  And Syrenes ſongs t'entrap and to beguile
                  Vs and this towne, till that our foes it get.
                  In this ſort did Amphimachus reuile
                  
                     Anthenor for his counſell, knowing well
                  That t'was nought els but treaſon. Till full well
               
               
                  To pacefie his choler, and to ſtay
                  Them from proceeding further to a brawll,
                  
                     Aeneas with faire words to make the way
                  More open for their purpoſe, and withall
                  To ſmooth the matter ſo, as if they ment
                  Nought els but troth, but t'was with falſe intent.
               
               
                  For he ſpake cleane contrary to his thought,
                  Intending onely to appeaſe them twaine,
                  Till that he had by policie ſo wrought,
                  That they from futher ſpeeches did refraine:
                  And when he ſaw them ſomewhat pacified,
                  To cloake Anthenors ſpeeches, and to hide
               
               
                  His owne diſſimulation in like eaſe,
                  When he had pauſd a little while, he ſayd
                  Vnto the King with ſmooth and flattering face,
                  That touching help, reliefe, or any ayd,
                  To be expected for the towne, he thought
                  There was none to be found, & that it nought
               
               
                  Availed them to hope thereon, ſith they
                  Beſiedged were ſocloſely and ſo hard,
                  That they could haue no victualls any way
                  To comfort them, and wholy were debard
                  From iſſuing forth, as hauing not the might
                  Againſt the Greeks for want of force to fight.
               
               
                  For as you know (ſaid he) while that this warre
                  Endured hath, we haue conſumd ſuch ſtore
                  Of famous and moſt worthy knights that were
                  A terror to our foes, that now no more
                  We can, nor dare not iſſue out to fight,
                  And which is more vnto our great deſpight.
               
               
                  The people are ſo full of feare and dread,
                  That they are all perſwaded ther's noway
                  For them, but euery one to lay his head
                  Vpon the blocke to die? therefore I ſay,
                  (Sith that the Fates for vs haue ſo decreed,
                  And that we now are driuen to ſuch need.
               
               
                  If that you will be ruld by my aduiſe,)
                  I thinke the ſafeſt way for vs wilbe
                  To parle with our foes, and not be niſe
                  To make a peace with them, though that it be
                  Vnto our loſſe, t'avoid th'extremety
                  We may fall in, ſith ther's no remedy.
               
               
                  But Priamus with face for anger pale,
                  And countnance ſterne, (he was ſo moud in mi
                        •
                     d;)
                  Cut of Aeneas long and flattering tale,
                  And fretting at the treaſon he did find
                  Lie hiden vnder it. Could not refraine
                  In furious wiſe to ſpeake vnto them twaine,
               
               
                  And ſayd, Anthenor and Aeneas both,
                  I muſe why you two ſhould ſo hardy be
                  And bold, as that with breach of faith and troth;
                  You dare inuent ſuch▪ treaſon, to bring me,
                  And all my ſubiects into extreame thrall
                  And danger of our foes, and therewithall
               
               
                  
                  Into diſpaire by falſe ſuggeſtion,
                  How can or may you in your conſcience find,
                  (If that you well conſidered thereon)
                  Againſt your facts and oathes to be vnkind
                  To me, that of my ſecret counſell were,
                  And ſo well thought on by me, that whatſoere
               
               
                  Did paſſe therein, it was not don without
                  You were in preſence to agree thereto:
                  But now I cannot muſe how it falles out,
                  That you decline in this ſort as you do
                  From me, that am of all my ſoones bereft,
                  And deſolate of friends in manner left:
               
               
                  It makes me grieue to thinke vpon the ſame,
                  And much to muſe that any of you can
                  Be ſo vntrue, and haue ſo little ſhame
                  To do it, how ſhould I truſt any man?
                  When you two are ſo faithleſſe vnto me,
                  That ought my chiefeſt counſellors to be.
               
               
                  You ſhould remember how with your conſent,
                  And chiefely by your counſell and aduiſe,
                  
                     Paris by me was into Grecia ſent
                  With many ſhips and men in warlike wiſe.
                  And thou Anthenor knowſt full well alſo
                  That fore he went thou didſt Ambaſter go
               
               
                  Vnto the Greeks, to fetch home Exion,
                  
                  If by faire meanes we could bring them thereto,
                  And after that thou madſt the motion
                  And was the cauſe that Paris then did go
                  With warlike force to Greece, and this is true.
                  For thinke you that without aduiſe from you,
               
               
                  I would with ſuch a power haue ſent him thither,
                  Or haue aſſayld the Grecians in their land,
                  Vnleſſe that you had mou'd me to't together,
                  No ſurely, it had nere been tane in hand:
                  And you your ſelues if you be well aduiſd,
                  Cannot deny but that it was deuiſd
               
               
                  And put in execution through you twaine,
                  Eſpecially, for when as Paris went
                  To Cithera for Helena its plaine
                  
                     Aeneas, thou waſt cauſe that he was ſent,
                  And th'onely man that readieſt was, and ſought
                  To welcome her when ſhe to Troy was brought.
               
               
                  For tis moſt ſure, ſhe neuer had come here
                  If thou hadſt been vnwilling therevnto:
                  Although as now thou makſt as though thou nere
                  Hadſt knowne thereof, nor giuen conſent thereto.
                  And now my ſons are dead, and I bereft
                  Of my beſt Knights, and without comfort left.
               
               
                  You tell me that the beſt way for me were
                  To make a meanes vnto the Greeks to get
                  A peace, as if of them I ſtood in feare;
                  And that I were ſo ſimple to forget
                  The many and moſt extreame outrages,
                  The ſlaughters, mortall warres, and domages,
               
               
                  The cruelties, and great deſtruction,
                  By them ſo long and often don to me,
                  This towne, and to my ſubiects euery one,
                  Which when I call to mind I cannot be
                  Perſwaded thereunto, though I ſhould die
                  And looſe all that I haue. For I eſpie
               
               
                  Such danger in that which by you is ment,
                  And ſo great falſehood couertly to be
                  Therein, that if you compaſſe your intent
                  In ſuch ſort as you moue it vnto me,
                  It will in fine be my confuſion,
                  And this townes vtter deſolation.
               
               
                  For vnpoſſible t'were for me to ſhun
                  The miſchiefe that thereon depends, which I
                  Were ſure to find (if that the ſame be don,
                  Which you do ſeeke,) without all remedy.
                  For this moſt ſure and certaine is no doubt,
                  The iſſve of the peace you go about.
               
               
                  Wherewith Aeneas grieued at the hart,
                  Roſe vp vpon his feet and moued ſore
                  Againſt the King, before he did depart
                  Out of the counſell chamber, voud, and ſwore
                  With many bitter words, and taunts, which he
                  Vnto him gaue, that he reuengd would be
               
               
                  On him, if he in time no order tooke
                  For better ſatisfaction in that caſe,
                  Whereto he bad him with all ſpeed to looke;
                  And ſo in mighty rage he left the place,
                  And with the Lord Anthenor went his way,
                  And would no longer in the counſell ſtay.
               
               
                  At whoſe departure Priam grieud to ſee
                  Himſefe by them ſo hardly vſd, he was
                  Therewith ſo vexed at the heart, that he
                  Could not refraine to ſhead forth eeares when as
                  He thought thereon, and then conſidering more
                  And deepelier then he had don before.
               
               
                  What trechery and treaſon they had wrought,
                  And ſecretly conſpired and deviſd,
                  Againſt the towne of Troy, and him, and ſought
                  Their vtter ruine he thereby ſurmiſd,
                  And feared they two would him by ſome way
                  In ſecret wiſe vnto the Greeks betray.
               
               
                  
                  If he did not the ſame with ſpeed preuent,
                  And ſhape ſome way their malice to withſtand;
                  And thereby turne the treaſon (which they ment
                  To worke gainſt him, and had then tane in hand
                  To practiſe with the Greeks,) before it wrought
                  Th'effect vpon themſelues that had it ſought.
               
               
                  That ſo the guerdon of their trechery
                  Might light on them that firſt inuented it,
                  For treaſon and all falſe conſpiracie,
                  Should be requited as it is moſt fit
                  With treaſon, for he that works villany,
                  For iuſt reward a ſhamefull death ſhould die.
               
               
                  And to effect the ſame King Priamus
                  
                  With many teares did grieuouſly complaine
                  Vnto his baſtard ſonne Amphimachus,
                  
                  And when they had together twixt them twaine,
                  Shewd their diſlikings of the trechery
                  
                     Anthenor and Aeneas ſecretly
               
               
                  Deuiſed had, with others, to betray
                  Him and the towne into the Grecians hand:
                  With many ſighs he did vnto him ſay,
                  Good Son I pray thee marke and vnderſtand
                  My meaning well, and thereto giue good eare,
                  Thou knoweſt that I am thy Father deare,
               
               
                  And how that now there are no more aliue
                  Of all my Sons, but thou alone to be
                  Mine onely heire and after me t'ſuruiue,
                  I pray thee therefore if thou loueſt me,
                  And of thine owne eſtate haſt any care,
                  Thinke on this treaſon, by the which we are
               
               
                  As now in ſo great danger to be brought,
                  If we do not preuent it by ſome way,
                  And practiſe quickly by vs to be wrought,
                  Whereby we may their furious courſes ſtay,
                  And firſt intrap and take them in the ſnare,
                  Which they for vs do craftely prepare:
               
               
                  Which to effect, my meaning is to call
                  Them this night vnto counſell purpoſely,
                  Where being come thou ſhalt vpon them fall
                  With many Knights, and kill them ſodainly:
                  The which meane time ſee thou do not diſcloſe
                  To any man, but onely vnto thoſe
               
               
                  Whom thou with thee wilt take to do the deed.
                  And ſo we ſhall preuent them vnaware:
                  The which to do Amphimacus agreed,
                  And bad King Priam lay on him the care
                  Thereof, t'accompliſh it with as much ſpeed,
                  As was to be required in ſuch need.
               
               
                  But as by Prouerbe old it's often ſaid,
                  There is nothing ſo cloſely gon about,
                  Nor counſell that's ſo ſecretly conuaid,
                  But by ſome meanes or other twill come out;
                  And that a murther oft done priuily,
                  And many yeares vnknowne to men doth lie,
               
               
                  The beaſts and birds of th'aire will it diſcrie.
                  And that the dumbe and ſenceles earth likewiſe,
                  Oft times caſts forth that within it doth lie,
                  And makes itknowne. Therefore let men be wiſe,
                  And not diſcloſe their ſecrets, ſith they ſay,
                  Two can keepe counſell when one is away,
               
               
                  But ſpecially great Princes ſhould haue care
                  Aboue all men to keepe their ſecrets well,
                  Becauſe that they like vnto Mirrors are
                  Whereon men looke. For if they chance to tell
                  Or ſpeake a thing out of their mouths that ſhold
                  Not vttered be, men preſently lay hold
               
               
                  Thereon, and ſpread't abroad both farre & wide,
                  When they do leaſt ſuſpect that it is knowne,
                  And would it from the common people hide,
                  That it may not about the world be knowne:
                  And ſo by indiſcreetnes oft diſcloſe,
                  Their ſecrets great vnto their chiefeſt foes.
               
               
                  And ſome perhaps in whom they moſt do truſt,
                  And doe familiarly to them reſort,
                  Will ſooneſt ſhow themſelues to them vniuſt,
                  And to the world giue them a bad report.
                  And therefore it is beſt for them to ſpare
                  To ſpeake, and of their words to haue a care.
               
               
                  That which a Prince doth ſecretly intend,
                  Shold not vnto the vulgar ſort be told,
                  For they their wits and wils do chiefely bend
                  (And do it as a common cuſtome hold,)
                  Vntruely to report that which they heare,
                  And make it cleane contrary to appeare.
               
               
                  For they do conſter things as they deſire
                  To haue them, and to reaſon are not tide,
                  And are compard vnto a wiſpe of fire
                  Which makes a blaſt, but doth not long abide
                  Within the ſame, but ſtrait-way doth conſume▪
                  
                  It is not good on ſuch men to preſume,
               
               
                  That fier and water both in one hand hold,
                  And vnto either ſide do bow and bend,
                  And as men ſay, are neither hot nor cold,
                  And t'euery new found tale their eares do lend,
                  To day they loue, to morrow they do hate.
                  And neuer do continew in one ſtate.
               
               
                  
                  To truſt to them there is no certaine ſtay,
                  For much like to a broken ſtaffe they bee,
                  Which when a man leanes on't it ſhrinks away:
                  And therefore Lords and Princes ought to ſee,
                  That they commit not too much ſecreſie
                  To them, for in them ther's no conſtancie.
               
               
                  For Priams counſell though it were deuiſd
                  Betweene him and his ſonne alone, twas told
                  Vnto Aeneas, who thereby adviſd
                  Of that which he thought Priam neuer would
                  Haue done, did make Anthenor vnderſtand
                  In how great danger both their liues did ſtand.
               
               
                  And therefore they together did conſent
                  Aſecret counſell with their friends to hold,
                  And others that vnto their partie bent,
                  Wherein they did agree, and ſaid they would
                  Preuent King Priam by ſome meanes, before
                  He ſhould proceed to that gainſt them, & ſwore
               
               
                  They would reuenged be on him, and make
                  Him and his ſon both rew they had done ſo,
                  And did among themſelues an order take,
                  That if the King ſent for them, they would go
                  So ſtrongly vnto him, they ſhould not need
                  Of him nor of his friends to ſtand in dread.
               
               
                  (Of ſuch great power and might Aeneas was,
                  And in the towne ſo well alyed, and had
                  Such ſtore of wealth, that he did farre ſurpas
                  All men therein, whereby the people made
                  So much account of him, that they did feare
                  And honor him as much, and to him weare
               
               
                  As dutifull almoſt in euery thing,
                  Which he deſird or asked of them, as
                  They in a manner were vnto the King.
                  For he in wealth and power equall was
                  Vnto him. And Anthenor alſo had
                  Almoſt as much, for euery man was glad
               
               
                  To follow them, and durſt not well deny
                  Whatſoeuer they would haue, or did command.)
                  And did conſpire betweene them ſecretly,
                  To yeild the towne into the Grecians hand,
                  Vpon condition of ſecurity
                  That when twas done, they would haue liberty
               
               
                  With goods, and liues of them, their children,
                  And kindred borne within the towne, to go
                  Or ſtay ſecurely where they liſt, and when
                  They had agreed among them ſo to do,
                  And ſcarce had made an end of parlieng,
                  They were ſent for to come vnto the King.
               
               
                  Who fully was determined and bent
                  That night to kill them as he purpoſed,
                  And ſtraight Aeneas and Anthenor went
                  And with them ſuch a troope of Troians led
                  To guard them, that when as King Priamus
                  
                  Saw them, he ſent vnto Amphimachus,
                  
               
               
                  And willed him no further to proceed
                  In that which he had bidden him do that night,
                  For that the thing between them two decreed,
                  He ſayd reuealed was, to their deſpight
                  And as he feard, to his deſtruction:
                  For when with more aduiſe he thought thereon,
               
               
                  And did perceiue Aeneas with ſo great
                  A power to come, and ſaw the people ſo
                  To fauor him, he knew he could not let
                  His purpoſe, for he made no more a do,
                  But proudly to the King did flatly ſay,
                  That ſpight of all that thereto would ſay nay,
               
               
                  There was no other remedy to be had
                  Whereby they might eſcape deſtruction
                  Then peace. The which he ſaid ſhould ſtraight be made.
                  Wherewith the common people euery one
                  With ſhouts and cries commended his aduiſe,
                  And praiſed and extold it to the skies.
               
               
                  And yet the King was thereunto contrary,
                  And would not graunt to yeild vnto his foes:
                  But then Aeneas would no longer tarry
                  To argue with the King, but fiercely roſe,
                  And told him whether he were liefe or loth,
                  Well pleaſ'd therewith, or angry & wroth,
               
               
                  He muſt content himſelfe, for it ſhould be
                  No otherwiſe, and that to his deſpight,
                  And gainſt his will and mind they would agree,
                  To enter into treaty ere t'were night,
                  Of peace to be concluded, and ſet downe
                  Forthwith betweene the Grecians and the towne.
               
               
                  Which when the King did heare, and ſaw how hot
                  
                     Aeneas and the people were therein,
                  He thought to ſtriue with them it was no boot,
                  And therefore for the time he did begin
                  With wiſedome to diſſemble, when he ſaw,
                  And knew well that necesty hath no law.
               
               
                  And for becauſe he could himſelfe not mend,
                  He told Aeneas fainedly, that he
                  Would with them at that time no more contend,
                  And alſo that he was content to be
                  Ruld by them, and t'allow, and to maintaine
                  Whatſoeuer they in his name ſhould ordaine.
               
               
                  
                  And ſo diſſembling with them gainſt his mind,
                  (For as the caſe then ſtood he could not chooſe)
                  When as he ſaw that he no meanes could find
                  To ſhun the ſnare layd for him, nor refuſe
                  To yeild vnto their willes, he did conſent
                  (Though faintly) that Anthenor ſhould be ſent
               
               
                  In all their names to parle for the towne,
                  And to conclude a Peace as they deſird,
                  (The which before in manner was ſet downe,
                  And with the Greeks agreed and conſpird
                  By him, and them that of his partie were
                  Contrary to the meſſage he ſhould beare.)
               
               
                  Who, going to the Greeks that knew his mind
                  And purpoſe in that caſe, before he came,
                  Was by them entertaind with countnance kind.
                  And while he ſtaid with them about the ſame,
                  The Troians in the towne with ioyfull cheare
                  Went on the walles, and in their hands did beare
               
               
                  Greene Oliue branches, ſignes of perfect peace:
                  Which when the Greeks did ſee that ſtood below
                  Vpon the plaine, their hope therein t'increaſe,
                  (With falſe pretence) the like to them did ſhow:
                  And to confirme them in opinion
                  Thereof, their Generall Agamemnon
                  
               
               
                  (That no ſuſpition might among them breed,)
                  Appointed three Commiſſ
                        ••
                     ners to treat
                  Of peace with him, which were King Diomed,
                  
                  
                     Uliſſes, and Taltabius King of Creet,
                  
                  Eſteeming them ſufficient to agree
                  Thereon for them, and whatſoere ſhould be
               
               
                  Done therein, by them all to be allowed
                  For good, and giuing them commiſſion large,
                  When they had ſworne on either ſide, and vou'd
                  Vprightly to do that they had incharge:
                  
                     Anthenor and they three together went,
                  To parle by themſelues, into a tent;
               
               
                  And when they were together cloſely ſet
                  Within the ſame alone, and priuately,
                  Where no man was to hinder them, nor let
                  Their buſines. Anthenor traiterouſly
                  With envious heart which he to Priam bare,
                  In few words did his mind to them declare,
               
               
                  And ſaid, he would giue Troy into their hands,
                  That they thereof might at their willes diſpoſe,
                  Conditionally, that they ſhould put in bonds
                  To him, that he, Aeneas, and all thoſe
                  That were of their affinitie and bloods,
                  Should freely with their bodies, liues, goods,
               
               
                  Goe where they liſt, or if they would ſtay ſtill
                  Within the towne, (as they ſhould thinke it beſt
                  To take their choiſe) it ſhould be at their will
                  Without all let. And therewith did proteſt,
                  That that which he had promiſt he would do,
                  If they would in ſuch ſort agree thereto.
               
               
                  Wherewith the Greeks in ſolemne wiſe did ſweare
                  T'obſerue the ſame, in all things as he made
                  Condition, (ſo that no varying weare
                  On either ſide, from that they promiſt had.)
                  Vpon the perill of their liues. And when
                  They had in that ſort ſworne to do it; Then
               
               
                  He charged them to keepe it ſecretly
                  Vnto themſelues, and not to make it knowne
                  To any man, till with ſecurity
                  T'were brought vnto effect, leaſt it were blowne
                  To ſome abroad, by thoſe that could not keepe
                  Their tongues from vttring of ſuch ſecrets deepe;
               
               
                  And ſo they might be croſt therein before
                  They were aware. And therefore did agree,
                  That he and they three onely and no more,
                  Of what eſtate ſoere they were, ſhould be
                  Made priuie to the ſame on neither ſide.
                  And then Anthenor ſayd, my Lords, to hide
               
               
                  Our purpoſe, and t'auoid ſuſpition,
                  I thinke it good that King Taltabius
                  
                  Should go with me into alone the towne,
                  To countnance me vnto King Priamus,
                  
                  Who being civile, old, demure, and ſad,
                  And very wiſe, there will no doubt be made
               
               
                  Of him by them, for they will thinke that he
                  Doth onely come to ſpeake about the peace:
                  And to be well aſſur'd, that it ſhall be
                  Obſerud and kept in all things, more or leſſe,
                  By them as I vnto you haue declar'd,
                  And by that meanes (ſaid he) they wilbeoard
               
               
                  From any manner of ſuſpition,
                  Or doubt of ill proceeding, till that we
                  Haue brought it to the full concluſion,
                  Whereto the Grecians gladly did agree:
                  And liking very well of euery thing,
                  Tooke order that Taltabius the King
               
               
                  Should go as he deſird, but ere he went,
                  
                     Anthenor (to make ſhew that he had brought
                  Some thing t'effect, and that the Greeks were bent
                  To giue conſent vnto the peace, and ſought
                  It earneſtly,) deſird of them to haue
                  Queene Panthaſillias body, which they gaue
               
               
                  
                  To him forthwith, and ſo he tooke his leaue
                  Of all the Greeks, and with the King alone
                  Went to the towne with fained ſhew to giue
                  Them hope of peace, and make relation
                  What he had done vnto King Priamus,
                  
                  Who faining to be much deſirous
               
               
                  To heare th'effect thereof without delay,
                  Cald all the commons of the towne together
                  In Ilion his Pallace, where next day
                  When they and all his counſell were together,
                  And he had cauſed ſilence in the place,
                  
                     Anthenor with a ſmooth diſſembling face,
               
               
                  (And ſugred words refind with eloquence
                  In tearmes ſo well, and circumſpectly vſd,
                  That no man at the ſame could take offence,
                  Nor iudge that they by him ſhould be abuſd
                  By any outward ſhow of countnance, cheare,
                  Or reſtures, they ſo finely couched weare.)
               
               
                  Declared vnto them th'effect of that
                  Which he vnto the Greeks propounded had
                  Concerning peace vnto them made, and what
                  The anſwere was that they vnto him made,
                  With his replie returnd to them againe,
                  Although therein his meaning was not plaine.
               
               
                  For t'was with foule deceit and falſehood fraught,
                  For he was very cloſe, and warily
                  Did watch his time till he aduantage caught,
                  (Like Serpent ſlie that in the field doth lie,
                  And hides his venom vnder graſſe that's long,
                  And as the Bee that ſtingeth with his tongue,
               
               
                  When he hath firſt caſt forth his hony ſweet,
                  For with his Syrens voyce he told his tale
                  In tearmes that for the time were apt and meet:
                  And couered it with ſuch a ſubtill vale,
                  That outwardly it ſeemed ſmooth and plaine,
                  Like to the ſunne that ſhining in the raine,
               
               
                  Shews faire and bright, although the weather bee
                  Sore troubled, windy, and tempeſtuous,
                  As by experience many times we ſee.
                  And ſo did he, (that was ſo trecherous,
                  And like a Tyger full of doublenes,)
                  Diſſemblingly his mind to them expreſſe,
               
               
                  As if that he ment truely to the towne.
                  Affirming that the Greeks were very ſtrong,
                  And by ſome reaſons which he then ſet downe,
                  Prou'd that they likely were and very long
                  To hold their ſiege, as being victualled
                  For many moneths, and therewith furniſhed
               
               
                  Of all things els that neceſſary were
                  To ſerue their turnes, concluding certainely
                  (To ſtrike their hearts into the greater feare,)
                  That without doubt there was no remedy
                  For them of Troy againſt the Greeks to ſtriue,
                  For they (ſaid he) mong them haue yet aliue
               
               
                  Great ſtore of puiſſant Kings, and many more
                  Moſt worthy Knights, who all with valiant heart
                  Haue vowed and proteſted, that before
                  They breake vp ſiege, or from this towne depart,
                  Theyle haue their wils on it what ere befall
                  To them thereby, and that ther's neither wall,
               
               
                  Towre, Bulwarke, nor yet gate that ſhall them let
                  On euery ſide t'aſſayle it, and at laſt
                  Deſpight of all our force the ſame to get,
                  And therefore ere it comes to th'vtmoſt caſt,
                  (Sith that we may not long againſt them ſtand,)
                  T'were beſt for vs forthwith and out of hand
               
               
                  To find a meanes to remedy all this,
                  The which (ſaid he) ſo that you be content,
                  I know well how to do: and thus it is,
                  When I vnto the Grecians campe was ſent
                  T'intreat for peace, this anſwere they me gaue,
                  That willingly we ſhould our asking haue,
               
               
                  But it muſt be vpon condition,
                  That we ſhall make them reſtitution
                  Of all the wrongs and miſchies that were don
                  By Paris in the Iſle of C
                           ••••
                        r
                           •
                        n,
                  
                  As it doth ſtand in right and equity,
                  And we are driuen of neceſſity
               
               
                  And gainſt our wils and minds to them to bend,
                  For, ſith it is in their Election
                  To bring this bloody warre vnto an end,
                  T'is not for vs to make condition
                  As pleaſeth vs, for now tis thus farre brought,
                  To ſtriue gainſt them it would availe vs nought.
               
               
                  For that might ſoner hurt, then mend our caſe:
                  Therefore I ſay ſith need doth vs conſtraine,
                  Through two moſt great extremities to paſſe,
                  Let vs choſe out the leſſer of the twaine,
                  And wiſely ſeeke the greater to eſchew:
                  And let our gold by vs kept cloſe in new,
               
               
                  Redeeme our liues. For better t'is to looſe
                  Our worldly wealth, then to be fiercely flaine
                  (Through wilfulnes) by our moſt deadly 
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     .
                  Are not our liues more worth then riches vaine
                        •
                     
                  
                  He's but a foole that for his owne welfare,
                  Doth niggardly his gold and treaſure ſpare
               
               
                  
                  When life depends thereon, let money go,
                  We may good ſtore of treſure get againe,
                  But life once loſt with vs, it's nothing ſo,
                  Then to eſteeme gold more then life, is vaine.
                  And therefore (as I haue vnto you told,)
                  If we may haue a finall peace by gold,
               
               
                  And with our treaſure ſtint this mortall war
                        •
                     e:
                  Great folly t'were againſt the Greeks to ſtand,
                  And obſtinately with them alwaies iarre,
                  For if (ſayd he) I let them vnderſtand,
                  That you do yeild to that which they require,
                  You may obtaine a peace at your deſire,
               
               
                  It is of them ſo eaſie to be had:
                  For that aſſoone as they are certified
                  By true report, what anſwere you haue made,
                  They are content with couenants to be tied,
                  And bound t'obſerue that which of thē you craue;
                  And they will looke the like of you to haue.
               
               
                  Which being done twixt vs on either ſide,
                  There muſt be therevpon Indentures made,
                  That ſhall record to what each part is tied;
                  That no doubt nor ſuſpition may be had
                  Of their true meaning and integrity:
                  And for becauſe they do expect from me
               
               
                  An anſwere, I will go to certifie
                  Them of the truth of all that hath been ſayd,
                  Nought doubting but that it will ſatisfie
                  Them, that therewith they ſhall be well apaid.
                  Which ſaid, the commons ſhouted out and cried
                  And with one voyce much praiſd & magnified,
               
               
                  
                     Anthenors pleaſing ſpeech vnto them made,
                  And therewith gaue him ſpeciall charge to beare
                  Their anſwere to the Greeks, who with him had
                  
                     Aeneas ioynd, to th'end that nothing were
                  Omitted that might further their intent.
                  And they (with King Taltabius that was ſent
               
               
                  Commiſſioner vpon the Grecian part
                  With Anthenor to Troy,) did vndertake
                  The charge t'effect the peace, although in hart,
                  Whatſoeuer proteſtation they did make,
                  They were but traitors, and ment nothing leſſe
                  Then that which outwardly they did profeſſe.
               
               
                  For Priamus had great ſuſpition
                  Of both of them, and certainely beleeu'd
                  They would procure the townes deſtruction,
                  For which he was within his mind ſo grieu'd:
                  That to himſelfe ſore preſt with care and wo,
                  He wept and ſaid, alas what ſhall I do
               
               
                  To ſcape the ſnare wherein I feare to fall?
                  For by my hard and cruell deſteny
                  (Which is the worſt and greateſt griefe of all.)
                  I am compelled of neceſſity,
                  Deſpight my heart, to ranſome and to buy
                  My life with money, of mine enemy,
               
               
                  Which doth torment me ſore. But I perceiu
                        •
                     
                  
                  Whatſoere I do there is no remedy,
                  For by conſtraint I muſt my treaſure giue
                  Vnto my foes, and dare it not deny:
                  And yet I am not thereby freed of feare
                  To looſe my life, which hangeth as it were
               
               
                  In ballance of deceit and tiranny,
                  For I am forſt for all my royall ſtate,
                  T'obay their wills that ſeekes by trechery
                  To haue my life, becauſe they do me hate.
                  But Parchas hath for me ſuch Fortune ſhapt,
                  That without doubt it cannot be eſcapt.
               
               
                  And while that he did in this ſort lament
                  His woefull ſtate with many a briniſh teare,
                  Queene Helena vnto Anthenor went,
                  To pray him and Aeneas when they were
                  In parle with the Greeks, for her to make
                  A motion, and if they could for her ſake,
               
               
                  By their good mediation get that ſhe
                  Might be reſtord againe (if peace did hold,)
                  Vnto her Lord King Menalus, ſo he
                  Contented were, and that of grace he would
                  (Forgetting that had paſſed) pleaſed be,
                  T'reſtore her to her former dignitie.
               
               
                  To whoſe requeſt Anthenor anſwere made,
                  That he would do as much as in him lay
                  To pleaſure her, and ſo when as he had
                  Tane leaue of her, he went the ſelfe ſame day
                  Vnto the Grecians Campe, t'effect the thing,
                  Which he ment traiterouſly to paſſe to bring.
               
               
                  Meane time within the towne they buried
                  A valiant Knight cald Glaucus, baſtard Son
                  To Priamus, whoſe funerall finiſhed,
                  And all things thereunto belonging don,
                  King Priam for Queene Panthaſillias ſake,
                  Cauſd cunning workemen curiouſly to make
               
               
                  A veſſell of pure gold, which he did fill
                  With balme and ſpice, her body to encloſe
                  And to preſerue from putrefaction, till
                  The war did end between him and his foes,
                  By treaty of the peace as then in hand,
                  That it might be conuaid into the land
               
               
                  
                  Of Amazons, wherein ſhe raigned Queene,
                  To burie it there, according t'her degree
                  In princely wiſe. The which King Philomene
                  
                  Did carry away with him from thence, when he
                  Left Troy to go into his natiue Land.
                  But now I will thereon no longer ſtand,
               
               
                  To tell you what about the peace was done
                  Within the Grecians Campe. Who all agreed,
                  With full conſent did make election
                  Of thoſe three Kings, Uliſſes, Diomede,
                  
                  And Taltabius of Creta, and no more
                  To deale for them, as they had done before
               
               
                  Concerning peace, and to that end to meet
                  
                     Anthenor and Aeneas, and to goe
                  With them to Troy, in counſell there to ſit
                  Vpon the ſame. The which forthwith to doe,
                  With ſuch inſtructions from Agamemnon
                  
                  As needfull were, they went into the towne
               
               
                  With both the Troyan Lords, where whē they came,
                  There was ſuch ioy among the people (who
                  In novelties delight, and at the ſame
                  Reioyce, though afterwards againe they do
                  Repent therefore, and their owne follies rue.)
                  For they ſuppos'd that the
                        •
                     eby would enſue
               
               
                  A perfect peace to them for evermore,
                  And finall end of all the griefe & ſorrow
                  Which they endured had ſo long before.
                  And Priamus the next enſuing morrow,
                  Aſſembled all his Lords and Peeres together
                  In Ilion, and when they were come thither,
               
               
                  And every man ſet downe in his degree.
                  
                     Uliſſes ſtanding vp with words refind
                  With eloquence, and ſmoothed ſubtilty,
                  In preſence of them all declar'd his mind,
                  (So well, that thoſe that then were there to heare
                  His pleaſing ſpeech, and not acquainted were,
               
               
                  Nor priuie to his meaning fraudulent,
                  Tooke pleaſure in't, but did not vnderſtand
                  The depth and ſecret drift of his intent)
                  Wherein he did two things of them demand;
                  The one, that Troy vnto the Greeks ſhould pay
                  A certaine ſumme of gold without delay,
               
               
                  In recompence of all the iniurie
                  And wrongs vnto them done in Cithera,
                  
                  When Paris without right or equitie,
                  From thence did take away Queene Helena.
                  
                  The ſecond thing was, that Amphimacus
                  
                  (A baſtard ſonne vnto King Priamus)
               
               
                  Should be exil'd from Troy perpetually,
                  Without all pardon or remiſſion.
                  The which Anthenor had by policie
                  And envie great procured to be done:
                  Becauſe that he did ſpight Amphimacus▪
                     
                  
                  For croſſing him before King Priamus
                  
               
               
                  In preſence of his counſell, (when he made
                  A motion touching peace, and ſaid he would
                  Not giue conſent thereto, but rather had
                  Looſe life and lim then any ſuch thing ſhould
                  Be offered to the Grecians.) And therefore,
                  Such hatred ſecretly vnto him bore,
               
               
                  That finding oportunity to quite
                  Him priuily, like ſerpent envious,
                  He thought he would occaſion take to bite,
                  When time did ſerue with heart malicious,
                  For ſpeaking truth. And therefore my adviſe
                  And counſell is, to wiſh men to be wiſe,
               
               
                  And not in words to be ſuperfluous.
                  For men muſt not ſay all things that they know,
                  And wiſedome oftentimes adviſeth vs,
                  When we are by extreamities brought low:
                  To ſpare to ſpeake, and to diſſemble when
                  We are conſtraind to yeeld to other men.
               
               
                  A man were beter not to ſpeake at all,
                  And ſilent be although againſt his will,
                  Then by his ſpeech in danger great to fall.
                  We muſt beware, and may not alwaies tell
                  The truth of things, but rather hold our peace,
                  The falſe reports of envious men to ceaſe.
               
               
                  That man is wiſe that can his choller hide▪
                  
                  For better tis with modeſty t'abſtaine
                  From anger, then with furie and in pride
                  To ſpeake, for when with ſilence men refraine
                  From words, and can endure wrongs patiently,
                  It is the way debates to pacifie.
               
               
                  For happy is he that can endure a wrong,
                  And not in ſpeech be too preſumptuous,
                  (Which oftentimes makes men excell in tong)
                  As it did happen to Amphimacus:
                  
                  (Although to tell the truth was his intent)
                  For by that meanes he ſuffred baniſhment,
               
               
                  But God the iudge of all men, afterward
                  To ſhew how he with equity and right
                  Can puniſh men, and giue them their rewarde
                  In ſhort time after made like iudgement light
                  Vpon Anthenor, which he falſly ſought
                  To lay vpon Amphimacus for nought.
               
               
                  
                  For not long after he himſelfe was ſent
                  By Aeneas meanes out of the Towne of Troy,
                  
                  And iudged to perpetuall baniſhment,
                  (And never did his freedome there enioy)
                  Whereby you ſee how God by providence,
                  In his due time doth iuſtly recompence
               
               
                  And puniſh all diſſimulation,
                  And treaſon, for who s'euer traitor is,
                  And ſeekes another mans confuſion,
                  To haue the like reward ſhall never miſſe:
                  For falſhood evermore doth backe rebound,
                  Like to a ball that riſeth from the ground,
               
               
                  And falleth downe againe where firſt it lay.
                  For what ſo ever treaſon men forecaſt,
                  Moſt commonly (as we are woont to ſay)
                  Will ſurely be diſcovered at the laſt:
                  And he that ſtrikes with ſword ſhall ſtricken be.
                  (As by Anthenor you may plainlie ſee.)
               
               
                  And while that they ſo earneſt were t'agree,
                  And bring the peace to that effect they ſought,
                  And chiefly that Amphimacus ſhould be
                  Exiled, as Anthenor cloſely wrought:
                  A ſodaine noiſe among them did ariſe,
                  As it had been the lamentable cries,
               
               
                  And dolefull plaints of men in extreame woe.
                  Whereat Uliſſes and King Diomede,
                  
                  As they did out the Counſell chamber go,
                  Were ſtricken in no little feare and dread:
                  And thought the people that great favor bore
                  T'Amphimacus, would be revenged fore
               
               
                  His exile cauſleſſe done to their deſpight.
                  And therfore fear'd that they ſhould murthered be,
                  With furie great within the towne that night,
                  By ſome deviſe and foule conſpiracy
                  Of falſe Anthenor and Aeneas both,
                  In whome they did repoſe but little troth.
               
               
                  And yet in truth there was not any man,
                  That heard the noyſe and rumor in the hall,
                  That could c
                        ••
                     ceiue or know how it began,
                  Which made the Greeks in greater feare to fall,
                  And to ſufpect the Commons would ariſe
                  And kill them, as their deadly enemies.
               
               
                  But to aſſure and put them out of dout,
                  And danger of all tumults what ſo ere,
                  
                     Anthenor did convay them ſafely out
                  Of Ilion: and when they gotten were
                  Out of the way to an aſſured place:
                  
                     Uliſſes with a pale and deadly face
               
               
                  Scarce freed from feare, & with diſſembling ſmile
                  Began to charge Anthenor, and to ſay
                  They feared that he meant them to beguile,
                  Becauſe he put them off from day to day:
                  And nought perform'd of that he promiſt had,
                  When they at firſt the cov'nāts with him made.
               
               
                  So that (ſaid he) we thinke and certainly
                  Belieue for truth (as reaſon doth vs moue)
                  That you meane nothing elſe but treacherie.
                  But falſe Anthenor from them to remoue,
                  All cauſes of ſuſpition what ſo ere,
                  Spake vnto them with ſad and ſober cheare,
               
               
                  And ſaid, I do the Gods to witneſſe call,
                  Who onlie know the ſecret of mans heart,
                  That without any fraud or guile, in all
                  That I haue tane in hand (as't is my part)
                  I haue been faithfull, true, and diligent,
                  To bring't to paſſe with all my whole intent.
               
               
                  One thing there is (whereat you muſt not grieue)
                  Which is the cauſe I cannot (as I would)
                  Performe't ſo ſoone, which if you giue me leaue
                  Shall brieflie vnto you by me be told.
                  This towne (as old records declare to vs,)
                  Long ſince was Builded by King Ilius.
                  
               
               
                  Who in perpetuall honor of his name,
                  And to preſerue it from oblivion,
                  When he had fullie finiſhed the ſame,
                  Gaue vnto it the name of Ilion:
                  
                  Wherein with moſt exceeding coſt and charge,
                  He did erect a Temple faire and large.
               
               
                  (In Pallas name the which long time was had,
                  And holden by all men in reverence great,)
                  Which Temple being raiſed vp and made
                  As high as to the roofe, ere he had ſet
                  And laid the beames and lead vpon the ſame,
                  
                     Pallas (becauſe of her it had the name,)
               
               
                  To ſhew how much the honor they her bore,
                  She did accept as pleaſing in her eies,
                  And alſo to encourage them the more,
                  Vpon her Altars t'offer ſacrifice,
                  A miracle ſo ſtrange did ſhew as then,
                  That nere the like was ſeen before of men.
               
               
                  For from the skie did ſodainlie deſcend,
                  A faire and goodlie Image ſo well made
                  And curiouſly compos'd, that none could mend
                  The workmanſhip thereof, nor ever had
                  Seene any thing ſo exquiſitely form'd,
                  Nor in all points ſo cunningly adorn'd.
               
               
                  
                  For it was made within the heavenly bower
                  Of Angels, by divine Mineruaes hand,
                  And by her ſent, to ſhew her mighty power,
                  Downe from the skies into the church to ſtand
                  Therein, for vs perpetually to be
                  A preſeruation in extreamitie,
               
               
                  And to maintaine and keepe the towne from all
                  Diſtreſſes, harmes, and dangers what ſo ere
                  At any time ſhould hap thereon to fall.
                  For that as long as it remaineth here
                  Within her Church, Troy well may be annoyd
                  By enemies, but nere ſhall be deſtroyd.
               
               
                  For Pallas of her grace to vs doth ſhow
                  Such favor, that while it is in the Towne,
                  There's no terreſtriall power can overthrow,
                  Nor haue the meanes by force to breake it downe:
                  Vnleſſe the Image could be ſtolne away
                  From hence, and yet there is no man that may
               
               
                  Remoue it from the place where it doth ſtand,
                  Vnleſſe it be the Prieſt, whoſe office is
                  Alone t'attend thereon, and with his hand
                  Is licenſed to doo't, becauſe it is
                  Impoſſible for any other man,
                  To ſtirre or lift the ſame, do what he can.
               
               
                  And who ſo ever ſees and doth behold
                  The Image, cannot tell whether it be made
                  Of wood or ſtone, of mettall or of mold,
                  For certaine tis, no earthly man ere layd
                  Hand therevnto, it is ſo heavenly
                  A piece of worke, and wrought ſo curiouſly
               
               
                  By power divine and wiſe Mineruaes hand.
                  Who of her grace hath giuen it vnto Troy,
                  
                  Within her Temple evermore to ſtand,
                  And granted them this priuiledge t'enioy:
                  That while it there remaines, they ſhall not need
                  The force and power of enemies to dread,
               
               
                  If they do yeeld due honor therevnto.
                  And by ſucceſſion ſo ſhall ſtill remaine
                  From King to King, who by true title do
                  And ſhall the Troyan Diadem obtaine:
                  If they preſerue the ſame with reverence,
                  And looſe it not by their owne negligence.
               
               
                  The name whereof is cald Palladiowne,
                  
                  Becauſe it was ſent downe out of the skie,
                  And by Minerua given to the Towne,
                  Within her Church to ſtand perpetually
                  For their defence: and this is th'only thing
                  Which hindreth me my word to paſſe to bring.
               
               
                  Whereto Uliſſes ſaid, if it be ſo,
                  That Troy cannot be given into our hands,
                  (As thou to vs proteſted haſt to do)
                  While th'Image in Mineruaes Temple ſtands;
                  And that it is impoſſible t'attaine
                  To our deſires therein; It is in vaine
               
               
                  For vs t'expect that at thy hands, which thou
                  Canſt not effect: and folly in thee to take
                  On thee to do that which thou knowſt not how
                  By any meanes t'accompliſh, nor to make
                  Thy promiſe good to vs; therefore I ſay,
                  It's beſt for vs to ſeeke ſome other way.
               
               
                  To whome Anthenor made reply, and ſaid,
                  As yet there's nothing promiſed by me
                  But ſhall be well perform'd though't be delaid,
                  As by the ſequell plainly you may ſee:
                  The manner how to you I will declare,
                  If ſo much time to heare it you will ſpare.
               
               
                  My meaning is (ſaid he) forthwith to go,
                  Vnto the Prieſt that hath the cuſtody
                  Of Palladowne, and to perſwade him ſo
                  (By promiſing to giue him preſently
                  A ſum of gold in hand) that he ſhall be
                  Content at my requeſt, to grant to me,
               
               
                  To bring the Image to the place whereas
                  You ſhall appoint: If that meane time you will
                  Content your ſelues, and letting care ore-paſſe,
                  Stay patiently a little while, vntill
                  That I this thing haue fully brought about,
                  Wherein (ſaid he) I pray you not to doubt,
               
               
                  For I will take the charge of it in hand,
                  And do aſſure you of Palladiowne.
                  
                  Whoſe purpoſe when the Greeks did vnderſtand,
                  They tooke their leaues to go out of the Towne:
                  But to avoid ſuſpition ere they went,
                  
                     Anthenor ſaid, that it was his intent,
               
               
                  To go vnto King Priamus to know,
                  In what ſort the Indentures ſhould be made
                  On either ſide concerning peace, and how
                  Much mony ſhould provided be and had,
                  That they were to receaue of him in hand:
                  And ſo (ſaid he) I ſhall ſoone vnderſtand
               
               
                  His meaning, which I will to you impart,
                  Wherewith Uliſſes and the reſt content,
                  For that time tooke their leaues, and did depart
                  Well ſatisfied, and to their armie went,
                  To certifie vnto Agamemnon,
                  
                  What they in Troy concerning peace had done.
               
               
                  
                  And Anthenor vnto King Priam went,
                  And told him that the beſt and readieſt way
                  For him was, (ſith the Greeks were fully bent
                  To make a peace) the next enſuing day
                  To call his Lords and Commons all together,
                  In Ilion: And when they were come thither,
               
               
                  
                     Anthenor ſpake before them all, and told
                  (Though falſlie) what the Grecians meant to do,
                  And what the ſumme of monie was they ſhould
                  Prepare for them (if they would grant thereto)
                  The which was twentie thouſand pound in gold,
                  And as much more in ſilver, if they wold
               
               
                  Haue peace, according to their owne deſire,
                  Which all in readie monie muſt be paid.
                  And further that the Grecians did require
                  Some corne, flower, and meale, the which he ſaid,
                  Should be to put into their ſhips, when they
                  Were readie to ſet ſaile to go away,
               
               
                  To ſerue their turnes while they at ſea ſhould be:
                  And bad them that they ſhould without delay,
                  Collect the ſilver and the gold, and ſee
                  That it were readie by a certaine day.
                  Whereto the King (though loath to doo't) agreed,
                  (For he durſt not gaine ſay't) and ſo decreed,
               
               
                  That preſentlie an order ſhould be made
                  To gather it of rich and poore, (for none
                  Was ſpard) and when Anthenor had thus laid
                  His traiterous plot, and ſo farre therein gone:
                  He went by night vnto the Prieſt to ſee,
                  If by perſwaſions he content would bee,
               
               
                  To hearken vnto him, and giue conſent
                  To do that thing, the which he had decreed
                  To bring to paſſe, and to that end he bent
                  His wit, and all the skill he had to feed
                  Him with faire words, and promiſes of gold,
                  That ſhould be giuen to him in hand, and told
               
               
                  Him while he liu'd he nere ſhould want, if ſo
                  He would conſent to grant to his requeſt,
                  And ſpeaking to him ſaid, if thou wilt do
                  The thing that I deſire, I here proteſt
                  And vnto thee a ſolemne vow doe make
                  Vpon mine honor, that Ile vndertake
               
               
                  To giue thee ſuch a ſumme of gold in hand,
                  That ever after thou ſhalt ſurely be
                  The richeſt of thy kindred in this land.
                  The thing that I therefore require of thee,
                  Is, that thou wouldſt deliuer preſently
                  
                     Palladion, which thou haſt in cuſtody,
               
               
                  Into my hands, and I will thee aſſure,
                  Therein to be ſo ſecret, that no blame
                  Shall fall to thee thereby, and will ſecure
                  Thee from all harmes may happen by the ſame
                  So that vpon my word thou ſhalt not need,
                  For doing it, to ſtand in any dread.
               
               
                  For I will ſo deuiſe, how ere it goeth,
                  That thou no hurt ſhalt haue if that thou do
                  This thing, for I (as well as thou) am loath
                  It ſhould be knowen I gaue conſent thereto:
                  Or that the leaſt in Troy ſhould me ſuſpect
                  Thereof, therefore all feare and care reiect▪
                  
               
               
                  For I had rather die then't ſhould fall out,
                  That we ſhould be accuſed for the ſame.
                  Which to effect, I wil't ſo bring about,
                  That thou and I thereby will reape no ſham
                        ••
                     
                  
                  Nor once ſuſpected be thereof, for all
                  The fault vpon Uliſſes head ſhall fall,
               
               
                  And he therefore ſhall onely beare the blame,
                  For by my meanes it ſhall reported be,
                  That he was th'onlie doer of the ſame,
                  And that by his great craft and ſubtiltie,
                  He hath devis'd to ſteale Palladiowne,
                  
                  And borne it ſecretly out of the towne,
               
               
                  Whereby he ſhall be blam'd, and we go free,
                  Of being once accuſed for this deed.
                  Wherefore (I ſay) if that thou wilt agree
                  To my requeſt, I pray thee then proceed
                  And do it out of hand, and here's the gold
                  That thou ſhalt haue, as firſt to thee I told,
               
               
                  Which I will now deliuer into thy hand.
                  But Tonant (ſo the Prieſt was cald) delaid
                  To do the ſame, and flatly did withſtand
                  Him therein at the firſt, and to him ſaid,
                  That neither gold nor any other thing,
                  Nor faire nor flattering words, nor menacing,
               
               
                  Should make him yeeld vnto ſuch treacheries
                  And though at firſt he ſtraightlie ſaid him nay,
                  (And that ſome honeſt men hate villanie,
                  Yet bribes in theſe daies beare ſo great a ſway,
                  That men the truth for mony will ſuppreſſe,
                  The poore for want, the rich for covetouſneſſe.
               
               
                  And both of them for gold will falſifie
                  Their words, and be ſeduced to decline
                  From truth, and all the bounds of honeſty.
                  For men with golden ſpades may dig and myne
                  Throgh Marble ſtones) the gold did tempt him ſo▪
                  
                  That letting truth and honeſty cleane go,
               
               
                  
                  He yeelded to Anthenor in that caſe,
                  And was content (ſo he the gold might haue)
                  To take the jmage downe out of the place
                  Whereas it ſtood within the Church, and gaue
                  It vnto him, which he the ſelfe ſame night,
                  Sent ſecretlie with all the ſpeed he might
               
               
                  Vnto Uliſſes by a meſſenger,
                  Whome he did truſt: and ſo betweene them both
                  The Towne and all the Troyans ſpoiled were.
                  For traiterouſly without all faith and troth,
                  They gaue the ſame into the Grecians hand,
                  As by the ſequell you ſhall vnderſtand.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  ¶ How the Greeks made an Horſe of braſſe, wherin they put a thouſand armed Knights; and vnder colour of peace, brought it into Troy, by the which it was vtterly destroyed for euer.
               
               
                  NOw maiſt thou mourne and pittifully weepe,
                  O famous towne of Troy that ſo art toſt
                  In waues of woe, and with ſo re ſighs and deepe
                  Complaine, that thou Palladiowne haſt loſt
                  By treaſon of the Prieſt, by whome't was ſold
                  Vnto thy foes for greedines of gold.
               
               
                  Why didſt not thou (oh mighty Ioue that art
                  The Governor of all the world, and knowſt
                  The inward thoughts and ſecrets of the heart,
                  Before they are conceau'd, and dailie ſhowſt
                  Thy power divine by iudgements ſtrange & rare,
                  Vpon ſuch men as diſobedient are
               
               
                  Vnto thy will) take vengance on the Prieſt,
                  That traiterouſly for greedineſſe of gold,
                  At falſe Anthenors motion and requeſt,
                  
                     Mineruaes jmage to the Grecians ſold?
                  And thereby was the meanes they did deſtroy,
                  And vtterly deface the Towne of Troy.
                  
               
               
                  What Land or Towne is able long t'endure
                  In any certaine ſtate? or what is he
                  That liveth here on earth can be ſecure?
                  When as ſuch men as are of that degree,
                  Will be corrupt in heart and mind, and take
                  Rewards, & of their conſcience ſhipwrack make?
               
               
                  Is't not a great and grieuons thing to ſee
                  Men (that ſhould vnto vs examples giue
                  Of holineſſe, and lights vnto vs bee,
                  To ſhew vs by good doctrine how to liue,)
                  Do things which are moſt wicked and contrary
                  To that they teach, & from their function vary.
               
               
                  For if that Prieſts be bad of converſation,
                  And that the brightneſſe of the perfect light
                  Which they ſhould ſhew, be voyd of good devotiō,
                  And turned by iniquity to night?
                  To whom ſhall any man repaire or go
                  To learne, or take example what to do?
               
               
                  The chiefeſt cauſe thereof is Auarice,
                  And greedineſſe of getting gaine and gold:
                  Which moſt accurſed and peſtiferous vice,
                  So great a ſway within Prieſts hearts doth hold,
                  That with the force thereof it makes them blind,
                  And vnto wicked motions ſtirs their mind.
               
               
                  For certainly there is no man that liues
                  Vpon the earth that is more rauenous,
                  Nor vnto vs ſo bad examples giues
                  Of greedineſſe, nor is more covetous
                  Then Prieſts, to ſcrape & catch all that they may.
                  For true it is, that long ſince many a day,
               
               
                  It hath been ſo faſt rooted in the heart
                  Of Prieſts, that are ſo much therewith in loue,
                  That nothing what ſo ere can make it part
                  Out of the ſame, nor it from thence remoue:
                  For tis ſo firmely grafted in their ſect,
                  That it makes them all holines neglect.
               
               
                  For gold is now ſo gliſtring and ſo bright,
                  That naturally it draws men to the ſame
                  Like th'Adamant, and daſleth ſo the ſight
                  Of Prieſts, that they do only beare the name,
                  To be the men that earneſtly embrace
                  That wicked vice of covetouſnes, and place
               
               
                  It in their greedy ravening minds ſo well,
                  That vertue doth not once ſo ſoone begin
                  To moue their hearts, but vice doth it expell,
                  And will not ſuffer it to enter in:
                  Such force it hath all goodnes to ſupplant.
                  As by this wicked Troyan Prieſt Tonant
                  
               
               
                  You may too well perceiue, that traitrouſly
                  The holy jmage to Anthenor ſold;
                  While Priam and the Troyans buſily,
                  Collected ſilver, corne, and ſtore of gold,
                  Of rich and poore, in readines to pay
                  Vnto the Grecks: which treaſure they did lay
               
               
                  
                  And ſhut within Mineruaes▪
                      Temple, there
                  To be reſeru'd till all the covenants made▪
                  
                  On either of their ſides performed were,
                  As they inſtructions from Anthenor had:
                  Which done, the King and all the Troyans went
                  Vnto Apollos Temple, with intent
               
               
                  To call vpon his name, and to adore
                  His Altars, and thereon in Paynim wiſe,
                  (In hope of grace) his aid and helpe t'implore.
                  And when they had begun to ſacrifice,
                  And lay the beaſts, the incenſe, and the blood
                  Vpon the Altars, as the prieſts then ſtood
               
               
                  Before the ſame, and went about to make
                  The wood to burne: two ſtrāge things did appeare,
                  The one was, that it would no fier take,
                  Nor mount vp to the aire with flames moſt cleare,
                  As it at other times was woont to do,
                  Although they ſtill did adde more fire thereto.
               
               
                  And ten times kindled it but't would nor bee,
                  For ſtill it quencht againe, and did no other
                  But caſt out filthy ſmoake, as oft we ſee
                  Lyme when it is with water ſleckt doth ſmother.
                  So that with all the meanes they deuiſe,
                  For want of fier they could not ſacrifice,
               
               
                  T'appeaſe their Idoll God Apollos ire.
                  The other thing was this, that when they laid
                  The offring on the Altar, while the fire
                  Was kindling, and burnt not (as it is ſaid)
                  An Eagle did deſcend downe from the skie,
                  And with a great and mightie noiſe did flie
               
               
                  Vnto the Altar where the offring lay,
                  And ſeazing on it with his tallents, tooke
                  It lightlie vp and bare it cleane away,
                  While all the people ſore amaz'd did looke
                  And gaſe on him with extreame dread & feare,
                  But th'Eagle ſoring ore the Towne, did beare
               
               
                  It ſwiftly thence in all the Troyans ſight,
                  And flying with it towards the Greeks, at laſt
                  Deſcended, and vpon their ſhips did light,
                  And into them the offering did caſt:
                  Which when the Troyans ſaw they had great feare,
                  And iudg'd thereby the Gods offended were
               
               
                  Againſt the Towne, becauſe the fire went out.
                  And therefore to enquire what thoſe things ment,
                  And t'eaſe their minds, and put them out of dout,
                  Vnto Caſſandra preſently they ſent,
                  To pray her that ſhe would them certifie,
                  What thoſe two ſtrange events might ſignifie.
               
               
                  Who told them that the quenching of the fire,
                  Was vnto them a demonſtration▪
                  
                  And certaine ſigne of great Apollos ire,
                  And of the wrathfull indignation,
                  Which he moſt iuſtly did vnto them beare,
                  Becauſe that in deſpight, without all feare
               
               
                  Of him they kild Achilles traiterouſly
                  Within his holie Temple, and did ſtaine
                  The ſame with blood, and after cruelly
                  When they had him therein ſo falſly ſlaine,
                  Without reſpect of place or perſon drew
                  His bodie thence, and vnto dogs it threw.
               
               
                  For which, ſhe ſaid, (t'appeaſe his wrath and ire)
                  They muſt go to Achilles tombe by night,
                  And there devoutly at the ſacred fire
                  Which burned at the walke, their Tapers light:
                  And with that fire (the which without all doubt,
                  She ſaid, would not by any meanes go out.)
               
               
                  New offrings make with great devotion,
                  Which would before Achilles burne moſt cleare,
                  That ſo they might giue ſatisfaction
                  To him for murthering of Achilles, where
                  His name ador'd ſhould be, the which they made
                  In manner as ſhe them commanded had.
               
               
                  For th'Eagle that with th'offring way did flie
                  Vnto the Greeks, ſhe bad them take good heed,
                  And ſaid, that it did plainly ſignifie,
                  That all the Gods together had decreed;
                  That Troy ſhould by ſome treaſon be deſtroyd,
                  And that by no meanes they could it avoyd.
               
               
                  For as they ſaw the Eagle when ſhe fled▪
                  
                  With th'offring to the Greeks, ſo ſhould they ſee
                  The Towne that had ſo long time flouriſhed
                  In honor great, and wealth, deliuered bee
                  Into the Grecians hands, and vtterly
                  Defaſt by them with moſt great cruelty.
               
               
                  
                     Mineruaes Image could not helpe them then,
                  Which they had loſt by their owne negligence.
                  For it moſt ſure and certaine is, that when
                  Gods ſentence is pronounſt, there's no defence
                  Againſt it to be made, for every man
                  Muſt ſtand to his decree do what they can.
               
               
                  The Grecians likewiſe woondring much (when as
                  They ſaw the Eagle with the offering
                  Come flying ſo) ſaid, ſurely that it was
                  A ſigne of ſome moſt ſtrange and ſecret thing
                  That ſhould be brought to paſſe, and for it had
                  Great feare, till Calchas expoſition made
               
               
                  
                  Thereof to them, and bad them not to doubt,
                  Nor ſtand in feare at all of any thing,
                  For that the iſſue thereof would fall out
                  Vnto their good, and they t'effect ſhould bring
                  That for the which they long had quarrelled,
                  And ſo much of their Grecian bloud had ſhed:
               
               
                  And willed them therefore no coſt to ſpare,
                  To make an end of their great enterpriſe,
                  And to that end did wiſh them to prepare
                  Some thing to offer for a ſacrifice
                  To Pallas: and to ſhew his traiterous mind
                  To Troy, he did a ſtrange invention find:
               
               
                  The effect whereof was thus. When he perceaued
                  King Priam was perſwaded to a Peace
                  By falſe Anthenors meanes, as cleane bereaued
                  Of all reliefe and hope of warre to ceaſe:
                  And that Anthenor, and Aeneas both
                  As traiterous as himſelfe, were very loth
               
               
                  To be diſcouered in their treachery,
                  Before that they had brought the ſame to paſſe,
                  To further them in their great villany,
                  He told the Grecians that their beſt way was,
                  To make a ſhew to offer ſacrifice
                  Vnto Minerua, in their Paynim wiſe.
               
               
                  Whereby (he ſaid) he would a meanes deuiſe,
                  That they the Towne ſhold take without all doubt,
                  And get the ſpoile of all their enemies.
                  Which that they might the better bring about,
                  He counſelled them to make a horſe of braſſe,
                  The which of ſuch a mightie greatnes was,
               
               
                  That it within the body of it held
                  A thouſand valiant knights that cloſe did lie
                  Hid in the ſame, well arm'd with ſpeare & ſhield,
                  Which framed was by craft and ſubtiltie
                  Of Synon, and of Appius the wiſe,
                  That with him ioyned were in that deuiſe.
               
               
                  Which horſe the Grecians purpoſely ſhould bring
                  Before the Towne, pretending (as they ſaid)
                  That they would giue it for an offering
                  To Pallas, and by Calchas counſell praid
                  King Priam, that he would vouchſafe them leaue
                  To ſet it in her Temple, and to giue
               
               
                  Them liberty to enter in the Towne,
                  To offer vnto her a ſacrifice,
                  Before they ſailed downe to Tenadowne.
                  
                  And by this falſe and politicke deuiſe,
                  They found the meanes to take the town of Troy,
                  
                  And did the ſame in cruell wiſe deſtroy.
               
               
                  But ere that they did bring the ſame to paſſe,
                  When as the fai
                        ••
                     d articles were made,
                  The Kings by whome king Priam aided was,
                  While he againſt the Grecians warred had;
                  Perceauing that the Troyans would haue peace,
                  And that therby their bloudy war ſhould ceaſe:
               
               
                  As many of them as then liuing were,
                  Did take their leaues of Priamus, and went
                  Againe into their Lands and Countries where
                  They raigned kings, when they had loſt & ſpent
                  Both mony & men: mong whom king Philomene
                  
                  Did take with him the body of the Queene
               
               
                  Of Amazons, that was by Pyrrhus ſlaine.
                  And of two thouſand knights that with him came
                  To Troy, there went but fiftie backe againe:
                  The reſt (vnto their everlaſting fame)
                  Were ſlaine in fight againſt the Grecians.
                  
                  And of a thouſand Amazonians
                  
               
               
                  That came to Troy in Priamus defence,
                  There was but iuſt foure hundred of them left,
                  To beare their Queens dead body way fro thence,
                  The reſt were by the Greeks of life bereft:
                  Who being gone, the next day following,
                  The Troyan Lords and Priamus their king.
               
               
                  Met with the Greeks in open field, and there
                  Conferred of the Peace on either ſide,
                  Where for the Grecians Diomede did ſweare,
                  That they would firmely ſtand to, and abide
                  By all that which they had agreed vpon
                  In treaty with Anthenor, and that none
               
               
                  Of all the Greeks the contrary would do.
                  Wherein the Troyans and King Priamus
                  
                  Were much deceau'd, and tooke no heed vnto
                  His double oath, as not ſuſpitious
                  Of treaſon meant therby: for he did take
                  His oath in generall tearmes, & did not make
               
               
                  Rehearſall of the points particular
                  That were agreed vpon. For his intent
                  Was only with a falſe pretence to ſweare,
                  T'obſerue and keepe the treaty fraudulent,
                  The which Anthenor with the Grecians made,
                  Contrary vnto that which Priam had
               
               
                  Been made belieue by him to haue been done.
                  For by the oath they tooke, they did include
                  And meant that treaſon only greed vpon
                  And ſwore thereto, intending to delude
                  The Troyans, and to catch them in a trap,
                  From whēce they neither could nor ſhould eſcape.
               
               
                  
                  Cleane contrarie to that the Troyans ment.
                  They made a ſhew as if they peace would make,
                  But bloudy warre was onlie their intent,
                  And outwardlie a fained oath did take
                  T'obſerue the peace; but treaſon was the end
                  And drift which they did ſecretly pretend.
               
               
                  But though they valid and covered it with ſhow
                  Of peace, therewith to blind the outward eie,
                  Yet he that all mens ſecret thoughts doth know,
                  Perceiued that their oath was but a lie.
                  He that profeſſeth truth and doth pretend
                  No ſuch thing, but thereby deceaues his frend,
               
               
                  Is not to be belieud what ere he bee,
                  Becauſe the vow he makes is but a lie:
                  And though into mens hearts we cannot ſee,
                  That ſweare and take their oaths ſo craftilie,
                  Yet he that craftilie doth lie and ſweare,
                  Doth wilfullie by craft himſelfe forſweare,
               
               
                  Whereto he can make no exception.
                  For God that knows mans heart and ſecrets all,
                  Condemneth him that with intention
                  Sweares falſlie to betray his friend withall.
                  As Diomede did traiterouſlie deceaue
                  The Troyans, that did verilie belieue
               
               
                  His oath had been without all fraud and guile,
                  As having no ſuſpition in their hearts,
                  That they ſhould be betraied by a wile,
                  Which at the laſt they all too dearelie bought:
                  When as they found the Grecians did contrarie
                  Vnto their oath, and from their promiſe varie.
               
               
                  But longer to entreat hereof were vaine,
                  Let it ſuffice't was all but treacherie,
                  The which the more to hide they tooke againe▪
                  
                  Queene Helena: and therewith preſentlie
                  The monie which the Troyans were to pay,
                  Was broght vnto the plaine the ſelfe ſame day,
               
               
                  And with the flower and meale delivered
                  Vnto the Greeks, as they agreed had,
                  The which they cauſed to be carried
                  Vnto their ſhips. And then as Calchas made
                  And laid the plot, with fain'd devotion,
                  And great and foule diſſimulation,
               
               
                  And holines vaild with hipocriſie,
                  The Grecians praid king Priamus that they
                  Might by his licence haue free libertie
                  In Pallas Temple (ere they went away)
                  Devoutlie t'offer for oblation,
                  The horſe of Braſſe in ſatisfaction
               
               
                  To her, for th'jmage which they ſtole frō thence.
                  (If Priamus would grant them ſo to do)
                  That ſhe therby forgetting their offence,
                  Might bee bening to them when they ſhould go
                  By ſea to Greece, and helpe them in their need.
                  To which King Priam preſently agreed,
               
               
                  As having no ſuſpition that he ſhould
                  Haue been betraid thereby, and gaue conſent
                  That they ſhould do't when s'ever that they would:
                  And was the willinger therewith content,
                  Becauſe Anthenor and Aencas both
                  (Whom he then thoght did meane good faith & troth▪
                  
               
               
                  Perſwaded him thereto: although they knew
                  The Greeks intent was thereby to obtaine
                  Their wills of Troy, which after did enſue.
                  And to that end the Greeks ſtraight on the plaine,
                  Began with ſpeed and mightie diligence
                  T'remoue the horſe, and with much reverence,
               
               
                  And great and extreame force to draw the ſame,
                  As neere vnto the towne as well they could.
                  But when vnto the gate therewith they came,
                  It was ſo great that by no meanes it would
                  Go in thereat, who when the Grecians ſaw,
                  They ſtaid, & did thēſelues frō thence withdraw,
               
               
                  And left it there before the gate, and went
                  Downe in their ſhips to Tenadon, to ſtay
                  There till they had effected that they ment
                  To bring to paſſe. Who being gone away,
                  King Priam and the Troyans that were glad
                  Of their retract, ſuppoſing that they had
               
               
                  Been gone indeed, ſet ope the gates of Troy.
                  
                  Whereat the common people iſſuing out
                  Into the plaine, with ſignes of extreame ioy
                  Ran to behold the horſe, and went about
                  The field whereas the Greeks incamped lay,
                  While they before the towne of Troy did ſtay.
               
               
                  And as they viewd the place, and lookt vpon
                  The Grecians huge and monſtrous horſe of braſſe,
                  And every man his iudgement gaue thereon,
                  The Troyan knight Timeres counſell was
                  To draw't into the Towne, but ſome that there
                  About it ſtood, and ſomewhat wiſer were,
               
               
                  As Capas, and ſome others, flatly bad
                  Them throw the treaſons of the Greeks away,
                  Or that forthwith a fire ſhould be made
                  To melt it, or elſe that without delay
                  They ſhould it breake in pieces ſmall, to ſee
                  What ſecret thing might therein hidden be.
               
               
                  
                  Wherewith the people that amaz'd did ſtand,
                  In ſundrie minds diuided were, till that
                  
                     Lycaon came with mightie ſpeare in hand,
                  And many following him demanded what
                  They meant to do, and entring mongſt the throng,
                  Said Troyan knights, you do your ſelus great wrong.
               
               
                  Belieue you that the Greeks are gone away?
                  Or that there's any goodnes in their gifts?
                  Thinke you that for our benefit we may
                  Giue credite to Uliſſes ſubtill drifts?
                  Ile pawne my life that in this horſe lies hid
                  A multitude of Greeks, or that they did
               
               
                  Deviſe it for an engine wherewithall
                  By night to ſcale our Towne, and ſo to win
                  The ſame by force; take heed, you know not all,
                  What miſterie ſo ever is therein:
                  I feare the Greeks (ſaid he) & will not truſt
                  Their gifts, & therewith gaue ſo great a thruſt
               
               
                  Againſt it with his ſpeare, that it did ſhake,
                  And with the ſame was heard ſo great a ſound
                  Within the hollow horſe, that it did make
                  The noiſe thereof throughout the aire rebound:
                  Whereby, had not the Troyans hearts been blind,
                  Enough was done the Grecians craft to find,
               
               
                  And Troy vntill this day had flouriſhed.
                  Mean time by chāce the Troyan ſheepherds caught
                  A man, who with his hands faſt pinioned,
                  In haſt vnto King Priamus they brought:
                  One, that into their hands fell purpoſelie,
                  And in his heart was fullie bent to trie
               
               
                  How he could worke the Troyans to beguile,
                  Or if he faild, was reſolute to die.
                  Who, when he had ſtood ſtill a little while,
                  Before the King, and each man caſt his eie
                  On him, & ſome of them at him did flout,
                  He ſeem'd to ſigh, (but marke how it fell out,
               
               
                  And you ſhall here the Grecians treaſons ſee,
                  And by this one, coniecture all the reſt.)
                  For as he ſtood in ſhew perplext to bee▪
                  
                  And with his hand did ſmight vpon his breſt:
                  Alas (ſaid he) what ground may me receaue?
                  What hope can I poore caytife now conceaue▪
                  
               
               
                  That neither with the Grecians dare abide,
                  And now among the Troyans captiue here,
                  Stand at their mercie readie to be tride,
                  And to receaue the doome of death I feare:
                  For that (as reaſon is) they thirſt my blood,
                  The which to ſhed I know would do them good.
               
               
                  This mournfull tale by him ſo vttered,
                  The Troyans hearts of rigor did bereaue;
                  And being by them ſomewhat pittied,
                  They askt him what he was, and gaue him leaue
                  To tell his tale, and plainlie to expreſſe
                  His mind: to whome (he ſaid) I will confeſſe
               
               
                  The truth (O King) of all that I do know.
                  And firſt I muſt needs ſay a Greeke I am,
                  For though that fortune falſe hath now broght low
                  Poore Synon; (for ſo called was his name)
                  Yet ſhall ſhe never make nor proue him lier,
                  Nor cauſe him to become a flatterer.
               
               
                  If ere you heard of King Pallamides,
                  
                  And of his valor great and Chivalrie,
                  Who traiterouſlie becauſe he did diſpleaſe
                  The Greeks, by them condemned was to die:
                  Vpon ſuggeſtion that he favored
                  Their enemies, but after he was dead,
               
               
                  They wiſhed he had been aliue againe.
                  His Squire I was and alſo kinſman neare,
                  To whome my father (I muſt needs tell plaine)
                  For pouertie put me his ſhield to beare,
                  And Armes to practiſe while he flouriſhed:
                  Who living, I was lou'd and honoured.
               
               
                  But after that by falſe Vliſſes drifts,
                  He was betraid and brought vnto his end,
                  With griefe and woe I was put to my ſhifts,
                  Pittying the fall of my vnguiltie frend:
                  But (like a foole) I could not hold my peace,
                  Nor yet frō hard & thratning words would ceaſe.
               
               
                  But ſtill I vowd, if ere returne I might
                  To Greece againe, (as they deſerued had)
                  I would his death vpon his foes require,
                  Which was the cauſe of all my woe, and made
                  
                     Vliſſes to invent new crimes gainſt me,
                  Whereby I was ſuſpect and held to be
               
               
                  A traitor gainſt the Greeks, and favorite
                  To th'enemie: and not content with that,
                  He reſted not, till Calchas by his wit
                  Had found a meanes to end my life. But what
                  Should I rehearſe ſuch things as needleſſe be
                  To you, and would no good procure to me?
               
               
                  But if you ſtill to hate the Greeks perſiſt,
                  Let it ſuffice, you haue me here alone,
                  On whome you may take vengance if you liſt:
                  The which that it were brought to paſſe & done▪
                  
                  
                     Uliſſes and Artidos much would ſpend.
                  And with that word he paus'd, & made an end
               
               
                  
                  Of ſpeaking, which did make them more deſire
                  To know the circumſtances of his tale,
                  Suſpecting not his craft, and did require
                  Him into his diſcourſe againe to fall:
                  Who trembling (though therein he did but faine)
                  With ſhew of feare ſpake vnto them againe,
               
               
                  And ſaid, full oft the Greeks would haue been gone,
                  And left their ſiege, and ouer ſeas haue paſt
                  To Greece againe, for that not any one
                  Of them but wearie was, the warre did laſt
                  So long, and they their bloud & liues did ſpend
                  Therein, & could not bring it to an end.
               
               
                  And gone they had, but that the ſeas did riſe
                  And often rage, and ſouthern winds did blow,
                  And caus'd them ſwell and mount vnto the skies,
                  And foming over brinks and banks to flow,
                  And made them ſtay: but ſpecially when as
                  They had devis'd & fram'd this horſe of braſſe;
               
               
                  So great a noiſe of thunder then was heard,
                  And round about the skies the lightning flaſht,
                  That it did make them generally affeard,
                  And for that cauſe they were ſo much abaſht,
                  That they did ſend Euripalus to know
                  Of Phoebus, what thoſe tempeſts did fore-ſhow.
               
               
                  At whoſe returne, this anſwere he did make,
                  And ſaid, with blood (oh Greeks) of maiden ſlaine,
                  A wind you had vnto you given, to take
                  Your voyage vnto Troy; and muſt againe
                  With blood returne, for one of you muſt die,
                  The furie of the Gods to ſatisfie,
               
               
                  Ere you a wind can haue. Which news once blown
                  Into the Grecian eares, each man with feare
                  Did tremble, and would willingly haue known
                  On whom the lot ſhould fall, as then to beare
                  That puniſhment▪ and for the reſt ſhould die.
                  At which time when Uliſſes did eſpie
               
               
                  Advantage, he praid Calchas to declare
                  The name of him that therefore ſhould be ſlaine,
                  That all the reſt might freed be of care.
                  And many cloſely ſpake, & ſome ſaid plaine
                  Twas I, for that they all acquainted were
                  What ſecret malice he to me did beare,
               
               
                  And ſome thereof vnto me warning ſent.
                  But ten daies twas ere Calchas would it ſhow,
                  For he did ſeeme to be much diſcontent,
                  And loath that any man from him ſhould know
                  Who't was that ſuffer ſhould for all the reſt.
                  Till that Uliſſes with his promiſe preſt
               
               
                  And vrged him ſo much, that with one voice
                  The lot was caſt on me, and me they name,
                  And glad they were of me to make their choice,
                  For each man of himſelfe did feare the ſame:
                  And to be ſure with ſpeed layd hands on me.
                  But when the time drew neere that I ſhould be
               
               
                  Vpon the Altar offred, and that they
                  The garlands full of daintie fruits did ſet
                  Vpon my head, I ſlily ſtole away,
                  (I muſt confeſſe) and ſpeedily did get
                  Into a place all full of mud and oſe,
                  And there lay hid, and durſt not once diſcloſe
               
               
                  My ſelfe, till they were vnderſaile, and gone.
                  And by this meanes my natiue Land haue loſt,
                  And of the Grecians here am left alone,
                  And nere ſhall ſee my children, and which moſt
                  Torments me, feare, becauſe I ſcapt away,
                  They will both them and my poore father ſlay,
               
               
                  And they ſhall guiltles die, and ſuffer wrong
                  For my offence. Wherefore I humbly pray
                  (If any pitty doth remaine among
                  Men here on earth) that I ſome favor may
                  (O King) receiue vnfainedly of thee,
                  And that thou wouldſt content and pleaſed bee
               
               
                  To eaſe my woe, and pittie my eſtate,
                  Which is ſo bad that I no friends can find,
                  Becauſe that all the Grecians do me hate.
                  This wofull tale ſo moued Priams mind,
                  And made him his diſtreſſed caſe to mone,
                  That he did will there ſhould no harme be done
               
               
                  To him, and bad vnbind his hands, and ſaid,
                  What ere thou art, forget the Grecians now,
                  For of them here thou needſt not be affraid,
                  Thou ſhalt be free, ſo that thou wilt vs ſhow
                  Who did this huge and monſtrons horſe invent,
                  Why was it made? was it becauſe they ment
               
               
                  To offer it vnto Pallas? or was't not
                  An engin made by them to vſe in warre?
                  Whereto (when he had ſo much fauor got,
                  And ſaw himſelfe to be ſet free from care
                  And feare of death) he ſaid, (with ioyfull cry,
                  And lifting both his hands vp to the skie;)
               
               
                  O everlaſting fires of God, that are
                  So terrible that no man can endure
                  The force thereof! I here by you do ſweare:
                  And oh you ſwords, and ſacred Altars pure,
                  I do you vnto witneſſe call, and ſay,
                  (Proteſting by the goodly garlands gay,
               
               
                  
                  That like a beaſt to ſlaughter brought, I ware,
                  Vpon my head in that moſt dolefull day)
                  That by my will I do not now declare
                  The ſecrets that ſhould not be knowne, nor ſay
                  That willingly I do my Country hate.
                  But ſith their cruell deeds and curſed fate,
               
               
                  Compell me therevnto, it lawfull is
                  For me to tell that which they would conceale,
                  And hope that if therein I do amiſſe,
                  The Gods will pardon me, as now I deale
                  Vprightly in this caſe. Wherefore (oh Troy)
                  Which by this meanes to thy no little ioy,
               
               
                  I do preſerue, in like caſe ſaue thou me,
                  Performe thy word, for I to thee hereby
                  Procure great wealth, and much proſperitie.
                  The hope of all the Grecians ſpecially,
                  Since that this long and bloudie warre began
                  In Pallas was, till that Titides ran
               
               
                  Like mad man with (the Father and the head
                  Of miſchiefes all) Uliſſes, and by night
                  Into Mineruaes Temple entered,
                  And ſlew the watch, and then by force and might
                  Their hands embru'd with bloud, (where no defēce
                  Gainſt him was made) her jmage tooke frō thence.
               
               
                  For from that day good fortune from them fled,
                  And nothing did vnto their minds fall out,
                  No hope they had, nor comfort followed,
                  What ere they tooke in hand, or went about:
                  For Pallas did them vtterlie forſake.
                  And with ſome doubtfull ſignes of war to make,
               
               
                  And put them in great feare, when they did bring
                  Her jmage to the Campe, and downe it ſet,
                  Her eies like flames of fire gliſtering
                  Did ſhew, and all her body ore did ſwet:
                  And thriſe ſhe roſe (whereat they woondered)
                  And ſhook her ſpeare & ſhield thriſe ore her head.
               
               
                  For which they were by Calohas bid to go
                  Vnto their ſhips, and put to ſea in haſt,
                  For that (ſaid he) belieue me it is ſo,
                  All hope for vs at this time cleane is paſt:
                  And though that they are gone from thence a while,
                  And vnto Greece returnd, it's but a wile.
               
               
                  For their intent is but to pacific
                  Their Gods in Greece, and then to come againe
                  When wind doth ſerue, & with a new ſupplie,
                  A hotter warre againſt you to maintaine:
                  And this by Calchas counſell they haue done.
                  And for amends to Pallas, and to ſhun
               
               
                  Her wrath for that moſt foule & great offence,
                  By them committed gainſt her Deity,
                  They were by viſions warn'd ere they went hence,
                  This Horſe that is ſo huge of quantity,
                  In this ſame place where now it ſtands, to ſet.
                  Which Calchas hath caus'd to be made ſo great;
               
               
                  (For it was Calchas worke and only drift)
                  Becauſe they feared you would enterpriſe,
                  When they were gone, the ſame by force to lift
                  Into the Towne, which they would in no wiſe
                  Haue you to do, becauſe you ſhould not call
                  On Pallas name, nor worſhip him at all.
               
               
                  For if you ſhould this gift of hers deface,
                  Deſtruction great without all doubt would fall
                  On Priams princelie bloud, and would it race
                  Out of the world for a memoriall
                  In time to come, to make all men to feare
                  To do the like. But if you could it beare
               
               
                  Into the Towne, and on your wals it ſet,
                  The Greeks of you would ſtand in mightie feare,
                  And Conqueſts great againſt them you ſhould get,
                  And they, deſpight their harts, great loſſe ſhold bear.
                  By this deceit of Synon falſe periur'd,
                  They credite gaue to him, and were allur'd
               
               
                  To worke their owne decay by that ſame horſe,
                  Whom neither ſtout Achilles, nor the warre
                  That ten yeares held, nor all the Grecians force
                  Could make to yeeld, nor for their foes to care:
                  And while they ſtood this craftie tale to heare,
                  The which he told with many a fained teare,
               
               
                  Another thing at that ſame time fell out,
                  Which put them in a mightie maze, and fild
                  Their valiant hearts with extreame feare & doubt.
                  Which was, as Neptunes Prieſt Lycaon kild
                  A Bull vpon his Altar, and the ſame
                  Did offer vnto him, behold there came
               
               
                  Two mightie Serpents ſwimming to the ſhore,
                  Whoſe vglie heads they might far off behold,
                  And ſee their backs & huge long tailes that bore
                  The ſea aloft, and in the waues did fold
                  And turne, and whirle the water round about,
                  Who with their fiery eies came fiercely out
               
               
                  Vpon the land, and at them hiſſing ran
                  With gaping mouths, wherwith in mighty feare
                  They all began to flie away, and whan
                  The Serpents hard by Neptunes Altar were,
                  They ſet vpon Lycaons children twaine,
                  And with their claws their tender lims did ſtraine,
               
               
                  
                  And tearing them in pieces, fed ſo faſt
                  On them, that they with ſpeed devoured were.
                  Which when Lycaon ſaw, he ran in haſt
                  With ſword in hand to ſaue their liues, but there
                  Was no defence againſt them to be made.
                  For when as they children eaten had,
               
               
                  They ran and claſpt Lycaon round about
                  The body and the necke in cruell wiſe,
                  Who mightily ſtroue with them to get out
                  Their furious clawes, with great & fearefull cries:
                  (Like to a Bull that's tide vnto a ſtake
                  For to be kild, doth mighty roaring make,)
               
               
                  But all in vaine, for nothing could him aid▪
                  
                  And when that he was kild, they tooke their way
                  Vnto Mineruaes Temple, where they laid
                  Themſelues downe at her feet, & there did ſtay:
                  Wherewith a mighty trembling feate did fall,
                  With wonder new & ſtrange vpon them all.
               
               
                  For they ſuppos'd and thought it to be true,
                  That for becauſe Lycaon with his ſpeare
                  Had run againſt the horſe, that as a due
                  Deſerved plague that puniſhment he bare:
                  And therefore all of them did cry and ſay,
                  Why bring you not this horſe without delay
               
               
                  Into the Towne, the Goddeſſe wrath t'appeaſe.
                  And preſently the people did begin
                  To batter downe their wall, and did not ceaſe
                  Till they had made a mighty brech therein:
                  Which done, they ſet the horſes feet vpon
                  Huge planks with wheels, that it might ſlide there on,
               
               
                  And with great ropes about his necke did draw
                  The fatall horſe, with men and armor full.
                  Which when the women with their children ſaw,
                  They leapt, & daunſt, & ſinging holpe to pull
                  And hale it in, and glad was he that could
                  By any meanes vpon the ropes lay hold.
               
               
                  And in that ſort it entred in the Towne,
                  (Vnhappy men to breed their owne decay)
                  For as they drew and ſhou'd it vp and downe
                  Along the ſtreets of Troy, vpon the way
                  Foure times it ſwai'd & iog'd againſt the ground,
                  And euery time they heard the armor ſound.
               
               
                  Within the ſame; yet on with it they went,
                  And blind with fond deſire they had to get,
                  That mōſtrous horſe brought in, were not content,
                  Till they had it by Pallas Temple ſet:
                  Wherewith Caſſandra plainly did them ſhew
                  By ſpirit diuine, what would thereof enſew.
               
               
                  But they that for her words did little care,
                  Belieu'd her not, but like to ſenceleſſe men,
                  The Temples ſtrew'd with hearbs, & did prepare
                  As ſolemne feaſts (as if that they had been
                  Secur'd and freed from dangers, whatſo ere
                  Might happē whē poore wretched men they were
               
               
                  At point of death, and as we vſe to ſay,
                  With one foot ſtepping in the graue, & had
                  No longer time to liue, but one ſhort day)
                  And ſo great triumph for the time then made,
                  That nere the like before was ſeen in Troy.
                  
                  (But true it is) that after extreame ioy,
               
               
                  As oft we find, enſues adverſitie,
                  And after peace (when men do liue ſecure
                  Without all feare in great felicitie,
                  And thinke that it for euer will endure)
                  Comes cruell warre, for there's no certainty
                  In worldly bliſſe, full of variety
               
               
                  Deceit and guile, vnhappines and trouble,
                  And neuer in one ſtate doth long remaine,
                  Not much vnlike vnto a water-bubble,
                  Which riſeth vp & ſtraight falls downe againe:
                  For though that men haue wealth & riches great,
                  And on the top of fortunes wheele are ſet,
               
               
                  Yet vnawares ſhe ſoone doth caſt them downe.
                  As you may well behold and plainly ſee
                  Here in this Booke, by Troy the ancient Towne,
                  Which thought it ſelfe for euer ſafe to be:
                  By bring in that mighty horſe of braſſe,
                  Which th'only cauſe of their deſtruction was.
               
               
                  And when that they in extreame ioy had ſpent
                  The day without all care, till it was paſt,
                  And that the chriſtall firmament had ſent
                  Darke night with clouds the skies to ouercaſt:
                  While that the wearied Troyans on the wall
                  Lay careleſly, and ſome on ſleepe did fall
               
               
                  As fearing nought. The Grecians armie ſoone
                  From Tenadon with all their Navie came,
                  And guided by the cleare bright ſhining Moone,
                  With ſilence great did land, and made a flame
                  Of fire out of their admirall, to ſhow
                  That they were there, and to let Symon know
               
               
                  They were prepard to ioyne with him, when he
                  Had done his feat within the Towne, who when
                  He ſtarted vp, and looking out did ſee
                  The light from thence, he ſtole out and began
                  To turne the gins that in the horſe were made
                  And when that he his bellie op'ned had,
               
               
                  
                  He called out Uliſſes, Athamas,
                  
                  
                     Theſander, Machon, and King Menalus,
                  
                  
                     Pyrrhus, Achilles ſon, (that alſo was
                  Surnamed by the Greeks Neoptolimus,)
                  King Thoas, and a number more beſide,
                  Who ſoone out of the Horſes panch did ſlide:
               
               
                  And preſently vpon the walles did go
                  And there faſt ſleping found the watch, whom they
                  Did fiercely kill, and when they had done ſo,
                  Vnto the gates in haſt they went there way,
                  And brake them vp, and then out of the towne
                  Did hang a light, which they at Tenadowne
                  
               
               
                  Perceiuing armd themſelues, and fiercely ride
                  To Troy-ward, where their fellows watch did keepe
                  And ready ſtood their comming to abide
                  At midnight, when ſound ſleep on men doth crepe
                  And furiouſly throughout the Citie ran,
                  And ſparing neither woman, child, nor man.
               
               
                  Kild all they found with extreame cruelty,
                  For they as then faſt ſleeping lay in bed,
                  And little did ſuſpect ſuch trechery,
                  Till that they felt with gaſtly wounds that bled,
                  Their enemies blowes and ſaw no remedy
                  But by their hands in cruell wiſe to die.
               
               
                  For neither ſex nor age by them was ſpard,
                  Whereby a mighty crie and noiſe did riſe
                  Within the towne, the which when Priam hard,
                  (Who little did ſuſpect his enemies:
                  So falſely had betraid him, and that
                  The towne by them was tane) but al to late
               
               
                  He found, and by experience too well knew
                  
                     Anthenor and Aeneas had betraid
                  The towne and him into their hands, & drew
                  That traiterous plot, the which they falſely ſaid,
                  Was for his and their good in generall,
                  But it was don to blind his eies withall.
               
               
                  Till they fit oppertunitie might haue,
                  To bring't paſſe, in ſuch ſort as they had
                  Agreed with the Greeks, which was to ſaue
                  Themſelue on ſuch conditions as they made
                  In ſecret wiſe, and cleane contrary told
                  To Priamus, which then he might behold
               
               
                  To well, for at that time the trechery
                  Which with ſuch traitrous hearts they had cōceild,
                  Was ſeene and by the Grecians cruelty,
                  Vnto the townes, and his decay reueald,
                  And th'Authors knowne, when as no remedy
                  Was to be found, t'auoyd th'extremity
               
               
                  That on him fell, for then the towne was tane,
                  And all the loftie towers thereof began
                  With fierto burne, and euery ſtreet & lane
                  Was fild with Greeks, and nothing hard therein
                  But lamentable cries and woefull grones,
                  Of men, that dying lay vpon the ſtones
               
               
                  Within the ſtreets, and howſes, and that fled
                  Before the Greeks, in mighty dread and feare▪
                  
                  Amazed ſore he roſe out of his bed,
                  And ſheading many a ſalt and brinſh teare
                  Ran to Apolloes Temple comfortles,
                  T'eſcape if that he might in that diſtreſſe.
               
               
                  Meane time the towne was of a flaming fier,
                  Which merciles conſumd and ſpoyled all,
                  And Greeks on euery ſide with great deſire
                  To be reuenged vpon the Troians fall,
                  And murthered and beat them downe ſo faſt,
                  That while that moſt accurſed night did laſt
               
               
                  Ere Phoebus ſhoane the next enſueing day
                  They ſlew of them boue twenty thouſand men,
                  And forcibly did take and bare away
                  Their 
                        •
                     iluar, gold, & all their goods, and then
                  With mighty rage & extreame violence,
                  They ſackt & ſpoyld without all reuerence
               
               
                  The Temples of the Gods throughout the towne,
                  And in deſpight of them with courage bold,
                  Did fiercely rent, and furiouſly pull downe
                  Their ornaments of ſiluer and of gold,
                  In preſence of the Gods that then were there,
                  While Priamus with ſad & heauy cheare
               
               
                  Before Apollo kneeld, and to him praid
                  Devoutly to relieue him, but in vaine,
                  For at that time there was no hope of aid,
                  That he by any meanes could then obtaine:
                  But onely there with patience to attend,
                  By cruell death his woefull life to end.
               
               
                  Whereof without all doubt he was moſt ſure,
                  Ere long time paſt by Grecians hand to haue,
                  And Caſſandra that holy creature,
                  Her ſelfe likewiſe in that diſtreſſe to ſaue,
                  Vnto Mineruaes Temple did repaire,
                  Accompanied with many a Lady faire,
               
               
                  And other Gentle-women of the towne;
                  Who there with ſobs moſt bitterly did crie,
                  And made their woefull lamentation,
                  Attending euery hower when they ſhould die.
                  Wherein ile let them with the goddeſſe dwell,
                  For if that I their ſorrowes all ſhould tell,
               
               
                  
                  And ſhow how they in euery lane and ſtreet
                  Lay groueling on their Lords and husbands deare,
                  And ſuckt their wounds, & all their cloths did wet,
                  And ſtaind, and di'd them with the blood that there
                  Out of their bodies ran, that wofully
                  Beheld them with a pale and deadly eye.
               
               
                  It would be ouer long for me to write,
                  And tedious likewiſe for you to heare.
                  But to proceed, when they had all that night,
                  Nere ceaſt to kill and ranſacke euery where,
                  The people, and the towne, and ſpard not one;
                  Next day in heaps they went to Ilion,
                  
               
               
                  King Priamus moſt faire and Princely hall,
                  Wherein they found not one to make defence
                  Againſt them, nor to keepe the ſame, for all
                  The people in great feare were fled from thence
                  To ſaue their liues, and left it deſolate,
                  Where all the gold and riches of the ſtate,
               
               
                  Encloſed lay within the treaſory,
                  The lockes whereof they brake, and bare away
                  The treaſure therein found, and cruelly
                  Did fier the howſe, for no man durſt ſay nay,
                  Nor let them to purſue their enterpriſe.
                  Then Pyrrhus in moſt fierce and furious wiſe
               
               
                  Went to Divine Apolloes Temple, where
                  Before the Altar with great cruelty,
                  While Priamus deuoutly praied there,
                  In humble wiſe t'Apollo on his knee,
                  With fury great not ſpeaking any word:
                  Into the body ran him with his ſword,
               
               
                  And gaue him ſuch a deepe and deadly wound
                  That preſently he fell vpon his face,
                  And pitifully died on the ground,
                  And with his blood defild the holy place.
                  
                     Aeneas and Anthenor ſtanding by,
                  As witneſſes of his great cruelty.
               
               
                  Whoſe death when as Queene Hecuba perceiud,
                  And on the ground there lying did behold
                  His bleeding corſe, ſhe ſeemed cleane bereaud
                  Of ſences, and in wofull wiſe did fold
                  And wring her hands, and pitiouſly did crie,
                  And in great feare out of the Church did flie
               
               
                  With Pollicene her daughter, (who together
                  Were preſent when King Priamus was ſlaine,)
                  To ſaue their liues, and yet they knew not whether
                  To go no
                        •
                      run, for no man durſt maintaine
                  Their quarrell, nor no comfort then was left
                  For them, that of the ſame were cleane bereft.
               
               
                  For all the towne in euery place was fild
                  With Greeks, that throgh, twith gliſtring ſwords did run,
                  And euery where the Troians fiercely kild,
                  That had no meanes their cruelty to ſhun.
                  And as ſhe ran in that ſort through the ſtreete,
                  It was her chance Aeneas there to meet,
               
               
                  Whom when ſhe ſaw, her fleſh began to ſhake
                  And tremble with the griefe ſhe had in mind,
                  And therewithall in fury great ſhe ſpake,
                  And ſayd to him, oh Traitor moſt vnkind!
                  Oh ſerpent falſe! oh Adder enuious!
                  Oh villaine vile, and moſt malicious!
               
               
                  Thou that art cauſer by thy wickednes
                  Of all our woes, and through thy trechery
                  Haſt brought vs now into ſo great diſtreſſe;
                  That plunged in the vale of miſery,
                  We run from place to place diſtreſt in mind,
                  And can no eaſe at all nor comfort find.
               
               
                  How couldeſt thou in heart be ſo vnkind
                  Vnto thy Lord and King, as traiterouſly
                  To ſtand by with a fierce and cruell mind,
                  And ſee him ſlaine by Pirrhus cruelly
                  Within the Temple, where he ſhead his blood,
                  Who while he liu'd was vnto thee ſo good,
               
               
                  And gratious Lord, that neuer any man
                  Felt more of his great liberalitie,
                  Nor was more lou'd, (as all men witnes can)
                  Then thou by him, (which thou maiſt not deny.)
                  Who now lies dead within that holy place:
                  Thou waſt not only traitor in that caſe▪
                  
               
               
                  But didſt conſpire his death, for thou didſt bring
                  Fierce Pirrhus to Apolloes Temple, where
                  Thou kneweſt well that he ſhould find the King,
                  Of purpoſe ſet, that he might kill him there,
                  Where as thou ſhouldſt (as dutie doth thee bind)
                  Haue ſaud his life, if thou hadſt been ſo kind.
               
               
                  But thou not only haſt that miſchiefe don,
                  But didſt betray this towne where thou waſt bred,
                  And foſtred with more reputation
                  Then any man, ſaue he that was the head
                  And King thereof, which now forgotten is
                  By thee, wherein though thou haſt done amiſſe,
               
               
                  Yet if within thy ſtony heart there be
                  One drop of pittie or compaſſion,
                  Let me requeſt this favor now of thee,
                  That in this time of deſolation,
                  Thou wilt my daughter Pollicene relieue,
                  And vnto her ſome ayd and ſuccour giue,
               
               
                  
                  If thou doſt any one reſpect at all
                  Of Priams race, (as ſure thou canſt not chooſe,)
                  That ſhe by thy protection may not fall
                  Into the Grecians hands, her life to looſe:
                  That when men ſhall this woefull ſtory read,
                  And find therein this fowle & treacherous deed
               
               
                  By thee ſo falſely done, and brought to pas
                  Againſt this towne, it may the rigor ſtay
                  Of thoſe that will judge and condemne thee as
                  A Traytor vile, and giue them cauſe to ſay,
                  That though thou didſt this great & wicked thing,
                  Yet at the laſt thou ſhewdſt thy ſelfe bening,
               
               
                  And gratious vnto Pollicene, whereby
                  Some little ſatisfaction thou ſhalt make,
                  In recompence of thy great treachery
                  To vs, and giue her cauſe thy part to take:
                  When men of thee (to her) ſhall juſtly ſay,
                  And call thee Traytor falſe another day.
               
               
                  If thou wilt now vouchſafe her life to ſaue▪
                  
                  But as for me do what thou wilt, all's one,
                  I neither do, nor will thy fauor craue.
                  For ſith my Lord King Priams dead & gone,
                  I care not though that thou ſome Grecians bidſt
                  Do vnto me, as vnto him thou didſt.
               
               
                  This motion made by Hecuba the Queene,
                  Though ſharp it were, did moue Aeneus ſo,
                  That pittying faire Lady Pollicene,
                  
                  He cauſed her forthwith with him to go,
                  And ſhut her in a chamber ſecretly,
                  From ſight and knowledge of the enemy:
               
               
                  Leaſt they thereby ſhould find occaſion
                  To picke ſome quarrell with him for her ſake.
                  And at that time likewiſe King Thelamon
                  
                  Of pity did in his protection take
                  The wife of Hector, cald Andromacha,
                  
                  And Priams daughter Lady Caſſandra.
                  
               
               
                  And vnto them his Princely promiſe gaue,
                  To keepe them from the Grecians cruelty.
                  And Menalus Queene Helena did ſaue,
                  As ſhe for whom with ſuch hoſtilitie
                  He had been cauſe to moue that bloody warre,
                  And for whom long in heart he had ſuch care.
               
               
                  The Greeks the while with hot and ragingire,
                  Neare ceaſt to breake and furiouſly pull downe
                  The walles, & to conſume and burne with fire
                  The howſes & rich buildings in the towne:
                  So that therein they left nothing vpright,
                  Nor vndefac'd, but with moſt great deſpight
               
               
                  Deſtroyed all without exception
                  Of any place or perſon whatſoere,
                  (Vnleſſe twere thoſe which by condition,
                  They had before proteſted to forbeare,
                  And did belong and appertaine vnto
                  
                     Aeneas, and all thoſe that did vnto
               
               
                  The treaſon by them practiſed conſent.)
                  And from their fury great would not forbeare
                  That day, till King Agamemnon had ſent
                  For all the Grecian Princes that were there,
                  To meet in Pallas Temple. Vnto whome,
                  When they therein were altogether come,
               
               
                  He asked them, if they would conſtantly
                  Obſerue their faith and promiſe made to thoſe,
                  By whom they had obtaind that victory,
                  Which they ſo long had ſought againſt their foes▪
                  
                  And what they would with all the treaſure do
                  Which they within the towne had won? Wherto
               
               
                  They anſwered, that for their promiſe made,
                  And truely ſworne vnto by them, they would
                  In each reſpect obſerue it well, and ſayd,
                  That all the gould and treaſure gotten, ſhould
                  By iuſt diuiſion be diſtributed
                  To euery man as he had merited:
               
               
                  Of what degree, eſtate, or dignity
                  Soere he was, and that it ſhould be done
                  By him without all partialitie,
                  So that mong them there might not any one
                  Haue cauſe to be offended, nor to blame
                  Him for the true diviſion of the ſame.
               
               
                  Which done, while they within the Temple ſtaid,
                  Some ſpeech about Queene Helena did riſe,
                  Whereto when ſome had anſwere made, and ſayd
                  Their minds therein as they could beſt aduiſe:
                  King Thelaphus with great ſeuerity
                  Sayd, that ſhe well deſerued had to die▪
                  
               
               
                  For whom ſo many men their liues had loſt,
                  And vrged, that ſhe might haue iudgement giuen,
                  That as they dyed for her, it ſhould her coſt
                  Her life likewiſe, that day ere it was euen.
                  Which many more of them agreed vnto.
                  And cauſe for her there was ſo much ad
                        •
                     ;
               
               
                  
                     Agamemnon and Menalus ſat ſtill,
                  And durſt not ſpeake one word to ſaue her life,
                  Leaſt that the Greeks in 
                        •
                     ury ſhould her kill,
                  (There was mong them as then ſo great a ſtrife.)
                  Till that Uliſſes with much Eloquence,
                  And good perſwaſions made in her defence,
               
               
                  
                  Did ſatisfie them all ſo well in th'end,
                  That they contented were that ſhe ſhould liue,
                  And ceaſing more about her to contend,
                  To M
                           •
                        nalus they did her freely giue.
                  And when their Generall Agamemnon
                  
                  Perceiued that they were agreed theron,
               
               
                  He made requeſt to them, that they would giue
                  
                     Caſſandra vnto him for recompence
                  Of all his paines, and ſayd while ſhe did liue
                  He would her keepe; and when they went frō thēce
                  Take her with him: and they contented were
                  It ſhould be ſo. And then before them there
               
               
                  
                     Aeneas and A
                           ••
                        henor to them told,
                  And iuſtified it vpon their oath,
                  That Helenus King Priams Son nere would
                  Agree vnto the war, but ſtill was loath
                  That Priamus his Father, and the reſt
                  Should take the ſame in hand, and did his beſt
               
               
                  To let it by his counſell and aduiſe,
                  And how that by the mediation
                  Of him, and of Caſſandera the wiſe,
                  (Whoſe hearts were moued with compaſſion,)
                  
                     Achilles murthered body was not made
                  A prey for hounds, as Hecuba had ſaid
               
               
                  That it ſhould be, and further that they were
                  Much grieued for the murther, and likewiſe
                  For many other matters that were there
                  Don in the towne, contrary to th
                        •
                     aduiſe
                  Which they from time to time had giuen to thoſe,
                  That of the war had order to diſpoſe.
               
               
                  To whom becauſe that they were innocent
                  Of all the wrongs that to the Greeks were don,
                  They graunted with one voice and full conſent,
                  That they ſhould haue a full remiſſion
                  And pardon of their liues. Then Helen
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
                  With humble voyce and viſage piteous,
               
               
                  Fell on his knees with great ſubmiſſion,
                  And thanking them for pardon to him giuen,
                  Submiſſiuely beſought Agamemnon,
                  
                  With many ſalt and briniſh teares, that euen
                  As he had freely pardoned his offence,
                  (For which he could make him no recompence)
               
               
                  He would be pleaſd to haue compaſſion
                  Vpon the ſilly blood of children,
                  And with a gratious eye to looke vpon
                  The ſons of valiant Hector, who as then
                  Nere had don wrong to him▪ nor any other,
                  And that he would vouchſafe thē with their mother
               
               
                  (His widow left, all comfortles alone,)
                  
                     A pardon of their liues and liberty.
                  To whom the King mou'd with compaſſion
                  At his requeſt, did graunt ſecuritie
                  Of life, and lim, and licence free to go
                  Whereas they liſt, the like he did vnto
               
               
                  The reſt of all the women then in Troy,
                  
                  That in the Grecian furie were not ſlaine,
                  And gaue to them free liberty t'enioy
                  Their dwellings there, or elſe-where to remaine
                  Within the land: for which moſt humbly
                  They gaue him thanks with many aioyfull crie▪
                  
               
               
                  Which done, the King with all the Grecians went,
                  Out of the Church, and preſently agreed
                  To leaue the towne, and to that end they ſent
                  Their treaſure and their men aboord with ſpeed:
                  Intending to returne to Greece againe,
                  But ſuch a ſodaine ſtorme of wind & raine,
               
               
                  With great and hideous tempeſts did ariſe
                  Vpon the ſurging ſeas, and ſuch fowle weather
                  Of thunder and of lightning in the skies,
                  Continued for one whole moneths ſpace together,
                  That none of them durſt with their ſhips aduc̄ture
                  That dangerous time into the ſeas to enter.
               
               
                  But were conſtraind vpon the land to tarry
                  Till be
                        ••
                     er wind and weather did enſue,
                  And finding it ſtill more and more contrary,
                  They asked Calchas counſell if he knew
                  What thoſe great ſtormes & tempeſts ſignified,
                  That them ſo long of paſſage had denied.
               
               
                  Who told them, that thoſe ſtormes & tempeſts fell
                  By prouidence Diuine, that had provokt
                  The vgly, fowle, and furious fiends of Hell,
                  To moue the ſame, and could not be reuok't,
                  Nor yet would ceaſe till they were puniſhed
                  By death, that had Achilles murthered.
               
               
                  And that their God Apollo angry was,
                  Becauſe thereby his Temple they did ſtaine
                  With blood, and that therefore they ſhould not pa
                        •
                     ,
                  Till they had pleaſed him with blood againe:
                  Which muſt be done by offering Pollicene,
                  
                  (Who by her extreame beauty cauſe had beene,
               
               
                  And th'obiect of that cruell murther▪don
                  Vpon Achilles body,) to apeaſe
                  And giue Apollo ſatisfaction:
                  The which he ſayd, if they would haue the ſeas
                  Propice, they muſt needs do ere they went thencee
                  To take away all cauſes of offence.
               
               
                  
                  This anſwere made, fierce Pyrrhus ſought about
                  In euery place for Pollicene, but could
                  By no meanes heare of her, nor find her out,
                  Till ſome man at the laſt vnto him told,
                  That ſhe was cloſely kept, and hidden by
                  
                     Aeneas and Anthenor priuely.
               
               
                  Whereby ſo great a rumor ſuddenly
                  Aroſe gainſt them, that by that meanes they were
                  In danger of their liues, till trayterouſly
                  
                     Anthneor to auoid all cauſe of feare,
                  And better to make knowne his villany,
                  Had ſought & ſearcht ſo long and buſily,
               
               
                  That at the laſt he found her out, & brought
                  Her forcibly vnto the Greeks, and there
                  Deliuered her to them, (when ſhe leaſt thought
                  That ſhe vnto her death had been ſo neare.)
                  Who preſently without compaſſion,
                  Was iudged to die by King Agamemnon,
                  
               
               
                  And taking care that execution
                  Vpon her ſhould be done without delay,
                  He did giue order and commiſſion
                  To Pyrrhus for the ſame, who made no ſtay,
                  But tooke her by the hand, and furiouſly
                  Drew her vnto the place where ſhe ſhould die.
               
               
                  Great was the preſſe that ran vnto that place,
                  To ſee and to behold young Pollicene
                  
                  Who for her beauty, comlines, and grace,
                  Within the world her like had nere been ſeene:
                  So that they all were grieud that ſhe ſhould die,
                  And for becauſe there was no remedy,
               
               
                  Let many a ſalt and bitter teare diſtill
                  Out of their eyes, for pittie to behold
                  Her woefull ſtare, and gladly by their will
                  Wiſht that ſhe might eſcape, & faine they would
                  Haue ventred to haue tane her forcibly
                  From Pyrrhus hands, but that they verily
               
               
                  Beleeud that without ſhe died, they nere
                  Should haue faire wind, nor go to Greece againe
                  To ſee their Natiue Land, whereto they were
                  Moſt certainely perſwaded by the vaine
                  Suggeſtions which their Prophet Calchas had,
                  Concerning her vnto them falſely made.
               
               
                  And when vnto Achilles graue ſhe came,
                  Whereas the Grecians would her ſacrifice,
                  She kneeled downe devoutly fore the ſame,
                  And lifting vp her faire and tender eies,
                  With wringing hands vnto the Gods ſhe praid
                  In moſt ſubmiſſiue wiſe, and thus ſhe ſaid.
               
               
                  OH mighty Gods that in the heauens abide,
                  And ſee and gourne all things whatſoere,
                  At whoſe command the world that is ſo wide,
                  And eke the ſeas and skies created were,
                  And by your word all formd & framd of nought,
                  To whom the depth & ſecrets of mans thought
               
               
                  Is knowne, for nothing from your Deities
                  By any meanes conceald or hid can 
                        •
                     e;
                  I humbly pray your heauenly maieſties,
                  That you will now be mercifull to me,
                  And my poore ſoule into your hands receiue,
                  When bitter death ſhall me thereof bereaue
               
               
                  I do confeſſe with all humilitie,
                  That with a holy care of chaſtitie,
                  I haue preſerued my virginitie
                  Vntill this day, wherein I now ſhall die
                  A maiden vndefild for thought or deed,
                  Although the Greeks haue iudged and decreed
               
               
                  To put me to this hard and cruell death,
                  The which I nere deſerud (as you can tell,)
                  For as my conſcience to me witneſſeth,
                  And I in truth may ſai▪t, & ſweare it well,
                  I am moſt cleare of that which they accuſe
                  Me for, & yet they will me not excuſe,
               
               
                  But die I muſt to ſatisfie their will,
                  As they alledge becauſe I gaue conſent
                  My brother Paris ſhould Achilles kill,
                  Whereas God knoweth I am an innocent,
                  And neuer did in will, deed, word, nor thought,
                  Giue my conſent ſuch treaſon ſhould be wrought
               
               
                  Gainſt him, whom I do know did loue me deare,
                  But was therefore right 
                        •
                     ory in my hart,
                  Though preſently as now it doth appeare,
                  I muſt for him endure great paine and ſmart,
                  Becauſe they haue decreed (for his 
                        •
                     ake)
                  That they on me alone will vengance take,
               
               
                  Without all mercy or compaſſion,
                  And offer me vp for a ſacrifice,
                  T'appeaſe the Gods great indignation.
                  Oh Grecians blind! me thinks you are not wi
                        •
                     e
                  So cruellie to ſeeke my death for nought,
                  And merciles to bend your hearts & thought,
               
               
                  To kill a poore & deſolate young maid
                  That neuer did offence to any one:
                  For which it may full well of you be ſaid,
                  That you haue hearts as hard as any ſtone,
                  And that you farre in cruelty excell
                  The Tyger fierce, and hungrie Lyon fell,
               
               
                  
                  T
                        •
                     aſſent vnto ſo villainous a deed,
                  And to deſtroy a ſilly fearefull maid,
                  Vnto her death ſo haſtily proceed,
                  As that it may by no meanes be delaid,
                  To giue her time and oppertunity
                  To mourne and weepe for her virginity,
               
               
                  For which your great and monſtrous cruelty,
                  My giltles blood will ſure for vengance call
                  Vnto the Gods, that ſhall with Equity
                  Iudge euery man on earth both great and ſmall,
                  And make the truth of all things openly
                  Appeare, which now lie hidden ſecretly.
               
               
                  I ſay not this, nor yet doe I complaine
                  To haue redreſſe, or to releaſed be
                  From death, as if that I did feare the paine
                  Thereof, for it's now welcomer to me
                  Then life, ſith all my brethren now are dead,
                  And in this woefull towne lie buried.
               
               
                  My father ſlaine in this vnweldy age,
                  And I my ſelfe left deſolate alone,
                  To ſee this towne by Grecians furious rage,
                  Brought into vtter deſolation:
                  The which doth make my heauy heart ſo ſore,
                  That I am able now to weepe no more,
               
               
                  And therefore wiſh for death to end my wo.
                  For now to liue were vnto me a death,
                  And better t'were out of this world to go,
                  And preſently to end my vitall breath,
                  Then to be led into captiuity,
                  And there with ſtrangers liue in pouerty.
               
               
                  And now good death no longer time delay
                  With thy moſt piercing dart my heart to riue,
                  Strike ſure and firme, I will not ſtart away,
                  Nor with thee in no wiſe contend nor ſtriue,
                  Now is the time to ſhew thy power on mee,
                  That ready ſtand here to attend for thee.
               
               
                  A mayden true, and Virgin pure I am,
                  That neuer was nor would be known of man,
                  As pure in mind and thought as ere I came
                  Out of my mothers wombe, and boaſt I can
                  That when that I am dead it may be ſayd,
                  That Pollicene did liue and die a mayd.
               
               
                  And now vnto the Gods I doe commend
                  My ſoule, of whom I craue ſubmiſſiuely
                  In mercy to behold 
                        •
                     e, and to ſend
                  Me patience in this great extremity.
                  And vnto euery mayden better grace,
                  Then t'end their liues in ſuch a dolefull caſe.
               
               
                  And longer time to liue in wealth and ioy
                  Then I haue done, and to defend and ſaue
                  Them from all foule misfortune, and annoy,
                  Beſeeching all good maids of me to haue
                  Remembrance, and example by me take,
                  How they of worldly 
                        •
                     oy account ſhall make,
               
               
                  And that they would vouchſafe to ſhed ſome teares
                  For me when I am dead and out of date,
                  To thinke how I in my moſt tender yeares,
                  Did end my daies by death vnfortunate.
                  And thus vnto the Gods I do commend
                  My ſoule, ſaid ſhe, and ſo her ſpeech did end.
               
               
                  And with that word ſhe bowed downe her head,
                  And ſhut her eies, attending ſtroke of death,
                  Which Pyrrhus with a furious ſpirit led,
                  Gaue her, and ſoone bereaud her of her baeath:
                  And being dead his cruelty to ſhow,
                  In peeces ſmall he did her body hew,
               
               
                  As it vpon his Fathers graue did lie.
                  I muſe how he could haue a heart ſo hard,
                  To mangle it ſo in peeces cruelly,
                  And not contented therewith afterward,
                  To ſatisfie his rage in furious mood
                  Like Tygar fierce did take her giltles blood,
               
               
                  And caſt it with his hand all ore the graue.
                  Well mayſt thou cruell Pirrhus rightly be,
                  
                     Achilles ſon, for Nature to thee gaue
                  A gift to be as pi
                        ••
                     les as he,
                  And worſe, for that I neuer of him read
                  That in his life he did ſo foule a deed,
               
               
                  As in ſuch ſort to kill a ſilly mayd:
                  But for a woman fell great paine and ſmart,
                  And that he felt in loue as it is ſayd
                  With Pollicene, for Cupid with his dart
                  Did wound him ſo by caſting of his eye
                  On her, that he thought verely to die,
               
               
                  For loue of her, & how that twas his chance
                  To looſe his life▪ for her whom thou didſt kill
                  With fierce and furious mood, not by miſchance,
                  But pupoſely thy pleaſure to fulfill.
                  For which although thou thoghſt it was no ſhame
                  Aſſure thy ſelfe the trumpe of flying Fame
               
               
                  Will through the world thy great diſhonour ſpread
                  For doing of an act ſo horrible,
                  And when that men ſhall chance thereof to read,
                  Thy name will vnto them be odible.
                  Whoſe cruell death when Hecuba the Queene
                  (That ſtanding by when it was don) had ſeene.
               
               
                  
                  With extreame griefe ſhe fell out of her wit,
                  And tare her ha
                        •
                     re, and furiouſly did ſet
                  Vpon the Greeks with tooth and naile, and bit
                  And ſcratcht, & beat all thoſe that with her met,
                  And palted them with ſtones, till at the laſt
                  The Greeks laid hold on her & bound her faſt.
               
               
                  And finally did take and beare her to
                  An Iſland to the Troyans ſubiect, where
                  They ſtoned her to death, and hauing ſo
                  Bereft her life, they made a ſepulchre,
                  Moſt ſumptuouſly compos'd of ſtone and braſſe,
                  Wherein with great ſolemnity ſhe was
               
               
                  Entombed, as belong'd to her eſtate,
                  Which Tombe ſtood there long after to be ſeen,
                  And called was the place vnfortunate.
                  And in this ſort that great and worthy Queene,
                  Did end her daies diſtreſſed 
                        •
                     ore, and mad:
                  When as the Greeks throgh Calchas counſell had,
               
               
                  By Pyrrhus hand her Daughter ſacrifiz'd
                  Vnto their God Apollo, to appeaſe
                  His furious wrath, who fooliſhly 
                        •
                     urmiz'd
                  That they ſhould never haue faire wind nor ſeas,
                  Vnleſſe Achilles death revenged were
                  By death of Policene: for they did feare
               
               
                  The Gods would nere be pleaſed, nor content
                  To let them paſſe to Greece till it were done.
                  But God that ſitteth in the firmament,
                  And is the true and only God alone,
                  Confound ſuch falſe and fained Gods, and all
                  Their jmages, with thoſe that on them call.
               
               
                  For they are nought but ſtocks that are without
                  All ſence, wherein the diuell doth remaine,
                  And ſubtilly by them hath brought about
                  His purpoſe, man to moue (whoſe heart is vaine)
                  To pray to them, and trulie to belieue
                  That they are Gods, and can vs ſuccour giue
               
               
                  In our diſtreſſe, and ſo induced hath
                  Mankind to leaue th'eternall God of heaven,
                  To pray to ſtocks and ſtones againſt the faith
                  Of Ieſus Chriſt, that hath his body given
                  To death for him, & by ſuch falſe illuſion,
                  Hath brought him in ſuch error and confuſion,
               
               
                  As he belieueth by jdolatry,
                  And offring beaſts and blood to jdols vaine,
                  That he doth ſerue the heavenly Maieſty
                  Of God, and ſhall remiſſion free obtaine
                  Thereby for thoſe offences he hath done:
                  But God confound them all and every one,
               
               
                  What title, name, or qualitie ſo ere
                  Idolaters vnto them giue. Whoſe number
                  So many are that name of Gods did beare,
                  That when I thinke thereon it makes me wonder:
                  The which that you as well as I may know,
                  I will their names to you in order ſhow.
               
               
                  Firſt Iupiter, Saturne, Mercurie,
                  
                  
                     Apollo, Daphne, Mars the God of warre,
                  
                     Diana cald the Queene of Chaſtitie,
                  The guide of men by night Lucina faire,
                  And Iun
                           •
                        
                      that moſt commonly doth dwell
                  In waters deepe, and Pluto God of hell.
               
               
                  Faire Venus Queene of luſt and venery,
                  With Cupid blind her ſon, the God of loue,
                  
                     Minerua Goddeſſe of activity,
                  The God of wine cald Bacchus, th
                        •
                     t doth moue
                  Men to deſire the ſame, Dame Cithera,
                  
                  And Plutoes louely Queene Proſerpina.
                  
               
               
                  Neptunus, Flora, Vulcan, Eo
                        •
                     us,
                  And Bell
                           •
                        des that thirſts, & ſtill doth draw
                  Vp water in a Bucket, Siſyphus
                  
                  Conde
                        •
                     nd to rowle a ſtone by fatall law,
                  And nere to ceaſe, and hungry Ta
                           •
                        talus,
                  
                  Th'jnfirnall fates, and Siſters furious,
               
               
                  That 
                        •
                     ained are to ſpin the threed of life,
                  The Muſes nine that ſweetly ſing and play,
                  
                     Bellon
                           •
                        
                      Queene of diſcord and of ſtrife,
                  And double faced Ianus (whome they ſay
                  The Romanes did adore) and Priapus,
                  
                  The angry fretting Prieſt cald Genius,
                  
               
               
                  (That's ſaid to curſe all thoſe that froward be,
                  To ſuch as friendly are to them, and kind)
                  
                     Imeneus (who hath authoritie,
                  The hearts of married couples faſt to bind
                  In loue, till they are mou'd to diſagree
                  By diſcord that twixt them ſets enmitie.)
               
               
                  The Fayries that are vs'd by night and day,
                  In houſes and in fields to ſing and dance.
                  The water-Nimphs, and Siluan Gods that ſtay
                  In woods and groues, and many times by chance
                  Are ſeen of men, as Satyrs, Nay
                           •
                        des,
                  
                  
                     Bycornes, Fawnes, Incubs, and Dr
                           ••
                        des,
                  
               
               
                  With many more. And finally to cloſe
                  And make the number compleat, Orph
                           ••
                        s
                  
                  The God of ſleepe▪ but certainly all thoſe
                  That to ſuch Gods ſo vaine and 
                        •
                     rivolus,
                  Do ſacrifice or on them vſe to call,
                  Will ſure at laſt into ſome danger fall,
               
               
                  
                  For recompence, of ſeruing them ſo well.
                  For all ſuch falſe and faind Idolatrie
                  Proceedeth from the crafty fiend of Hell,
                  Who is ſo full of fraud and ſubtilty,
                  That he deuiſd thoſe Idoll Gods to frame,
                  And purpoſely did creepe into the ſame,
               
               
                  And ſpake in them, and anſwere made to thoſe
                  That praid to them, and cauſed men thereby
                  To leaue the true and liuing God, to loſe
                  Eternall blis in heauen, for certainely
                  All thoſe that on ſuch Idolls falſe do call,
                  Serue Belzebub, and cleane from God do fall.
               
               
                  As David in his Pſalter doth declare,
                  That mong the Pagan Gods there is not one
                  That can relieue or aid vs, for they are
                  All made and framd of ſiluer, gold, or ſtone:
                  Or els of Copper, Braſſe, Tin, Lead, or wood,
                  And that they neither can nor do man good.
               
               
                  For eies they haue and cannot ſee at all,
                  And eares likewiſe and yet they do not heare,
                  And legs and feet and cannot ſtand, but fall,
                  Vnleſſe they leane, or ſomewhat doth them beare
                  And hold vpright: and therefore as he ſaith,
                  He that in them repoſeth truſt or faith,
               
               
                  Or to bow downe to them which take delight,
                  Let him be well aſſurd, that at the laſt
                  They will him with ſuch recompence requite,
                  That head-long downe to hell he ſhall be caſt,
                  With damned ſoules to dwell perpetually,
                  And that is his reward when he ſhall die.
               
               
                  And in this life misfortune dread and feare,
                  With many troubles that on men do light.
                  As famous ſtately Troy doth witneſſe beare:
                  Which once was of ſuch puiſſant force and might,
                  That it did thinke it ſelfe to be ſecure,
                  And that it ſhould in that ſtate long endure.
               
               
                  And gainſt her foes to haue prevailed by
                  
                     Apollo, Pallas, Iuno, Uenus, and
                  
                     Diana faire, the Queene of Chaſtity,
                  Whome they were wont to honor in that land
                  With ſacrifice, and worſhip great to ſhow
                  To them, by whom they now are broght full low,
               
               
                  And vtterly deſtroid for euermore.
                  Whereby you ſee what is the end of all
                  That do ſuch falſe and fained Gods adore,
                  And vnto them for helpe and ſuccour call:
                  What did Mineruaes Image them preuaile,
                  By whom they hoped nere of aid to faile?
               
               
                  Or any of their ſuperſticious vaine,
                  The which they did ſo deerely buy at laſt,
                  Not onely with a ſhort and earthly paine,
                  But with eternall woe that ere ſhall laſt.
                  Oh Troy therefore I muſt lament thy fall,
                  And when I thinke vpon thee, ever ſhall
               
               
                  With pitie thee bewaile, that wert ſo brought
                  Vnto thine end, and ſometime was ſo great
                  And populous, that no towne ever mought
                  Compare with thee, when thou waſt proudly ſet
                  In honors throane, as thoſe that thee then knew
                  Can witneſſe beare, but now all men may rew,
               
               
                  And pittle thy decaied walles that ſtood
                  (About thy ſtately building,) loftily.
                  And Priamus thy Prince of Royall blood,
                  That made and builded thee ſo ſumptuouſly.
                  I thinke no man that in the world liues now,
                  By pen or tongue can tell which way, or how
               
               
                  To frame or to deviſe a dolefull crie
                  Convenient to deſcribe thy miſerie.
                  No though it were the Prophet Ieremie,
                  
                  That mourned for the great Captivitie
                  Of that moſt famous towne Ieruſalem,
                  
                  And of the woefull Iewes, bewailing them
               
               
                  With bitter teares. Nor yet Ezekiell
                  
                  That to King Zedechias earneſtly,
                  Fore-ſhewed the Captivity that fell
                  In Babilon, and for his Propheſie
                  Was ſton'd to death, nor he that cruelly
                  Was ſaw'd in twaine, though all of them did crie,
               
               
                  And bitterly lament the Iewes orethrow.
                  Nor Daniell that within his heart did grieue
                  With extream paine, (when God his power to ſhow)
                  Vnto King Nabuchadneſer did giue
                  The ſhape of beaſt his hautie pride t'imbaſe,
                  And ſeuen yeares did make him feede on graſſe.
               
               
                  For I ſuppoſe if all of them had beene
                  Heere living in that dolefull time againe,
                  And with their ſore and warry eies had ſeene
                  The great diſtreſſe which Troy did long endure,
                  And all the bloody ſlaughters had beheld
                  Betweene the Greeks and Troians in the field,
               
               
                  There fought on either ſide in cruell wiſe,
                  I verily perſwaded am that all
                  Their bitter teares would by no meanes ſuffice,
                  To grieue for thoſe great ſorrowes that did fall
                  Vpon the towne of Troy by Grecians brought,
                  And alſo by falſe treaſon gainſt them wrought.
               
               
                  
                  But this ſhall now ſuffice thereof to ſpeake,
                  For like as he that againſt the wind doth ſaile,
                  And ſeeth his maſts and yard
                        •
                      begin to breake,
                  Knowes well to 
                        〈…〉
                      availe:
                  So were't in vaine for me to tell you all
                  The miſeries that did to 
                        〈◊〉
                      befall,
               
               
                  Or to prefume to ſhew how eurſed Fate,
                  Was bent in fierce and cruell wi
                        •
                     e to make
                  An end of them, and of their happy ſtate,
                  The which on me I dare not vndertake▪
                  
                  And therefore of the ſiedge ile make an end
                  In rude and ſimple wiſe, as it is pend.
               
               
                  And ſo the fourth Booke finiſh with the leaue
                  And fauor of your Princely Maieſtie,
                  The which if that your grace to me will giue,
                  The fifth Booke ile begin, and ſpecifie
                  Therein what dangers and aduentures fell
                  Vnto the Greeks vpon the ſea, and tell
               
               
                  How they therein were 
                        •
                     rownd and caſt away,
                  And th
                        ••
                     e that did eſcape and got to land:
                  (To ſhew that man hath here no certaine ſtay,
                  And cannot fatall De
                        ••
                     iny withſtand,)
                  Vnfortunately died, and ſo together
                  Such meaſure had, as they did meet to other.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE LIFE AND DEATH OF HECTOR.
            THE FIFT BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. 1.
               
                  ¶ Wherein is ſhewed how the Greeks in their returne to Greece, after the deſtruction of Troy, by tempeſts on the ſeas were moſt of them drowned; and how the reſt that eſcaped and got to land, dyed miſerablie by malice and treaſon wrought in Greece, one againſt the other.
               
               
                  
                     WHen Eolus (whome Poets faine to bee
                  The ruler of the winds) appeaſed was,
                  And he and Iun
                           •
                        
                      did together gree,
                  To make the ſeas ſo calme that men might paſſ
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  Securely through the ſame, and skie t'appeare
                  With faire & chriſtall hew: The Greeks that were
               
               
                  Deſirous to returne to Greece with ſpeed,
                  To ſee their natiue Land (when they had woone
                  And vtterlie deſtroied Troy) decreed
                  To ſhip themſelues, and forthwith to be gone
                  Frō thence where they had ten yeres ſpace maintaind
                  A painefull ſiege, and little thereby gaind,
               
               
                  Conſidering all the loſſes they had had.
                  Yet triumphing for victorie obtaind,
                  Reioyſt that they ſo good an end had made.
                  But fortune that their pride and ioy diſdaind,
                  Soone chang'd their mirth into adverſity.
                  For when they thought themſelues ſecur'd to be,
               
               
                  And that they ſhould in peace and quiet reſt,
                  She ſtirred vp foule diſcord and diſdaine,
                  Their happie ſtate to trouble and moleſt,
                  And did in ſtead of ioy procure them paine:
                  And made their hearts with pride and rank or ſwell,
                  Whereby at ſtrife among themſelues they fell,
               
               
                  (In middeſt of their high and greateſt glory,
                  When as they moſt reioyſt and triumphed,
                  That they by force had woone the victorie
                  Againſt their Troyan foes, and flouriſhed
                  In honor, and by trumpe of flying fame,
                  Eterniz'd had the glory of their name,
               
               
                  
                  From Eaſt to Weſt, and mak'ſt it ſwiftly flie
                  Throughout the world, to ſhew their worthines
                  As farre as Phoebus compaſſeth the skie.
                  For ſuddenly by great vnhappines,
                  Their glory that did ſhine ſo cleare & bright,
                  Ecclipſed was, (vnto their great deſpight.)
               
               
                  And all their welfare and proſperity,
                  Subuerted cleane by enuy and debate,
                  (Which Sathan through his craft and ſubtilty,
                  Made ſodenly to creepe into their ſtate.)
                  For Thelaphus with rancor and diſcord,
                  Before the Grecian Princes went abord,
               
               
                  Complaind againſt Uliſſes in this wiſe,
                  And ſayd, my Lords, if that it pleaſe you ſtay
                  To heare me ſpeake, (and thinke as you are wiſe
                  That reaſon moueth me thereto;) I ſay
                  That at the winning of the towne of Troy,
                  
                  The treaſure that thereby we do enioy,
               
               
                  And forcibly did get into our hand,
                  Together with the riches which by might
                  And valor great we wan within the land,
                  Me thinks is not (if it be iudged right)
                  Diſtributed by iuſt deviſion,
                  Nor with indifferent proportion,
               
               
                  According to the law of equitie,
                  Which in ſuch caſe, to thoſe that merit beſt,
                  And are of high degree and dignitie▪
                  
                  Affordeth better part then to the reſt,
                  And giues to euery one as he deſerud,
                  The which mong vs hath not been well obſerud,
               
               
                  In euery part without exception,
                  For Pallas Image cald Palladion,
                  
                  Whereof Uliſſes hath poſſeſſion,
                  I ſay that right vnto it he hath none.
                  Although he hath a falſe apparance found
                  To iuſtifie his title, and doth ground
               
               
                  The ſame hereon, that tis his owne by right
                  Becauſe he woon't, as he doth brag and vaunt,
                  (Though ſubtilly, and not by force and might.)
                  And ſaith twas giuen to him by ſpeciall graunt
                  Of euery one, and yet it is not true,
                  For I deni't, and flatly ſay to you
               
               
                  That he doth not deſerue the ſame, nor ſhall
                  Enioy it long, for that as iuſt reward
                  For my deſarts, it to my 
                        •••••
                      doth fall,
                  If that indifferently I may be 
                        •
                     eard,
                  And that you with reaſon iudge, and be
                  Vnpartiall in this caſe twixt him and me.
               
               
                  And firſt conſider well, and way withall,
                  That while you here ſo long in ſiedge did tarry,
                  I onely out of Meſſa brought you all
                  Prouiſion that for you was neceſſary,
                  That you no want of victuals might ſuſtaine,
                  By any meanes while you did here remaine.
               
               
                  And further as concerning feats of armes
                  Performed in the field in Knightly wiſe,
                  I euer ready was at all alarmes,
                  And daylie fought againſt our enemies:
                  And as I am aſſurd full well, kild more
                  Of them, then thoſe that greater countnance bore.
               
               
                  You alſo know that I ſlew Philomen,
                  
                  To whom King Priam ſent his youngeſt Son
                  To keepe with ſtore of treaſure great, and when
                  I had him ſlaine and all that riches won,
                  I brought it vnto you, and therewith did
                  Relieue you much, and did ſupplie your need.
               
               
                  And ſor your ſakes I ſlew the Frizian King,
                  And ſtore of gold and treaſure from him won,
                  And all thoſe ſpoiles vnto the Campe did bring.
                  You likewiſe further know what I haue don
                  T'augment and to aduance your ſoueraignty,
                  By conquering two kingdomes valianly
               
               
                  While you in ſiedge here lay, and did them ad
                  Vnto your puiſſant Empire, and likewiſe
                  The prouinces to Troy annexed, made
                  All Subiect vnto you. What otherwiſe
                  I with Achilles did t'increaſe your fame,
                  I know that you cannot forget the ſame.
               
               
                  And therefore needles twere for me to ſay
                  Or ſhew you all I could produce to proue,
                  My merits more then his, do euery way
                  Deſerue a greater recompence and loue
                  Of you. And therefore whatſoere he ſaith;
                  No right vnto Palladion he hath.
               
               
                  The iudgement in this caſe I do referre
                  Vnto you all, the which that you may know
                  The better how to giue, you firſt ſhall heare
                  His qualities, which I will to you ſhow.
                  In him there is no manner worthines,
                  Knight-hood, valor, nor yet hardines.
               
               
                  For when time ſerues that he ſhould in a need
                  Shew forth his might, he dates not enterprize
                  That which he boaſts, but proues as he's indeed
                  A coward right, as plainely with your ci
                        •
                     s
                  You ſee ther's i
                        •
                      him nought but cra
                        •
                     tines,
                  Words many, falſehood, & dec
                        •••
                     fulnes.
               
               
                  
                  For he is ſtill in heart imagining,
                  How to effect by craft and ſubtilty
                  His purpoſe, and the ſame to paſſe to bring,
                  T'intrap and to deceaue his enemy:
                  For never any thing as yet there was
                  By him archieu'd, nor fully brought to paſſe,
               
               
                  For which he well deſerued praiſe or laud,
                  But it was done (it's knowne vnto you all)
                  By ſome deviſe of treachery or fraud.
                  For like vnto a goodly painted wall,
                  He makes a faire and pleaſing outward ſhow,
                  But no man can his inward meaning know.
               
               
                  And by ſuch ſleights, deceit, and pollicy,
                  He got the Image cald Palladion,
                  
                  And thereby (to our ſhame and villany)
                  It may be ſaid the conqueſt we haue woone
                  Vpon the towne, by treaſon gotten was,
                  And not by our great knighthood brought to paſſe.
               
               
                  The onely cauſe whereof (as I haue ſaid)
                  
                     Uliſſes is, for he (vnto our ſhame)
                  This ſtumbling blocke hath in our honor laid,
                  And thereby much ecclipſed all our fame:
                  The truth thereof ſith all of you do know,
                  Ile leaue for this time, more of him to ſhow.
               
               
                  And of you all my Lords together craue
                  You iudgements, which of vs deſerveth beſt
                  For his deſerts, the jmage faire to haue,
                  That for the ſame we may no more conteſt:
                  Which words thus vſed by King Thelaphus,
                  
                  
                     Uliſſes having heard with mind ſuſpicious,
               
               
                  And ſeeing how with envie great he was
                  Incenſt and mou'd gainſt him, with good adviſe
                  He bare with him a while, and let ore-paſſe
                  His choller, and, as he was paſſing wiſe,
                  Determing no ieſt thereof to make
                  To anſwere him, on this wiſe to him ſpake,
               
               
                  And ſaid with countance bold before his face,
                  My Lords, if that I may haue leaue to ſpeake,
                  I hope before we part out of this place,
                  (And yet intend no peace thereby to breake)
                  To proue directly that with equitie,
                  The jmage onely doth belong to me,
               
               
                  Which I will keepe and hold while I do liue,
                  Deſpight of all that thereto dare ſay nay.
                  And firſt, for proofe this inſtance I do giue,
                  That at the ſiege wherein ſo long we lay,
                  In double wiſe I did my ſelfe acquit,
                  As well by valor great, as by my wit.
               
               
                  For by adviſe I was the onely man
                  T'intrap them in a ſnare, and for your good,
                  Devis'd the meanes and way whereby we wan
                  The towne of Troy, which otherwiſe had ſtood
                  And flouriſht to this day, and truth to tell,
                  As it is not vnknowne to all full well,
               
               
                  If you will ſpeake vprightly and with reaſon,
                  I dare avouch (though Thelaphus ſaith no)
                  I was chiefe cauſe of their confuſion.
                  How often of Embaſſage did I go,
                  To make the treatie with them in ſuch wiſe,
                  As I for our advantage could deviſe?
               
               
                  And when I ſaw that all that we had done,
                  Was but in vaine the towne of Troy to win,
                  And that for vs advantage there was none,
                  While that the holy Image was therein:
                  By my adviſe ſo ſubtillie I wrought,
                  That I to you Mineruaes Image brought.
               
               
                  Which Thelaphus maliciouſly doth ſay,
                  That to your great diſhonour and your ſhame,
                  By treacherie I brought it thence away,
                  And thereby much imblemiſhed your fame:
                  But ſith you are ſo wiſe I pray you take
                  The quarrell now in hand, and thereof make
               
               
                  An end betweene vs twaine, and ſo prouide,
                  That th'jmage at this time may iudged be
                  (All fauour whatſoever laid aſide)
                  To him that it deſerues; and as for me
                  Ile ſtand to your award. Which having ſaid,
                  He pauſed, and from ſpeaking further ſtaid.
               
               
                  Whereat with courage great King Thelaphus,
                  
                  In heart and mind exceeding lie much mou'd,
                  (Reſpecting no man there in furious
                  And raging wiſe) deſpightfullie reprou'd,
                  And chafed at Vliſſes with diſdaine,
                  And he at him replide with like againe.
               
               
                  Whereby they two great enemies became,
                  And into hard and bitter tearmes did fall,
                  And threatning each the other for the ſame:
                  King Thelaphus in preſence of them all,
                  Said, that before they two did end that ſtrife,
                  It ſhould vnto Vliſſes coſt his life
               
               
                  By his hands, if he did not well defend
                  Himſelfe. Which when the Grecian Princes heard,
                  The quarrell grown between them two, to end
                  The matter was by all of them deferd,
                  And wholly put to th'arbitration
                  Of Menalus, and King Agamemnon,
                  
               
               
                  
                  Which afterward did breed a mortall iarre.
                  For when they two conſidered had thereon,
                  They iudged, cauſe Uliſſes (t'whom they bare
                  Affection great) the jmage faire had woon,
                  He ſhould poſſeſſe the ſame as his reward,
                  And Thelaphus from claime thereof debard.
               
               
                  The reaſon that made them therein preferre,
                  
                     Uliſſes (and King Thelaphus to thwart)
                  Was, for becauſe they both beholding were
                  To him, for that he friendly tooke their part,
                  When as the Greeks bout Helen were at ſtrife,
                  To haue her kild; and he to ſaue her life,
               
               
                  Perſwaded them ſo well, that they content
                  To let her liue, to Menalus her gaue.
                  When Thelaphus with furie gainſt her bent,
                  Before them all ſaid flatly ſhe ſhould haue
                  Her head cut off, and ſuffer deadly paine,
                  Becauſe for her ſo many had beene ſlaine.
               
               
                  And by that meanes King Thelaphus was croſt,
                  And put beſides Palladion gainſt his will,
                  For which he ſwore (thogh deare it ſhold him coſt)
                  Ere long time paſt he would Vliſſes kill:
                  And one day likewiſe be reveng'd vpon
                  King Menalus, and king Agamemnon.
                  
               
               
                  And therewith in a mighty rage he went
                  With all his knights, (and left the company)
                  Who with him in their hearts were fully bent,
                  When they a fit occaſion might eſpie,
                  In cruell wiſe ere long reveng'd to be
                  Vpon their foes, but chiefly on thoſe three.
               
               
                  And for that cauſe ſuch hatred to them bare,
                  That nothing but their deaths could th
                        •
                      content:
                  But they that of his purpoſe were aware,
                  With policie his furie to prevent,
                  Did cauſe their knights about them to attend,
                  If that occaſion ſerued, to defend
               
               
                  And keepe them from the furie of their foes.
                  And likewiſe ſoone to rid them of that doubt,
                  For earely in the morne ere Phoebus roſe
                  (The matter was ſo quicklie brought about)
                  King Thelaphus that braue and worthy knight,
                  Moſt cruelly was murthered in the night.
               
               
                  And in the morning bleeding ſore was found
                  Within his bed, whereas his body lay
                  Sore mangled, hewd, & cut, with many a wound:
                  Which thing when as the Grecians heard next day,
                  They did abhorre that act ſo horrible,
                  And cauſe to God and man twas odible.
               
               
                  They could not chooſe but for his murther weepe,
                  And grieue to thinke how foule and traiterouſly
                  He had been kild, when he was faſt aſleepe,
                  And mong them then there roſe ſo great a cry,
                  Throughout the hoaſt for that moſt wicked deed,
                  That all his friends within their hearts decreed,
               
               
                  His death ſhould be revenged vpon thoſe
                  That had that cruell murther brought to paſſe:
                  The which, although no man would it diſcloſe,
                  Yet every one that in the hoaſt then was,
                  For it had moſt and great'ſt ſuſpicion
                  On Menalus, and King Agamemnon,
                  
               
               
                  But chiefly on Vliſſes, vnto whome
                  By common voice of them in generall
                  His ſodaine death imputed was, and ſome
                  Did vow and ſweare what euer did befall,
                  (Mong whom yong Pyrrhus ſpecially was one)
                  They would revenge the death of him full ſoon
               
               
                  Vpon Vliſſes, who by treachery
                  Had falſly wrought the ſame; but to preuent
                  And ſcape from Pyrrhus furie, ſodainly
                  Aboard his ſhips next morning ſtraight he went:
                  And hoiſing ſaile in haſt from thence he fled,
                  And left the jmage with King Diomed.
                  
               
               
                  And of the fact in heart had great remorſe.
                  Who in that ſort thus fled away and gone,
                  Yong Pyrrhus tooke his bloudy mangled corſe,
                  And made a fire and laid the ſame thereon,
                  In preſence of the Greeks that it beheld,
                  And burnt it vnto aſhes in the field.
               
               
                  And afterward the aſhes being cold,
                  He tooke them vp, and did them ſafely put
                  With reverence great, into a box of gold,
                  The which with his owne ſeale of armes he ſhut:
                  And ſent them to be buried there whereas,
                  While he did liue, the ſoveraigne Prince he was.
               
               
                  And hauing all the ceremonies vs'd
                  For him in every point moſt orderly,
                  He ſtill vpon the cruell murther muſd,
                  Which vnto him was done ſo traitrouſly:
                  And ſware and vowd it ſhould be dearly bought,
                  By them that it ſo wickedly had wrought.
               
               
                  And for that cauſe great hatred bare vnto
                  King Menalus, and King Agamemnon,
                  
                  Who well advis'd, and taking heed thereto,
                  For feare thereof nere went abroad alone▪
                  
                  But ſtrongly garded daily did attend,
                  What iſſue would enſue thereof in th'end.
               
               
                  
                  Which Pyrrhus likewiſe did, and would not ceaſe
                  By all the meanes he could to ſeeke ſome way
                  T'intrap them, and his wrath would not appeaſe.
                  And in that ſort they three from that ſame day
                  Were ſterne and deadly foes each vnto other:
                  And while that they in ſuch wiſe iar'd together,
               
               
                  And enviouſly each other did purſue,
                  Still more and more their malice did encreaſe,
                  And hatred great on each ſide did renue.
                  Till Anthenor their furies to appeaſe,
                  By policie did cut of all diſdaine
                  On either ſide, and made them friends againe.
               
               
                  And to that end prepard a royall feaſt,
                  And did invite the Grecians to the ſame,
                  And to intreat and pray them never ceaſt,
                  Till they three with the reſt vnto it came,
                  That all the Princes of the hoaſt might ſee
                  They had their anger left, and did agree
               
               
                  Together like good friends as ere they were.
                  To write the great and ſumptuous fare they had,
                  With all the ſeverall diſhes that were there;
                  As alſo what rich Preſents then were made,
                  And by Anthenor given liberallie
                  Vnto the Greeks, it's no neceſſitie.
               
               
                  Let it ſuffice they wanted nothing that
                  Might pleaſe and giue contentinent vnto man.
                  And while at table they together ſat,
                  Some one among them enviouſly began
                  To ſpeake againſt Aeneas, and t'accuſe
                  And charge him with moſt great and vile abuſe,
               
               
                  Eſpecially becauſe he did conceale,
                  And hide away the Princes Pollicene,
                  
                  And would by no meanes tell them, no
                        •
                      reveale
                  What was become of her that cauſe had been
                  Of fierce Achilles death: and for the ſame
                  They did impoſe vpon him ſo much blame,
               
               
                  That they did all with one conſent agree,
                  He ſhould therefore be baniſht out of Troy,
                  
                  Contrary to their former grant that hee
                  The freedome of the Towne ſhould ſtill enioy:
                  But nere the leſſe they did with one conſent,
                  Comdemne him to perpetuall baniſhment.
               
               
                  (The cauſer of the ſame I cannot tell,
                  But ſure it is Anthenor, and none other
                  Within the Towne of Troy did know it well,
                  And ſecretly betraid his traiterous brother:
                  That with him holpe to bring that thing to paſſe,
                  Which in the end the Townes deſtruction was.)
               
               
                  Which when Aeneas knew, and ſaw no way,
                  For him by any meanes to mollifie
                  The Grecians hearts, to giue him leaue to ſtay,
                  He humblie praied them of courteſie,
                  That of their princely favor and their grace,
                  They wold vouch
                        •
                     afe to grant him 4 months ſpace
               
               
                  To ſtay in Troy, while he provided had
                  All things that ſhould for him be neceſſaire;
                  And further vnto them petition made,
                  That he from thence might alſo with him carrie
                  The ſhips that into Cithera did go
                  With Paris, iuſt number twentie two.
               
               
                  Which being by the Grecians full conſent
                  Vnto him given, with licence for the ſpace
                  Of time he askt to ſtay, to Troy he went
                  With heavie heart, to ſee't in ſuch a caſe:
                  And ſpecially when he to mind did call,
                  That all the woes which on the ſame did fall,
               
               
                  Came onlie by the treaſon he had wrought
                  Againſt the Towne; and alſo to remember,
                  That he could not enioy the thing he ſought,
                  But muſt of force depart and ſtay no longer,
                  Where he had liu'd ſometime in great eſtate.
                  And curſed his moſt hard and cruell fate,
               
               
                  To ſee him ſelfe ſo plung'd in that diſtreſſe,
                  And baniſht by the Greeks, and knew not why
                  Nor who had ſought his fall, till he did geſſe
                  And ſaw by ſignes Anthenor ſubtilly
                  To get him out of Troy procured it,
                  For which he ſware & vowd he would him quit.
               
               
                  And to that end ſent preſently for all
                  The Troyans that then in the towne were left,
                  Who willingly aſſembled at his call,
                  (For being of their ſoveraigne Prince bereft,
                  They made account he onlie did remaine
                  Aliue, to be their Lord and Soveraigne.)
               
               
                  To whome he ſpake & ſaid, my friends you ſee,
                  How fortune at this time begins to frowne,
                  And with diſſembling face to ieare at mee,
                  As ſhe hath done at this moſt worthy towne,
                  Her cruelty gainſt it and me to ſhew:
                  You know likewiſe that we are but a few,
               
               
                  Here reſting in this ruin'd place t'abide,
                  And I perforce muſt leaue your company.
                  Wherefore I thinke it beſt that you provide
                  Some meanes for your owne good and ſafety,
                  By looking out among you for a man,
                  To governe you with all the ſpeed you can.
               
               
                  
                  For otherwiſe I ſee not how you ſhould
                  Be able long this open Towne to keepe,
                  Nor yet your ſelues from ſtrange invaſion
                        •
                      hold:
                  That here now like vnto a flocke of ſheepe,
                  Diſperſt without a ſheepheard do remaine,
                  And no man left your quarrell to maintaine.
               
               
                  Wherefore if you my counſell now will take,
                  I thinke, ſithtis ſo dangerous a thing
                  For you to liue without an head, to make
                  And chooſe ſome one among you for your king.
                  And he whome I thinke fitteſt man to raigne
                  Ore you, and be your Lord and ſoueraigne
               
               
                  Is Anthenor, whoſe knighthood and renowne
                  Is knowne vnto you all, if you conſent
                  And will agree to my opinion.
                  And to that end let one for him be ſent,
                  And when that he comes here within the towne,
                  You ſhall ſet on his head a regall Crowne.
               
               
                  That he may governe you with equity,
                  And valiantly defend, preſerue, and ſaue
                  You from diſtreſſe and all extreamity.
                  And they agreed, and were content to haue
                  Him ſent for preſently to be their king.
                  For they not once ſuſpected any thing
               
               
                  Concerning that the which Aeneas ment,
                  Whoſe words and mind contrary were to other,
                  For it was his full purpoſe and intent
                  To ſlay him preſently when he came thither,
                  And with his friends prepared to that end
                  All armed ſtood, his comming to attend.
               
               
                  Who nought ſuſpecting that which did fall out,
                  Vnarmed came into the towne, where he
                  Was preſently encloſed round about
                  By Aeneas, and in danger ſlaine to be:
                  If that the common people had not been,
                  Who in great haſt came running thē between.
               
               
                  And downe vpon their knees before him fell,
                  Deſiring him to haue compaſſion
                  On them and theirs, whom he then knew full well,
                  Were left within a bare and naked towne
                  Without a guide, and praid him to withhold
                  His hand and furie great, from that which wold
               
               
                  Be cauſe of their deſtruction generall,
                  And on them and their woefull caſe to rue.
                  To whome Aeneas ſaid before them all,
                  Will you that I forbeare him that's vntrue,
                  And ſhews himſelfe ſo traiterouſly bent
                  To you and me, with falſe and bad intent,
               
               
                  That for it he deſerued hath to die.
                  For was't not he that ſpecially alone.
                  Conſpir'd by treaſon with your enemie▪
                  
                  To bring you all vnto deſtruction,
                  And me vnto the Greeks hath ſold and bought,
                  And vndeſeru'd my baniſhment hath wrought▪
                  
               
               
                  The which they haue decreed without repeale,
                  But ere I go from hence Ile make him ſure,
                  The iuſt reward of his deſerts to feele,
                  And without all compaſſion to endure
                  The paine that to a traitor doth belong,
                  That at this time hath done me ſo much wrong▪
                  
               
               
                  To be exild from hence, where with you all
                  I purpoſed to lead my life, and take
                  Such part as ſhould vnto our ſhares befall,
                  But by his meanes I muſt the Towne forſake:
                  Which wrong I cannot brooke nor never may,
                  And therefore for the ſame I will him ſlay▪
                  
               
               
                  Beſides all this, he was as you haueſeene,
                  The onely man that to the Grecians gaue,
                  The yong and goodly Princeſſe 
                        
                           ••
                        llice
                           •
                        e;
                  
                  Whom they did ſlay, & would you I ſhould ſaue
                  One that ſo traitrous is? Thus much I ſay,
                  (Whos'ever that againſt the 
                        •
                     ame ſaith nay.)
               
               
                  Sith you intreat for him he ſhall go free
                  With life, but cauſe his treaſon is ſo great,
                  He ſhall out of this Towne exiled bee,
                  And therewith they a time vnto him ſet,
                  When he ſhold go from thence, without all grace
                  Or favour ſhewd, and that he muſt not paſſe.
               
               
                  And thus as traitors both they wrought together,
                  To bring the Towne to ruine and decay,
                  So treacherouſly they did exile each other
                  Out of the ſame, and might not therein ſtay
                  To lead their liues where they were borne & bred,
                  In peace and reſt as they determined.
               
               
                  And preſently Anthenor therevpon,
                  Without delay did preparation make,
                  Of all things neceſſarie to be gone
                  From thence, & with his friends did ſhipping take,
                  And ſaild by divers Lands and ſundry Iſle
                        •
                     .
                  It's needleſſe to rehearſe how many miles
               
               
                  He travel'd on the ſeas, nor how he ſcapt
                  The dangers that therein are often ſeen.
                  But to be briefe his courſe ſo well he ſhapt,
                  That at the laſt when he a while had been
                  Toſt too and fro, with ſtormy wind & weather▪
                  
                  He ſpied an Iſle, & with his ſhips made thither.
               
               
                  
                  Which Iſland had to name G
                           •
                        r
                           ••
                        diay,
                  
                  Where he no ſooner foot on land did get,
                  But there vpon a 
                        •••
                     ke without delay,
                  His men with preſent ſpeed to worke he ſet,
                  And made a towne that was both broad & long,
                  With towred wals which were exceeding ſtrong.
               
               
                  And many pleſant woods and waters ſweet,
                  That on each ſide the ſame environed,
                  With all things elſe that for the ſame was meet.
                  Which Iſle as then was ruld and governed
                  By Thetides a king of worthy ſame,
                  Who long and many yeres had held the ſame
               
               
                  In peace, and never had moleſted been
                  By any adverſe fortune whatſoe
                        •
                     e:
                  Who vnto Lord Anthenor and his men
                  Great courteſie did ſhew, and by him were
                  In friendly wiſe receau'd and welcomed,
                  And peaceably by him were ſuffered
               
               
                  To plant themſelues therein, and to enioy
                  Their towne as freely with all priviledge,
                  As they before liu'd in the towne of Troy:
                  
                  Whoſe being there once knowen and publiſhed,
                  A number of the Troyan knights went thither,
                  And there encreaſt and multipli'd together.
               
               
                  And ſoone did make it rich and populous,
                  And called it the Towne of Menelau.
                  
                  To tell you more of him were frivolous,
                  For memory of him there ſhould be none:
                  Sith he was by his treaſon cauſe of all
                  The miſeries that did on Troy befall.
               
               
                  And therefore I will turne my ſtile againe,
                  To tell you what vnto the Greeks befell,
                  And how by Propheſie Caſſandra plaine,
                  And truely did vnto the Grecians tell,
                  What happen to them ſhould, & mong them all
                  Declared to their puiſſant Generall,
               
               
                  That he within his houſe ſhould murthered bee
                  By treaſon, that againſt him ſhould be wrought,
                  And that there was no way for him to flie,
                  Nor ſcape the ſame what meanes ſo ere he ſought:
                  And bad him haue a care of his eſtate,
                  For he ſhould die by death vnfortunate.
               
               
                  The ſtorie ſaith, when Thelaphus was ſlaine,
                  (As in another place I ſaid before)
                  He had two ſons (that liuing did remaine)
                  The which two ſeuerall wiues vnto him bore:
                  Who with a King cald Tenter did remaine,
                  And nouriſht were till that they did attaine
               
               
                  To mens eſtate, and in the end he came
                  Two braue and worthy knights as euer were,
                  And in their time attaind to hauty fame,
                  As by their liues and acts it doth appeare:
                  The elder of them cald Authe
                           •
                        ic
                           •
                        s,
                  
                  The yonger had to name A
                           ••
                        iſſar
                           •
                        s.
                  
               
               
                  And then doth ſhew that when the Greeks had done
                  All that they would to Troy, and 
                        •
                     eadi
                        •
                      lay
                  Attending wind and tide at T
                        •••
                     d
                        ••
                     ,
                  To ſaile to Greece, Agamemnon did pray
                  And earneſtlie entreated them t'agree,
                  And giue conſent that Menalus and he
               
               
                  Might take their leaues and ſtay no longer there.
                  Whereto at firſt they would not giue conſent,
                  But flatly them denyd and gainſt it were,
                  But after much entreaty were content
                  They ſhould depart: and ſo they two together
                  Set ſaile, when it was faire and pleaſing weather,
               
               
                  In Autumne when the aire was drie and cold,
                  And melaucholie humors did abound,
                  When Phoebus had clea
                        •
                     e paſſed Le
                           •
                        
                      bold,
                  And in ſixteenth degree of Virgo found:
                  And trees that in the Summer time were greene,
                  Waxt drie, & corne and fruits were gathered in.
               
               
                  And flowers & herbs (which in the month of May,
                  With freſh and liuely hew ſhewd gallantly,)
                  Began to hang their heads and to decay.
                  And all the fields that flouriſht verdantly,
                  Were dri'd, and lookt with ſad & heauy cheare.
                  At th'jſſuing of the daies caniculeare.
               
               
                  And men by humors great which then abound,
                  Moleſted were with ſhivering feavers cold,
                  And when the wind with bluſtring blaſts was found
                  To ſhake the trees ſo ſore, they could not hold
                  Their leaues, but did conſtraine them off to fall
                  At time of yeare, when men on God do call,
               
               
                  And humbly him beſeech to keepe and ſaue
                  Their vines from raine, & ſtorms, & nipping froſt,
                  That they in time the fruits of them may haue,
                  Which otherwiſe would vtterly be loſt,
                  If too much moyſture fall vpon the ground,
                  As commonly that time of yeare is found,
               
               
                  At vnawares to happen with ſome blaſts
                  Of wind and bluſtring weather, which ſo ſore
                  Doth moue theſeas, & therewithall orecaſts▪
                  
                  The skies, & makes them lowring, which before
                  Shewd pleaſantly, and ſeemed for a while
                  To put men in good hope with fained ſmile.
               
               
                  
                  But yet there is no truſt twill ſo abide.
                  As well the Greeks that put to ſea did find,
                  And ſailed forth of Tenadon with tide,
                  And wind as good as they could wiſh in mind:
                  And with the gold and treaſure that they woon
                  In Troy, three daies their courſe directly 
                        •
                     un
               
               
                  To Greece ward, by conſent of Eolus,
                  
                  Who with the winds did ſeeme as't were t'obay
                  To them, and promiſt voyage proſperous,
                  And did conduct t hem onward of their way,
                  With pleaſing gale along the Grecian coaſt.
                  But when that they in fortune truſted moſt,
               
               
                  And thought themſelues to be in her good grace,
                  Miſtruſting nought, ſhe ſodenly did lower,
                  And vnawares with falſe diſſembling face,
                  (To ſhew and to declare her mighty power,)
                  Turn'd all their hope into moſt deepe deſpaire,
                  And ouercaſt the weather that was faire,
               
               
                  And made th'Egean ſeas that calme did ſhow,
                  To riſe aloft with billowes huge and hie,
                  And Boreas with his boyſtrous blaſts to blow,
                  And roare and whiſtle lowdly in the skie:
                  And day that was moſt cleare, to ſeeme as night,
                  It was ſo darke, ſo that they had no light,
               
               
                  But onely by the lightning that did fall
                  With flaſhes great, and made them ſore agaſt,
                  And much more when the thunder therewithall,
                  With mighty claps did breake both Yard & maſt:
                  And rent and tare their ſailes, & made them flie
                  Ore bord into the ſea that roſe ſo hie,
               
               
                  And bare their ſhips vp with ſo mighty force,
                  As if that they on mountaine tops had been,
                  And then againe with cleane contrary courſe
                  Caſt them as low, ſo that they oft were ſeen
                  As if that they directly headlong fell
                  Into the deepe infernall pit of hell.
               
               
                  And therewithall the lightning ſodainly
                  Fell in their ſhips, and ſet them on a fire,
                  And two and twenty of them ſpeedily
                  Conſumd & burnt, the reſt (with furious ire
                  The which Minerua to them bare) were caſt
                  Vpon the ſhore, and there in pieces braſt.
               
               
                  For ſhe offended was with them ſo ſore,
                  Becauſe to her they did no reverence
                  When they from Troy departed, and the more,
                  Becauſe of that moſt great and foule offence,
                  The which Cileus Aiax gainſt her wrought
                  Within her Church, which he full dearly bought.
               
               
                  For when his ſhips were moſt part of them drownd,
                  She bare ſo great a ſpight and hate to him,
                  That he to ſaue himſelfe from death was found
                  In danger great, within the ſeas to ſwim
                  Starke naked, and at laſt got to the land,
                  And there lay almoſt dead vpon the ſand,
               
               
                  And that he had for his deſert and ſhare.
                  The which Minerua iuſtly to him ſent,
                  Becauſe that he no honor to her bare,
                  When he into her Temple boldly went:
                  And forcible with mighty violence,
                  
                     Caſſandra Priams Daughter drew from thence.
               
               
                  Whereby you ſee what danger doth enſue
                  To men, that dare prophane a holy place,
                  As Cileus Aiax did, but did it rue,
                  And plagued was therefore without all grace:
                  As God with grieuous puniſhment will ſtrike
                  All thoſe that do preſume to do the like.
               
               
                  Which many of the Greeks moſt true did find,
                  By giving of the ſame occaſion.
                  For he that with a proud and hawtie mind,
                  Will venture by too great preſumption,
                  To ſtriue againſt the God of peace and might,
                  Shall at the laſt vnto his foule deſpight
               
               
                  Repent the ſame much ſooner then he weenth,
                  And oftentimes not puniſhed alone,
                  For many a man that innocently meanth,
                  Is plagu'd for that which other men haue done:
                  For all the Greeks in generall together,
                  Returning home receau'd ſome hurt no other,
               
               
                  Both hie and low of ſtate, all felt the ſmart
                  And puniſhment of rigor to them vs'd
                  Vpon their foes, with ſterne and cruell heart,
                  Becauſe that they their victory abus'd:
                  As by the ſequele of the Hiſtory,
                  It doth appeare moſt clearely to the eye.
               
               
                  Which ſaith, that in times paſt a King there raign'd
                  Among the Greeks, which Naulus had to name,
                  Who long in honor great his Land maintaind,
                  And through the world did ſpread his hawty fame:
                  Two Sons he had, Pallamides the elder,
                  And Oetes was the ſecond, and the yonger.
               
               
                  Who both one mother had, and valiant were,
                  Eſpecially Pallamides, for he
                  For knighthood was eſteemd and held to beare
                  The name and fame both farre and neare, to be
                  The worthieſt Prince then living in his daies,
                  For force and power of men at all aſſaies.
               
               
                  
                  And for his wiſedome ſometime governed
                  The Grecians hoaſt, when they fore Troy did lie,
                  And was of them moſt highly honoured,
                  But at the laſt was ſlaine vnhappilie
                  In battaile: when as he moſt flouriſhed
                  In honor, & his fame abroad was ſpred.
               
               
                  But ſome that bare great envie in their hearts,
                  Vnto the Grecians moſt maliciouſly
                  Againſt them treaſon wrought, & plaid their parts
                  So well therein, that Naulus haſtilie
                  Fell at debate with them: for they devis'd
                  A tale the which they told him, and ſurmis'd
               
               
                  That which was never practiſed nor wrought
                  By any one of all the Greeks, not yet
                  In any wiſe imagined nor thought
                  By them, though he for truth belieued it:
                  For they told him that while the Grecians were
                  Before the towne of Troy, that falſlie there
               
               
                  
                     Pallamides his ſonne was murthered
                  By night, as he within his bed did lie,
                  The which they ſaid was done by Diomede,
                  
                  And falſe Uliſſes with great crueltie:
                  Which (truth to ſay) and giue to them their due,
                  They never did, for it was moſt vntrue.
               
               
                  They alſo did moſt confidentlie tell
                  The King, that all the Princes did conſent
                  Vnto that deed, and knew thereof full well,
                  (Although there was nere any ſuch intent)
                  And ſpecially that King Agamemnon,
                  
                  And Menalus were by when it was done.
               
               
                  But all (they ſaid) was falſe and nothing ſo,
                  Yet nere the leſſe they did the king perſwade
                  So well, that he gaue credite therevnto,
                  And verilie belieu'd the Grecians had
                  Conſpir'd the death, and the deſtruction
                  Of valiant King Pallamides his ſon.
               
               
                  And better to averre their falſe report,
                  They fain'd & ſaid that letters twaine were ſent
                  Out of the towne, which treaſon did import,
                  And ſaid that King Pallamides was bent
                  To favor them of Troy, and that he had
                  Receau'd a ſum of gold of them, and made
               
               
                  Condition more to haue, ſo that he would
                  Delay the time, and cauſe their enemie
                  To leaue the ſiege, and for them only hold:
                  And more to make their matter good did lie,
                  And ſaid, they found the letters in the field,
                  Encloſed faſt within a Troyans ſhield
               
               
                  That in the fight was flaine, and that thereby
                  The who
                        •
                     e contents of all the treaſon wrought,
                  And practis'd by the Troyans ſecretly▪
                  
                  With King Pallamides, to light was brought:
                  And though that he was guiltles of the ſame,
                  (The Grecians more to ſlaunder and to blame,)
               
               
                  They ſaid Uliſſes falſly practiſed,
                  With one that on Pallamides did wayt,
                  And him with gold and words moſt faire ſo fed,
                  That at the laſt he caught him with a bait,
                  And got him to agree and be content
                  To grant to his requeſt, and giue conſent
               
               
                  To take a bag of gold, and ſecretly
                  By night convay the ſame into the bed
                  Whereas his Lord Pallamides did lie,
                  Which he accordingly accompliſhed:
                  And to make all ſeem true, the gold then laid
                  Within the bed, was ſo much as was ſaid,
               
               
                  
                     Pallamides receaued had in hand.
                  That when the matter once in queſtion came,
                  He ſhould not well gainſt his accuſers ſtand,
                  It being found and prou'd to be the ſame
                  Iuſt ſumme of gold, the which was ſpecifi'd
                  In thoſe two letters in the Targat hid,
               
               
                  Which being found, and to the Grecians told,
                  They were to vproare moued in ſuch wiſe,
                  Concerning thoſe two letters and the gold,
                  That they did in a muttering ariſe:
                  And all together ran with one conſent,
                  In furious wiſe vnto the royall tent,
               
               
                  Wherein the king (that innocent and cleane
                  Of that ſuppos'd offence then was) remaind,
                  And little knew what they thereby did meane:
                  And would by no intreaty be reſtraind
                  To ſtay, but when before him there they ſtood
                  Like vnto men that had been mad or wood;
               
               
                  They did begin againſt lowd to crie,
                  And bitterly to raile and chafe withall,
                  And by no meanes their rage would pacifie,
                  But readie were on him therefore to fall:
                  And ſpecially the kings Agamemnon,
                  
                  And Menalus with indignation
               
               
                  Againſt him in their hearts conceaued, than
                  Without adviſe or any care at all
                  Of his eſtate or high degree, began
                  For iuſtice there be
                        •
                     ore the Greeks to call:
                  The which when king Pallamides perceau'd,
                  And ſaw what malice they gainſt him conceau'd,
               
               
                  
                  At firſt he was ſomewhat therewith abaſt,
                  But preſently againe without all feare
                  He ſtood vp on his feet, and at the laſt
                  When as he ſaw how hot at him they were,
                  And that they ſtill perſiſted that he ſhold
                  Condemned be: To ſhow his courage bold
               
               
                  And valor great, he flatly did deny
                  That which by them on him was falſly layd,
                  And ſwore before them all it was a lie,
                  For proofe whereof he offer made and ſaid:
                  That he his life would venture like a Knight,
                  With any whatſoere he were, to fight
               
               
                  In ſingle combat hand to hand, to try
                  And proue by force that he no treaſon wrought,
                  (Reſpecting not his Soveraigne dignity
                  Nor royall bloud) and them therefore beſought,
                  To grant and giue conſent that preſently
                  That day the combat might be fought, thereby
               
               
                  To find and know the truth, if any one
                  Againſt him durſt within the field appeare.
                  Which proffer made they all ſtood mute, and none
                  Of all his foes that his accuſers were,
                  The combate would accept: for Diomede
                  
                  And King Uliſſes authors of that deed,
               
               
                  Withdrew themſelues, and never did make proffer
                  To take his gauntlet vp, which he had laid
                  Before them on the ground, nor yet would offer
                  To proue that which of him they falſly ſaid
                  Behind his backe, but with a fained ſhow,
                  Made as if they thereof did nothing know.
               
               
                  And for his part Uliſſes craftily,
                  (As't was his common practiſe to diſſemble
                  With all men, and to flatter, faine, and lie,
                  Wherein he did the ſerpent ſlie reſemble,
                  That cloſely lyeth hidden in the graſſe,
                  To ſting and bite ſuch as thereon do paſſe.)
               
               
                  When as he heard Pallamides deny
                  The treaſon to him laid, and offer made
                  To proue them falſe that would it iuſtifie,
                  He ſeemd as if therefore he had been glad:
                  And like a friend that meant nought elſe but well,
                  He did begin in double wiſe to deale.
               
               
                  And openly ſeemd him thereof t'excuſe,
                  And gaue adviſe vnto the Greeks to ceaſe,
                  From charging him with treaſon, and to vſe
                  No more opprobrious ſpeeches in that caſe,
                  And by that meanes appeaz'd their muteny:
                  And did perſwade them that moſt certainly,
               
               
                  That accuſation falſe and ſlanderous,
                  Vpon him was impoſed wrongfully,
                  By ſome that had with hearts malicious,
                  Conſpir'd to do him that great villany:
                  And to procure his everlaſting ſhame,
                  Yet he himſelfe was author of the ſame.
               
               
                  But when he ſaw he could not bring to paſſe,
                  That which he had deviſed to betray
                  And charge him with, that he a traitor was,
                  He ſubtilly found out another way:
                  Which by conſent of Diomede he brought
                  Vnto effect, and in this wiſe he wrought.
               
               
                  He went vnto him late vpon a night,
                  And as a ſecret friend vnto him told,
                  (Firſt ſwearing him by th'onor of a knight,
                  Not to diſcloſe that which reveale he ſhold)
                  That he could bring him to a place whereas
                  Great ſtore of gold and treaſure hidden was.
               
               
                  That had to him been privately diſclos'd,
                  And none elſe but himſelfe thereof did know,
                  And that is lay within a well enclos'd:
                  Which as a friend he offred him to ſhow,
                  So that he promiſe would that night to go,
                  Accompani'd with them two, and no mo,
               
               
                  To fetch it ſecretly into his tent.
                  Which he (belieuing all that they did ſay)
                  Agreed vnto, and forth with them he went
                  Vnto the well, whereas he ſaid it lay:
                  And comming thither, told them that he wold
                  Go downe into the well to fetch the gold.
               
               
                  Suppoſing to haue found it there indeed.
                  But being downe into the bottome gone,
                  (As they before between them had agreed,
                  When aid and ſuccor for him there was none,
                  For vp againe himſelfe he could not riſe:)
                  They ſtoned him to death in cruell wiſe,
               
               
                  And went their waies vnto their tents with ſpeed,
                  Where down they laid themſelues to take their eaſe,
                  As if that they had never done the deed.
                  And ſo they ſaid that King Pallomides
                  
                  Was murthered by Uliſſes treachery,
                  And Diomede: and it was but a lie
               
               
                  Deuis'd to ſlander them that guiltleſſe were,
                  And alſo all the Grecians elſe beſide,
                  For he was with an arrow ſlaine in warre
                  By Paris, while they did in ſiege abide:
                  But they that are to falſhood wholly bent,
                  Can tales deviſe that nere were done nor ment.
               
               
                  
                  And as for thoſe two letters that were brought
                  Out of the towne, as by them was ſurmis'd,
                  No ſuch thing by Pallamides was wrought,
                  It only was maliciouſly devis'd:
                  And nothing elſe but falſhood & vntroth,
                  Of purpoſe told to make king Naulus wroth,
               
               
                  And angry with the Greeks in generall,
                  Thereby to worke their ruine and decay,
                  And mou'd him for that cauſe on them to fall,
                  As they returned homeward on their way:
                  For preſently king Naulus and his ſonne,
                  Belieuing that ſuch treaſon had beene done,
               
               
                  And wrought by Greeks, as was vnto them told,
                  Did ſweare and vow reveng'd to be therefore
                  Vpon them by all waies and meanes they could:
                  And vnto them in heart ſuch hatred bore,
                  That without any favor merciles,
                  When as the Greeks were on the ſurging ſeas,
               
               
                  And ſaild along the ſhore by Naulus land,
                  He cauſed fires to burne, and ſet vp lights
                  Vpon the coaſt, the which on hills did ſtand,
                  And might be ſeene farre off in winter nights,
                  To make the Greeks to erre and go aſide
                  Out of the way: for when they had eſpi'd
               
               
                  The lights on ſhore, and did not vnderſtand
                  The reaſon, but ſuppoſing harbor neere,
                  They did direct their courſe vnto the land,
                  And thinking them for ſea-marks placed there,
                  To ſhew them how to fall on land by night,
                  Without all feare they made vnto the light.
               
               
                  Whereby vpon the rockes & ſand they ſtroke,
                  And by that meanes two hundred ſhips they loſt,
                  Which ſodainly were all in pieces broke,
                  And caſt away vpon king Naulus coaſt,
                  Which coſt the life of many a worthy man.
                  And ſo to take revenge he firſt began
               
               
                  Vpon the Grecians, with deſtruction
                  Of them, and of their Navie huge and great,
                  But yet by fortune King Agamemnon
                  
                  Eſcaped death, and ſafely home did get,
                  With Menalus, King Diomed, and more
                  That followed them: & yet there was great ſtore
               
               
                  Of Earles, Kings, and Princes caſt away
                  At that ſame time. But when as Oetes knew
                  That they were gone, and that he could not ſtay
                  Them as he would, he vowd ſome ſhould it rew:
                  And preſently imagined a wile,
                  Wherewith he did Agamemnon beguile,
               
               
                  By writing of a letter to his wife,
                  Which ſet ſo great contention tweene thē twaine,
                  That it did coſt Agamemnon his life.
                  The letter did in it thus much containe,
                  That her deare Lord and king Agamemnon,
                  
                  A great and mighty wrong to her had don.
               
               
                  The which could not but breed moſt extreame blame,
                  And detriment vnto her in the end,
                  (Although ſhe nere had merited the ſame)
                  The which he ſaid was that he did intend
                  A daughter of king Priamus to take
                  To wife, and would her vtterly forſake,
               
               
                  (Though ſhe ſurpaſt her much for excellence
                  Of beauty, and of comely feature)
                  That never had vnto him done offence.
                  Whereof he did her certainly aſſure,
                  And that it was his purpoſe and intent,
                  That ſhe ſhould into baniſhment be ſent,
               
               
                  A thouſand miles frō thence when he came home,
                  Adviſing her that ſhe ſhould warily
                  Looke to her owne eſtate. This was the ſum
                  And generall contents of that which he,
                  Within his letter ſent vnto the Queene:
                  Although the king was innocent and cleane,
               
               
                  Of that which he to her did falſly write,
                  And loud her while he liu'd with all his heart,
                  And in none elſe but ſhe did take delight,
                  Nor had no ſuch intent from her to part:
                  But't may be that the letter which he ſent,
                  Made her to do more then ſhe ever ment,
               
               
                  And to giue credite thervnto too ſoone.
                  Who thanked Oetes for his carefulneſſe
                  In her behalfe, and his compaſſion
                  Shewd therein to preſerue her from diſtreſſe:
                  And yet (as in the ſtory you ſhall find)
                  She was a moſt falſe Lady, and vnkind
               
               
                  To him while he was abſent in the warre.
                  But neretheleſſe ſhe was ſo diligent
                  To looke vnto her ſelfe, and to prepare
                  A bait for him, and thereby to prevent
                  All miſchiefe whatſoever might enſue
                  To her, by that which ſhe thought to be true,
               
               
                  That finally ſhe brought him to his end.
                  What truſt can man repoſe in worldly glory,
                  (Though all men to obtaine't their wits do bend,)
                  Which proues to be ſo vaine and tranſitory:
                  Or in the wavering ioyes of prowd ambition,
                  Which ſodainely are turned vpſide downe.
               
               
                  
                  Or flying fame that mounteth vp ſo hie,
                  And is orethrown in twinckling of an eie,
                  Or as vaine boaſting of great victory,
                  That vaniſheth away ſo ſodainly,
                  Or in diſſembling fortune moſt vniuſt,
                  In whom no man could ere ſo ſurely truſt,
               
               
                  As that he might aſſure himſelfe that ſhe
                  Would vnto him a conſtant friend remaine,
                  Gainſt whom no man whats'euer that he be,
                  Can once reſiſt or victory obtaine:
                  For on her wheele though he clime nere ſo faſt,
                  Let him be ſure ſheele throw him downe at laſt.
               
               
                  Her favor's not to be relide vpon,
                  For ſhe's ſo full of mutability,
                  That he which doth repoſe his truſt thereon,
                  Doth build vpon a meere vncertainty:
                  To day ſheele be a friend and ſeeme to ſmile,
                  To morrow ſhe will falſly men beguile.
               
               
                  Her pride is ſuch ſhe ſpareth no degree,
                  Great Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Princes, all are one
                  With her, for in their greatſt felicity,
                  When they are plaſt in high and Princely throne,
                  And liue and raigne in honor and renowne,
                  For all their mighty power ſhe caſts thē downe.
               
               
                  As you may ſee by King Agamemnon,
                  
                  Who while he liu'd ſo puiſſant was of ſtate,
                  That mong the Greeks there was not any one
                  Eſteemd nor found to be more fortunate,
                  Nor greater; yet for all his excellence,
                  He could not make reſiſtance nor defence,
               
               
                  With all the power that on him did attend,
                  Againſt conſpired murther, nor prevent
                  The treaſon wrought to bring him to his end,
                  Which his Queene Clytemneſtra did invent
                  And purpoſely deuiſe. But he that knows
                  All things on earth, his iudgment often ſhows
               
               
                  On ſuch as take delight in murthering
                  Of men, which God doth vtterly forbid,
                  And ſpecially the murthering of a king.
                  Which is ſo foule and horrible a deed,
                  That all the paine that Exion fe
                        •
                     les in hell,
                  With other foule infernall ſpirits that dwell
               
               
                  With Belzebub, are not ſufficient
                  To take revenge, nor puniſh ſuch 
                        •
                     one
                  As hath a heart ſo miſchieuouſly bent,
                  For that excedeth in compariſon
                  All other kinds of treaſon whatſoere,
                  And no man can vprightly with it beare.
               
               
                  But God will them aſſuredly confound,
                  And bring vnto an end vnfortunate;
                  For they are worſe then Cerberns the hound,
                  Who though that he of malice doth vs hate,
                  He barks before he bites; but ſuch as lie
                  In wait to kill a man, will ſodainly
               
               
                  Aſſaile and ſet on him ere he's aware.
                  But bloud ſo ſhead vndoubtedly doth crie
                  To God for iuſt revenge on thoſe that are
                  The actors, and will fall aſſuredly
                  On them, which though ſometimes he doth prolong,
                  Yet he is iuſt, and puniſheth all wrong
               
               
                  Done vnto every man, but ſpecially
                  To mighty Kings; as this Agamemnon,
                  
                  In his time was of ſuch authority,
                  That comparable to him there was none
                  In all the Grecian campe, but fate ſo wrought,
                  That when vnto his houſe he came, & thought
               
               
                  To liue in peace, he ſhould there end his life
                  By vnexpected murther, which was done
                  By policy and miſchiefe of his wife:
                  For that when to the ſhore he came, aſſoone
                  As ever foot vpon the land he ſet,
                  In ſeemely wiſe Clytemneſtra with him met.
               
               
                  Who outwardly with countenance bening,
                  And friendly ſhow did welcome him, with much
                  Great courteſie and honour, whome the King
                  In loving wiſe embraſt, and thought no ſuch
                  Falſe treaſon had vnto him then been ment,
                  And ſtraight with her vnto his Pallace went.
               
               
                  Where ſhe no whit reſpecting faithfull vow,
                  Nor promiſe made in wedlocke, ſet aſide
                  All duety and reſpect ſhe ought to ſhow
                  Vnto the king, and ſhameleſly vntide
                  The knot of loue, and proued ſo vnkind,
                  That ſhe did ſet her heart and all her mind
               
               
                  Vpon a knight that in her favor ſtood,
                  Whoſe name Egiſtus was, though truth to tell,
                  He neither came of noble birth nor blood,
                  Nor yet in armes nor knighthood did excell:
                  But cauſe he did his buſineſſe well by night,
                  She tooke in him ſuch pleaſure and delight,
               
               
                  That he her loue from all men elſe had wone,
                  Which moued her her husbands blood to ſhed,
                  And for becauſe ſhe could not he alone,
                  She made him her copartner in her bed:
                  And by him at the laſt a Daughter had
                  Cald Exion, and promiſe to him made,
               
               
                  
                  Vpon the paine of looſing of her head,
                  That ſhould be her Lord and King, when as
                  Her husband King Agamemnon was dead.
                  The which accordingly to bring to paſſe,
                  
                     Agamemnon next night by him was ſlaine,
                  Whereof the Queene exceeding glad & faine,
               
               
                  No longer time delayd, but preſently
                  Did marry with Egiſtus, and did bring
                  His purpoſe ſo to paſſe by treachery,
                  That he was of Meſſena crowned King:
                  And gaue him thereof full poſſeſſion,
                  And thereby diſinherited her Son.
               
               
                  And luſt with her abounded in ſuch wiſe,
                  That reaſon bore no ſway within her mind,
                  (For they are alwaies deadly enemies)
                  And wrong and falſhood now more favor find,
                  Then equity, true dealing, righteouſnes,
                  Honor, eſtate, deſert, or worthineſſe.
               
               
                  For by her beaſtly foule adultery,
                  (A ſin which never raignes in man alone)
                  She practiſed with falſe conſpiracie,
                  To murther her deare Lord, & wrong her Sonne:
                  And thereby heapt one ſin vpon another,
                  Which down to hell with her did ſinke together.
               
               
                  And to her did erelaſting woe procure,
                  Which ſhe full well deſerued for her paine.
                  Who can himſelfe here in this life aſſure,
                  When Kings in traiterous wiſe are falſly ſlaine▪
                  
                  To make and ſtirre vp alteration
                  In kingdomes great, by wrong ſucceſſion.
               
               
                  Which they that are the authors may pretend,
                  To do with colour of ſome equitie:
                  But God the Iudge of Iudges in the end,
                  Will right all falſe intruſions ſpeedily,
                  On thoſe that ſeeke by force and violence,
                  To wrong ſuch as nere did to them offence.
               
               
                  For though thereby ſhe thought her ſelfe ſecure,
                  As having all the Country at command,
                  And dreamt long in that happy ſtate t'endure;
                  Yet ſhe cold not the puniſhment withſtand
                  Which God for her prepar'd, for when't was known,
                  That ſhe her ſelfe s'vnnaturall had ſhown
               
               
                  Vnto her Lord and King Agamemnon,
                  
                  As ſo to murther him, and afterward
                  So falſly diſinherited her Sonne,
                  And had him from his lawfull right debard:
                  Her Son that was of yong and tender age,
                  (Horeſtus cald) to ſhun his mothers rage,
               
               
                  Was ſecretly convaid and ſent away
                  Out of the Land by King Taltabius,
                  
                  Into the Iſle of Creet̄e, where he did ſtay
                  And nouriſht was by King Idumeus,
                  
                  And Carkaſis his Queene, whoſe onely heire
                  A daughter was, of beauty paſſing faire,
               
               
                  (Climenea cald) and by them vs'd as well
                  As their owne child, where he continued
                  Till he waxt great, and did in armes excell,
                  And with him thence a puiſſant army led:
                  To conquere his inheritance by might,
                  Which falſe Egiſtus held without all right
               
               
                  And equity from him. But for a while
                  Ile let him ſtay where he was nouriſhed
                  In tender yeares, for I muſt change my ſtile,
                  And tell you ſomewhat of king Diomed:
                  
                  Who for his part likewiſe great woe endur'd,
                  The which to him was enviouſly procur'd,
               
               
                  And falſly brought to paſſe by Oetes traine,
                  Which he for him and many others more
                  Prepared had, of malice and diſdaine,
                  Which he vnto the Grecian Princes bore:
                  To take revenge on them for murthering
                  
                     Pallamides, the which to paſſe to bring,
               
               
                  (Though't were vntrue) yet he and Naulus both
                  Perſwaded otherwiſe, would't not belieue,
                  But in their minds conceaued ſo much wrath
                  And hatred gainſt the Greeks, that to bereaue
                  Them of their liues was all their care & thought:
                  Thus gainſt the ſaid king Diomed they wrought.
               
               
                  Within the great and ſpacious Grecian land,
                  There was a mighty kingdome long and large,
                  Which towards the Eaſterne parts therof did ſtand,
                  Compoſed of Calido
                           •
                        ie and Arge,
                  
                  Both ioynd in one, abounding in great ſtore
                  Of wealth, whereof he that the ſcepter bore
               
               
                  And raignd therein, Polentus had to name,
                  To whome his wife a ſon & daughter bare,
                  The ſonne Aſſandrus called was; whoſe fame
                  Both far and neere was ſpred for knighthood rare.
                  His daughter faire the name of Egra bore.
                  Who cauſe he had two children and no more,
               
               
                  He did vpon his death bed ſo provide,
                  That when he ſhould depart the, world,
                  All ſtrife) they two his kingdome ſhould divide to ceaſe
                  Betweene them, and together liue in peace.
                  Whoſe daughter afterward he being dead,
                  Was married vnto king Diomed.
                  
               
               
                  
                  (Who while he did at Troy in ſiege remaine,
                  Lou'd Creſſida that Calchas daughter was,
                  And for her ſake endur'd much griefe and paine.
                  But I will let his loue to her orepaſſe,
                  As nothing to the matter pertinent)
                  Who not long after they were married, went
               
               
                  Vnto the ſiege of Troy, accompanied
                  With Aſſandrus her brother, who together
                  Vpon the ſeas out of the way were led,
                  And driven too and fro with ſtormie weather:
                  And cleane contrary wind they had, which bore
                  Them forcibly vpon Boetia ſhore.
               
               
                  Whereas they did (as glad a while to ſtay
                  And reſt themſelues) take land & there remaine,
                  Till Thelaphus the King thereof heard ſay
                  That they were there, and thereat much diſdaind,
                  Becauſe that they to land thereon would venter,
                  Before that he did giue them leaue to enter.
               
               
                  Though they (as he ſuppos'd) did not pretend
                  To do him wrong thereby while they did ſtay,
                  Nor yet by any way or meanes t'offend
                  His ſubiects, but for all they tooke did pay:
                  But Thelaphus well arm'd with many a knight,
                  Went downe vnto the ſhore with them to fight.
               
               
                  And with exceeding furie on them ſet,
                  Where Aſſandrus ſo brauely did aſſaile
                  His enemies, that thoſe that with him met,
                  Could not againſt his valor great prevaile:
                  So that by knightly force the field he wan
                  Vpon his foes, and killed many a man
               
               
                  That him withſtood, which when the King eſpi'd,
                  And ſaw how he ſo brauely plaid his part,
                  Diſdaining ſore thereat (to daunt his pride)
                  With all his force he ſtroke him with a dart,
                  So farre into the breaſt that he fell dead
                  Vpon the ground: the which when Diomed
                  
               
               
                  Perceaued, to revenge him like a knight
                  Of valor great, that time ſuch ſlaughter made
                  Vpon his foes, that by his puiſſant might,
                  He made them run out of the field as glad
                  To ſaue their liues: which done, he gan to make
                  Great ſorrow for his loving brothers ſake.
               
               
                  And ſtudying what were beſt for him to do;
                  At laſt his corps from ſavage beaſts to ſaue,
                  Before that he one foot from thence did go,
                  He put the ſame into a Princely graue,
                  And buried it with many weeping eyes,
                  Vpon Boctia ſhore in Paynim wiſe.
               
               
                  But Oetes to his ſiſter wrote and ſaid,
                  That he was ſlaine by craft of Diomede,
                  
                  Who to that end in wayt for him had laid
                  A band of men, that he once being dead,
                  The kingdome wholly might without all ſtrife,
                  Deſcend by right to him and to his wife.
               
               
                  And that he would poſſeſſion thereof take,
                  Aſſoone as he againe returned home.
                  And further ſaid, that he would her forſake,
                  And that with him there did a Lady come,
                  Whome he did loue and meant to make his wife.
                  And by that meanes did ſet ſuch mortall ſtrife
               
               
                  Betweene them, (as he in like ſort had done
                  Not long before, and in the ſelfe ſame kind,
                  Twixt Clytemneſtra and Agamemnon,)
                  That he poſſeſt her ſad and heauie mind
                  With ſuch conceit of treaſon: that much grieu'd
                  To heare thereof, ſhe verily belieu'd
               
               
                  All to be true that vnto her was told.
                  So that with heart to wrath and furie bent,
                  And face that looked deadly, wan, and cold,
                  She did for her deare brothers death lament:
                  Whome ſhe did with ſo great affection loue,
                  That from revenging him (no man could moue
               
               
                  Her heart that was as hard as any ſtone)
                  Vpon her husband Diomede. For when
                  The tedious weary ſiege of Troy was done,
                  And he returned home to her agen,
                  She did him on the ſhore by force withſtand,
                  And beat him backe not ſuffring him to land.
               
               
                  But baniſhed him preſently from thence,
                  And would not once with him be reconcil'd:
                  Who ſeeing that he could not make defence
                  Againſt her power, to ſee himſelfe exil'd
                  So wrongfully, much grieued at the heart,
                  Cleane comfortleſſe he did from thence depart.
               
               
                  And went vnto Salerne land, whereas
                  A puiſſant King cald Tentar then did raigne,
                  That Brother vnto Thelamon Aiax was,
                  Who at the ſiege of Troy was falſly ſlaine:
                  But Diomede cleane deſtitute of ayd,
                  Vnhappy man not long time therein ſtayd;
               
               
                  For when King T
                           ••••
                        r knew that he was there,
                  Suſpecting him for death of The
                           ••
                        mon,
                  
                  He did purſue him, ſo that whereſoere
                  He ſtaid, he ſaw that ſuccor there was none
                  For him to haue: ſo that vpon a night,
                  In ſecret wiſe he tooke himſelfe to flight,
               
               
                  
                  And left Salerne land, in hope to find
                  More comfort and reliefe in other place,
                  To eaſe and to redreſſe his troubled mind,
                  If fortune would vouchſafe him ſo much grace:
                  Meane time with heauie heart & thought confus'd,
                  Like one forſaken wholly, and refus'd
               
               
                  Of euery man, he wandred to and fro
                  From place to place, and could no reſt procure
                  Vnto himſelfe, not knowing where to go,
                  And all that while great mis'rie did endure.
                  Till at the laſt Aeneas that ſtill ſtaid
                  In Troy, the ſcattred Troyans there to aid,
               
               
                  Which after the deſtruction there were left,
                  And every day and hower were in doubt
                  To be deſtroyd, and of their liues bereft,
                  By enemies that dwelt there round about:
                  And had no man to gouerne them, nor ſtand
                  In their defence, or that would take in hand
               
               
                  To be their guide againſt their enemies.
                  Till that Aeneas t'aid them in their need,
                  Vnto them gaue his counſell and adviſe,
                  To ſend a meſſenger for Diomed,
                  
                  (Of whome he did the fortune vnderſtand,
                  To be expulſt and baniſht from his land,)
               
               
                  To pray him to come vnto them with ſpeed,
                  With all the force and power he could make,
                  To ſaue and to defend them in their need,
                  From thoſe that them oppreſt, and t'vndertake
                  To be the guide of them, that ready were
                  To be deſtroyd for want of government.
               
               
                  Which Diomed did grant vnto, and came
                  In haſt to Troy, and thither with him brought
                  A gallant troope of men, and with the ſame
                  Relieued them, and brauely for them fought:
                  With whome vpon the way Aeneas met,
                  And to the towne with honor great him fet.
               
               
                  And entertaining him as his degree
                  Requird, a banquet for him did prepare,
                  Of every thing that might deſired bee,
                  Where each of them to th'other did declare
                  The miſeries and troubles firſt and laſt,
                  By ſea and land which they had overpaſt,
               
               
                  Which no man can by any meanes eſchew.
                  But as dame Fortune for him hath decreed,
                  He muſt take that ſhe ſends him as his dew.
                  But now vnto the matter to proceed,
                  The Troyans that were almoſt driven out
                  Of Troy, by thoſe that dwelt there round about,
               
               
                  That daily did invade and ſpoyle their land,
                  By Diomed relieued were, and ſet
                  At liberty againe, who did withſtand
                  Their foes ſo puiſſantly, that he did get
                  The victory of them foure times at leaſt,
                  And them ſo ſore purſued and oppreſt,
               
               
                  That finally they tooke and ſlew them all.
                  And ſuch as were found traitors, and had done
                  That miſchiefe which vpon them then did fall,
                  Condemned were and hanged euery one,
                  Whereby no man durſt do them any wrong:
                  And by that meanes king Diomed waxt ſtrong,
               
               
                  And did in time by his protection,
                  And government which he did take in hand,
                  As being Lord and Ruler of the towne,
                  So valiantly their enemies withſtand:
                  And ſuch a ſway there for a time did beare,
                  That of him all the Country ſtood in feare.
               
               
                  And by that meanes in fine it ſo fell out,
                  His fame did ſpread abroad both farre & large,
                  And his great valor was ſo blowen about,
                  That it was knowne in Calidon and Arge:
                  
                  Which when the Queene his wife did vnderſtand,
                  She feard he would invade her in her land,
               
               
                  And it by force at laſt from her would take.
                  And to her ſelfe much mus'd how Diomed,
                  
                  Such ſuccor and ſuch grace had found, to make
                  Himſelfe ſo great, that he ſo farre ſhould ſpred
                  His fame: for which, as politike and wiſe
                  She did forecaſt, and with her ſelfe deviſe,
               
               
                  By counſell of her Lords in generall,
                  To reconcile her ſelfe, and to that end
                  (Determining him home againe to call)
                  A meſſenger with ſpeed to him did ſend,
                  And to him by her letters ſignified,
                  That whereas ſhe had wrongtully deny'd
               
               
                  Him enterance into his Land, when he
                  Returned from the ſiege of Troy, ſhe ſaid,
                  That ſhe with all her whole Nobilitie,
                  Submiſſiuely for pardon crau'd, and praid
                  Him to come home againe into his land.
                  Which news when he from her did vnderſtand,
               
               
                  Remitting all offences whatſoere
                  Vnto him done, he was content to do
                  As ſhe deſir'd, and with her fault to beare,
                  (As being more of mercy mou'd thereto
                  Then iuſtice, which doth wrongs with force requite,)
                  And as he was a wiſe and courteous knight.
               
               
                  
                  When he did by her letters vnderſtand
                  Her meaning and intent, he thought it beſt
                  To ſtint all ſtrife, & therefore out of hand
                  Did willingly graunt vnto their requeſt,
                  And ſpeedily returned home agene,
                  And reconcild was vnto his Queene,
               
               
                  And for his part all wrongs forgotten were,
                  And pardoned to his Nobility,
                  And after that he liued long time there
                  In high eſtate and great felicity,
                  And with his Queene a happy life did lead.
                  But cauſe no more of him I further read,
               
               
                  I will leaue off to ſpeake of him as now.
                  And vnto Duke Aeneas turne my ſtile,
                  And of him briefely tell vnto you how,
                  When he in Troy remained had a while
                  To aid them with Diomed, & ſpent
                  Some time therein, with many men he went
               
               
                  Aboord his Troian ſhips well furniſhed
                  Of all things that for him were neceſſary,
                  And hoyſing ſayles put vnto ſea with ſpeed,
                  And proſperous wind, till it began to varry:
                  And made the ſeas to ſtorme, & waues to riſe,
                  And mount aloft almoſt vnto the skies.
               
               
                  And hauing many dangers ouerpaſt,
                  And ſayled many miles along the coaſt,
                  He did ariue at Carthage at the laſt,
                  When he his wife by Fortune ſtrange had loſt.
                  But to declare all that to him befell,
                  And ſeuerally vnto you here to tell:
               
               
                  How that Queene Dido loued him, and gaue
                  Him treaſure, gold, & coſtly jewels ſtore,
                  With all things els that he deſir'd to haue,
                  And how for all the loue ſhe to him bore,
                  He ſhewd himſelfe to her ſo much vnkind▪
                  
                  (That as you ſhall at large in Virgill find,)
               
               
                  He ſecretly from her did ſteale away,
                  And got into his ſhips ere ſhe it knew,
                  By night, when ſhe in bed faſt ſleeping lay,
                  (For which in deſperate wiſe her ſelfe ſhe ſlew.)
                  And ſayled into Italy, whereas
                  He did through many hard adventures pas
               
               
                  And diuers battailes fought, and at the laſt
                  Did conquer it; and therein raigned King
                  With all his long and tedious trauailes paſt,)
                  It needles were for me ſith every thing
                  Declared is by Virgill long before
                  I wrote this Booke▪ which of him ſpeaks no more
               
               
                  But ſheweth how Horeſtus to requight
                  His Fathers death on them that had him kild,
                  Did find the meanes as equitie and right
                  Requires, that blood by murther falſely ſpild,
                  Should by the King of kings moſt iuſt decree,
                  Without all doubt at laſt revenged bee.
               
               
                  For blood by murther ſhead or violence,
                  Doth neuer ceaſe for vengance loud to call,
                  On him that hath committed ſuch offence,
                  Which on him at the laſt will ſurely fall
                  And giue him that reward he hath deſerud,
                  (For none can ſcape the doome that is reſeru'd
               
               
                  For murthers) by God that ſits on hie,
                  And doth behold downe from his heavenly throne
                  All actions good or bad with equall eie.
                  Who though a while he letteth them alone,
                  And makes a ſhew to winck at faults forepaſt,
                  When he ſees cauſe hele puniſh them at laſt,
               
               
                  At ſuch time as they little thinke thereon,
                  The which he doth full often for our good,
                  As for the murther of Agamemnon,
                  
                  He made one that was next to him of blood,
                  (Horeſtus his owne Son) his ſubſtitute,
                  His iudgement in that caſe to execute.
               
               
                  And vnto him procured meanes & might,
                  By aid of freinds to bring the ſame to pas,
                  Who when he had been made & dubbed knight,
                  By Idumeus King of Creet, when as
                  He had attaind to twenty foure yeares old,
                  And was of body ſtrong and courage bold:
               
               
                  And therewithall both wiſe and provident,
                  And calling vnto mind the iniurie
                  He had ſuſtaind, was reſolutely bent
                  (If Fortune vnto him did not deny
                  Her ayd,) to proue if that he could obtaine
                  His kingdome and his heritance againe.
               
               
                  The which by force Egiſtus from him held,
                  And wrongfully poſſeſt by falſe pretence
                  Of wedlocke, & thereby had him compeld
                  For ſafegard of his life to flie from thence,
                  For which he did proteſt while he had breath
                  To be revengd, and alſo for the death
               
               
                  And murther fowle of King Agamemnon
                  
                  His father, on all thoſe that had conſpird
                  And traitrouſly procurd it to be don,
                  And to that end moſt earneſtly deſird
                  
                     Idumeus King of Creet to ſtand his friend,
                  Some ayd & ſome reliefe to him to lend.
               
               
                  
                  To helpe him to aſſaile his enemie,
                  By whom he did ſuch iniurie ſuſtaine,
                  Which his requeſt the King would not denie,
                  But willing his iuſt quarrell to maintaine,
                  Ordained that a thouſand Knights ſhould goe
                  With him to fight againſt his cruell foe.
               
               
                  
                     Egiſtus that by force and violence
                  So long time vnto him had done ſuch wrong,
                  Which done, Hereſtus by his diligence
                  In little time did make himſelfe ſo ſtrong,
                  That he another thouſand knights did win
                  To go with him, and therewith did begin
               
               
                  With all his power to march, and in the way
                  As he along did through the countrey pas,
                  The firſt place where he did incampe and ſtay
                  To victuall and to reſt his army, was
                  Within a towne (Troyeſa cald,) where he
                  Was welcomed with great ſolemnitie,
               
               
                  By Forence King thereof, who hated ſore
                  
                     Egistus for his barbrous cruelty,
                  In murdering King Agamemnon, but more
                  Becauſe of great deceit and trechery
                  He had vnto him done, when as the king
                  That loud him well, him ſo much honouring
               
               
                  Vnto him gaue his daughter young of age
                  To be his wife, but he reſpecting not
                  The Kings good will, nor breach of mariage
                  When he had her virginitie once got,
                  Car'd not for her, but quickly changd his mind,
                  And ſhewd himſelfe vnto her ſo vnkind,
               
               
                  That he without a cauſe her cleane forſooke,
                  And gainſt the lawes of equitie and right
                  Committed fowle adulterie, and tooke
                  
                     Clytemneſtra to his wife, when he by night
                  With her conſent had ſlaine Agamemnon,
                  
                  And of Methena Crowne bereft her Son,
               
               
                  And for that hatefull falſe conſpiracle,
                  By her and him ſo miſchieuouſly wrought,
                  Committing murther and adulterie:
                  King Forence that by all occaſions ſought
                  To be revenged on him for the 
                        •
                     ame,
                  Aſſoone as Prince Horeſtus to him came,
               
               
                  He did not onely offer him ſome ayd,
                  To helpe him in his need againſt his foe:
                  But in moſt friendly wiſe vnto him ſayd,
                  That he himſelfe would alſo with him goe,
                  And with foure hundred Knights well furniſhed,
                  Vnto Methena land accompanied
               
               
                  Him all the way, but ere they entered
                  Into the ſame, Horeſtus firſt did go
                  Into the Temple, where he offered
                  A ſacrifice vnto the Gods, to know
                  How he ſhould ſpeed, and alſo to implore
                  Their aid therein: and when he kneeld before
               
               
                  The Altar, he by Oracle was told
                  And bidden that without compaſſion
                  Shewn to his mother Clytemneſtra, he ſhould
                  Revenge the death of King Agamemnon
                  
                  His father, vpon her that was the cauſe
                  That he was ſlaine againſt all humane lawes:
               
               
                  And that he ſhould no mercy to her ſhow.
                  But to fulfill the Gods degree and heſt,
                  He willed was her body all to hew
                  In peeces ſmall, which done, he ſhould not reſt
                  Till he had ſlaine Egiſtus in likewiſe,
                  For iuſt reward of their great cruelties.
               
               
                  Enioyning him not to be negligent
                  In any wiſe, but carefully t'effect
                  And execute the Gods commandement,
                  On paine (if that he did the ſame reiect,)
                  Of that which might vnto himſelfe enſue,
                  Which Oracle which as Horeſtes knew.
               
               
                  He entred ſtraight into his natiue ſoyle,
                  Where when he came, all that did him withſtand,
                  He did in hoſtile wiſe deſtroy and ſpoile,
                  And being in the middeſt of the land,
                  Layd ſiege vnto Methena towne, whereas
                  Falſe Clytemneſtra the Queene at that time was.
               
               
                  But ere Horeſtus fully thither came
                  To plant the fiege, Egiſtus in great poſt
                  The day before was gon out of the ſame,
                  Intending to prepare a mighty hoaſt
                  To ſet vpon Horeſtus, and conſtraine
                  Him to breake vp his ſiege, but all in vaine.
               
               
                  For while Horeſtus ſtill before it lay,
                  He ceaſed not his ſpies abroad to ſend,
                  To ſee and to enquire every day
                  Which way he went, and what he did intend
                  Or meant to do, and purpoſely did ſet,
                  Some bands of Knights his paſſages to let.
               
               
                  Appointing others ſpeedily to ride,
                  And follow him about in euery place,
                  Commanding them t'aſſaile him on each ſide,
                  And euer more to keepe him ſtill in chaſe:
                  While he the towne ſo hotly did aſſaile,
                  That it could not againſt his force prevaile.
               
               
                  
                  So that at laſt he tooke it by aſſault,
                  And entring thereinto at euening late,
                  He found the Queene Clemneſtra in a vaut,
                  Whom (when he had ſet watch at every gate)
                  He cauſed to be bound in chaines, & layd
                  Therein againe, where till next day ſhe ſtaid,
               
               
                  While traitrous King Egiſtus haſt did make,
                  Withall the power of men that he could get,
                  T'invade with ſpeed and vnawares to take
                  
                     Horestus, & him of his purpoſe let:
                  And him thereby an ouerthrow to giue,
                  And by that meanes Methena to relieue.
               
               
                  But all that he could doe did nought availe,
                  For vnawares Horeſtus with him met,
                  And with ſuch mighty force did him aſſayle,
                  That in ſhort ſpace he did the victory get.
                  And having ſlaine and put his men to flight,
                  Himſelfe was tane, & to his great deſpight,
               
               
                  In priſon caſt, with hands and feet faſt bound.
                  Which done, Horeſtus cauſed every one
                  Wichin the towne that were conſenting found
                  Vnto the death of King Agamemnon,
                  
                  As alſo thoſe that armes againſt him bare
                  To be committed priſoners, & did ſpare
               
               
                  None whatſoere he was, but all receiu'd
                  Due puniſhment for their reward, & were
                  Condemnd to die, & of their liues bereaud,
                  Next day when as the Son ſhin'd bright & clreare.
                  And firſt Clemneſtra principall & head
                  Of all the reſt, in mighty feare & dread
               
               
                  Was fore Horeſtus brought, who preſently
                  Severely drew his ſword, & therewithall
                  (When as he had condemned her to die,)
                  Did hew & cut her into peeces ſmall:
                  And cauſed her in that ſort to be borne
                  Out of the towne, to be deuourd and torne
               
               
                  By Beaſts and Birds, and haue no buriall,
                  And by that meanes gaue her a iuſt reward:
                  Which done, he did for falſe Egistus call,
                  Who when he had likewiſe his ſentence hard,
                  (Which was that he ſtarke naked drawne ſhould be
                  Along the towne, and hang'd vpon a tree,
               
               
                  And not to be cut downe but there to rot.)
                  To execution went, and ſo you ſee
                  What guerdon by Gods iudgement murther got,
                  And they are ſo repaid that traitors bee.
                  And then the reſt that with them did conſent
                  To kill the King and to rebell, were ſent
               
               
                  Out of the towne, & hangd on gibbets hie,
                  That all men might example by them take.
                  And ſo Horeſtus with ſeveritie
                  Reuenged was for Agamemnons ſake
                  On them that him ſo traitrouſly had ſlaine,
                  And got his loſt inheritance againe.
               
               
                  But when he had thus finiſhed and don
                  That which the Gods commanded had, & tane
                  Revenge for death of King Agamemnon,
                  
                  So traitrouſly by Queene Clytemneſtra ſlaine.
                  King Menalus ariuing with his fleet
                  Of ſhips (that with him came from Troy) in Creet.
                  
               
               
                  (And with him brought Queene Helena the faire,
                  That had been cauſe of all the Troian warre:
                  The people did in mighty flocks repaire
                  To ſee and to behold her beauty rare,
                  For which ſo many Princes great were ſlaine,
                  But things once done, cannot b'vndon againe.)
               
               
                  Who hearing of his brothers death, & that
                  In traitrous wiſe he had been murthered
                  By Clemneſtra his wife, was grieud thereat:
                  But yet with partiality much led,
                  Conſidering on the fact as it behou'd
                  Him to haue done, he was in hart 
                        •
                     ore mou'd
               
               
                  Againſt Horeſtus that ſo merciles,
                  With rigor great and extreame crueltie
                  Had ſlaine his mother, like one pitiles,
                  And cleane bereft of all civility;
                  For which he ſwore & vou'd if he did liue,
                  He would him of his regall Crowne depriue.
               
               
                  Affirming for his cruelty ſo great
                  By law of God that he vnworthily
                  Vpon his Fathers Royall throne did ſit,
                  And therefore ſtraight againe to ſhip did hie:
                  And leauing Creet, to Athens ſayl'd ſo faſt,
                  That he ariud in Neſtors land at laſt.
               
               
                  And therein was receaud and welcomed
                  As his eſtate requird, but he poſſeſt
                  With fury great, and by much choller led,
                  Would not content himſelfe, nor be at reſt
                  Till he had told to Neſtor why he came,
                  And of him askt his counſell in the ſame.
               
               
                  Deſiring him that he a meanes would be
                  By counſell, & by power if that he might,
                  To put Horeſtus from his dignitie
                  And Regall throne, (which though it were his right)
                  He ſaid, that he had loſt the ſame becauſe
                  He had his mother ſlaine gainſt natures lawes.
               
               
                  
                  And therevpon to Athens both they went,
                  And did require the Princes of the land,
                  To meet together there in Parlament,
                  Where Menalus gaue them to vnderſtand
                  What Horeſtus to Clytemneſtra had don,
                  And craued all their iudgements therevpon,
               
               
                  Who being there himſelfe, and hearing what
                  King Menalus had ſaid, and did eſ
                        •
                     ie
                  His meaning and intent was flatly that
                  He would haue him depriued. Did replie
                  With courage bold, and ſayd, he had don nought
                  But that which all the Gods decreed and thought
               
               
                  Convenient to be done, and then did ſhew
                  How he commanded was by them to go
                  Into Meſſena land, and there to hew
                  His mother all in peeces, and to do
                  The ſame without all ruth or compaſſion,
                  Becauſe ſhe had kild King Agamemnon;
                  
               
               
                  And that the murther chiefely had been wrought
                  By her alone againſt all humane lawes,
                  And therefore all the Princes there beſought
                  With equitie to thinke vpon the cauſe,
                  And not with any malice nor in rage,
                  To ſeeke to take from him his heritage,
               
               
                  He being Son to King Agamemnon,
                  
                  And true and lawfull heire thereto by right,
                  Though Clytemneſtra ſought his deſtruction,
                  And diſpoſed him thereof hy might.
                  Which hauing ſayd Duke Neſtor haſtely
                  Stood on his feet, and for him did reply,
               
               
                  And ſaid, that he would for Horeſtus ſake,
                  That had don nought but that which ſhold be don
                  And lawfull was, his quarrell vndertake
                  Againſt all thoſe that held opinion
                  Contrary therevnto, but none repli'd
                  To him againe, for euery man eſpi'd
               
               
                  That Horeſtus had reaſon ſo to do;
                  And therefore all agreed and gaue conſent
                  To Crowne him King, and did proceed thereto:
                  Which don, they did diſſolue their Parlament,
                  And ſo Horeſtus by his ſubiects true,
                  Was crowned King againe with honor due
               
               
                  To his eſtate, and after that was made
                  Good friends with old King Menalus againe,
                  Whereof King Idi
                           ••
                        us being glad,
                  That friendſhip long betweene them to maintaine,
                  By mediation twixt them brought to pas,
                  That Hermion that Helens daughters was
               
               
                  By Menalus, was maried vnto
                  King Horeſtus, and by that alliance,
                  So made and ſurely knit betweene them two,
                  They ceaſed all their ſtrife and variance,
                  And afterward did liue and raigne in peace,
                  And more and m
                        •
                     re in honors did encreaſe.
               
               
                  Meane time Egistus daughter Exion
                  
                  Whom he on Queene Clytemneſtra had begot,
                  Did fall into ſuch deſperation,
                  That ſhe all worldly pleaſures cleane forgot,
                  And did endure ſo great extreamity,
                  That ſhe did hang her ſelfe vpon a tree.
               
               
                  But here I muſt digreſſe and turne my ſtile
                  From Horeſtus to King Uliſſes, and
                  Of his moſt ſtrange adventures ſpeake a while,
                  Which endurd both on the ſea and land.
                  Who when he did to Greece againe repaire,
                  
                     A while he found the weather cleare & faire,
               
               
                  And then againe when as the skies did frowne,
                  And did begin to thunder & to raine,
                  He was vpon the ſeas caſt vp & downe,
                  And had no more ſhips with him then but twaine,
                  The which like marchant ſhips were furniſhed,
                  That he might ſayle the ſafelier without dread.
               
               
                  Yet neretheleſſe for all his policy,
                  The wind ſo much contrary gainſt him was,
                  That he was forced by extremity
                  To fall vpon the ſhoare & land, whereas
                  King Thelamon (that was ſo falſely ſlaine
                  By night within his bed,) ſome time did raigne.
               
               
                  Where he no ſooner got vnto the land,
                  But he was tane and into Priſon throne,
                  And bound with Iron chaines both foot and hand,
                  Becauſe he murthered King Thelamon,
                  
                  (As they ſuſpicion had) but he del
                        •
                     ſo
                  With them, that at the laſt they let him go,
               
               
                  But yet with loſſe of all that ere he had
                  Within his ſhips, and after that againe
                  He put to ſea, and was exceeding glad
                  To haue eſcaped ſo, but all in vaine:
                  For Fortune ſo contrary to him was,
                  That as he on the ſeas along did pas,
               
               
                  Vnhappily he fell into the hand
                  Of Naulus, who watch long his coaſt had layd
                  To ſpoyle the Greeks, that thereon chanſt to land,
                  And by him there againſt his will was ſtaid,
                  And into cruell priſon caſt againe,▪
                  
                  Becauſe he did ſuſpect that he had ſlaine
               
               
                  
                  
                     Pallamindes his Son: but being bold
                  Of ſpirit, and of wit and wiſedome great,
                  So ſmothly for himſelfe his tale he told,
                  That he againe at liberty was ſet:
                  And out of Naulus danger ſafely got,
                  But by what me anes the ſtory telleth not.
               
               
                  And hauing well eſcaped from the ſame,
                  He trauailed in ſimple poore array
                  A foot throughout the land, till that he came
                  To King Idumeus court, and there did ſtay,
                  Who ſeeing him in ſuch a meane eſtate
                  And barely clad, did wonder much thereat.
               
               
                  Yet neretheleſſe diſdaind him not therefore,
                  But welcomed him with glad & ioyfull cheare,
                  And honord him although he came ſo poore:
                  And when they two alone together were,
                  
                     Uliſſes his complaint vnto him made,
                  And told him what vnto him chanced had.
               
               
                  And in this wiſe with ſad and heavy cheere
                  Vnto him ſayd, my Lord the gentlenes
                  You ſhew to me that thus diſteſſed heere
                  Vnto you came, imboldneth me t'expreſſe
                  The manner of my fortunes, and to tell
                  You how & in what ſort they on me fell.
               
               
                  Firſt, when I did the Troian land forſake,
                  With wind at will which at that time did blow,
                  And entred ſhip my courſe for Greece to take,
                  I ſayled to an Iſle I did not know
                  Cald Mirma, which with all things did abound
                  That are to be deſird, wiſht, or found.
               
               
                  And which for gold or ſiluer may be bought,
                  Wherein for certaine time aboad I made,
                  And all the while I ſtaied, wanted nought
                  That needfull was for man, & with me had
                  The treaſure which I won in Troy, & men
                  Good ſtore to ſerue my turne withall, & when
               
               
                  I did perceiue that Iſle to be ſo ſound
                  And wholſome aire, I purpoſely did ſtay
                  Therein, and all that while no creature 
                        •
                     ound
                  That once moleſted me. Till on a day
                  When we did find the weather faire & ſtill,
                  And wind to blow according to our will▪
                  
               
               
                  We went abord, & ſtraight did put to ſeas,
                  And in a little ſpace made ſo good way,
                  That we ariued at Clanſtafages,
                  
                  Where with our ſhips we for a while did ſtay,
                  And had the wind & weather cleare & faire,
                  But who may put his truſt in wind or aire?
               
               
                  For in good hope to haue a pleaſant skie,
                  And roome at will as I had found before;
                  And entred ſhip and faſt againe did hie
                  To ſea, where when for three daies and no more
                  I 
                        •
                     ayled had with wind ſtill at my backe,
                  At laſt it turn'd about & th'aire waxt blacke.
               
               
                  And ſuch a hideous tempeſt did ariſe
                  Vpon the ſea, that I was in deſpaire
                  To looſe my life, it thundred in ſuch wiſe,
                  And lightning flaſht ſo faſt out of the aire:
                  And in that ſort being driuen to and fro,
                  In danger great and knew what to do,
               
               
                  It was our chance at laſt to ſpie out land,
                  Whereto we made and found the ſame to be
                  An Iſland cald Cicile, and out of hand
                  Caſt anker forth with great extreamitie,
                  And got to ſhoare with labor ſore and paine,
                  Wherein at that ſame time two kings did raigne.
               
               
                  Whereof the one was cald Sorigones,
                  
                  Who vnto vs prou'd cruell and vnkind.
                  The other had to name King Coclopes,
                  
                  Who likewiſe had a fierce & bloody mind;
                  Both brethren, and both like, for difference none
                  Betweene them was for bad condition.
               
               
                  For both of them at once vpon vs ſet,
                  And cruelly a prey of vs did make,
                  And all the goods out of my ſhips did fet,
                  And forcibly the ſame from me did take,
                  And left me nought wherewith my ſelfe t'relieue.
                  But that which moſt of all my mind did grieue,
               
               
                  Was that when they perceiud I had no more
                  Left in my ſhips for them, away they went,
                  And vnto vs ſuch cruell minds they bore,
                  That they their Sons two mighty Giants ſent
                  Downe to our ſhips, the one 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
                  
                  The other huge and ſtrong Poliphe
                           •••
                        s.
                  
               
               
                  Who being both of body mighty great,
                  And therewith all exceeding tall and ſtrong,
                  In fierce and cruell wiſe vpon vs ſet,
                  And did aſſayle vs ſo that ere t'was long
                  A hundred of my men they ſlew, that were
                  Not able there moſt cruell blowes to beare,
               
               
                  Nor gainſt them long to ſtand in their defence,
                  Which don, they tooke me and King Alphenore,
                  
                  And in their armes by force and violence,
                  Deſpightfully away with them they b
                        •
                     re,
                  And carried vs (that were in mighty feare)
                  Into a darke and filthy priſon, where
               
               
                  
                  Our hands and feet with Iron chaines were bound,
                  And we were fed with bread and water cleare,
                  And had no bed, but bare and naked ground
                  To lyevpon while we remaines there.
                  This mighty Giant cald Poliphemus,
                  
                  Who as I ſayd had ſo impriſoned vs,
               
               
                  A ſiſter had that paſſed every one
                  That liued in her time, for beauty rare,
                  Who as it ſeem'd had ſome compaſſion
                  Of our diſtreſſe, (as maydens often are
                  More kind then men,) and came to viſit vs
                  In priſon, by which meanes it fell out thus:
               
               
                  That Alphenore (though captiue then he lay)
                  So much admird her beautie, that he fell
                  In loue with her, and did nought night and day,
                  But muſd thereon, and liked her ſo well,
                  That though he did himſelfe in fetters find,
                  Yet he on her did holy ſet his mind:
               
               
                  And faſter with loues chaines had tyed his hart,
                  Then with theyron bands wherein we lay
                  Sixe moneths in great diſtreſſe, ere we could part
                  Or get from thence, for ſo long we did ſtay
                  Impriſoned, till that Polliphemus,
                  
                  At laſt had ſome compaſſion vpon vs.
               
               
                  And after we had been tormented ſo,
                  Did eaſe vs of our great captivity,
                  And of his grace and fauour let vs go,
                  Whereas we would at our owne liberty.
                  But Alphenore ſtill burning hot in loue,
                  Could not the ſame out of his mind remoue,
               
               
                  But dayly felt a ſore and grieuous fit
                  Thereof within his heart, till at the laſt
                  He found the meanes by policy and wit,
                  (When he had many ſtormes of loue orepaſt,)
                  That on a night he did the mayd convay
                  Out of her fathers houſe, and went away
               
               
                  With her ſo ſecretly, that no man knew't,
                  Till morning early ere that it was day:
                  
                     Polliphemus did ſweare that we ſhould rue't,
                  And following vs oretooke in the way,
                  And ſuch a fierce aſſault on vs did make,
                  That 
                        •
                     e the mayd from Alphenor did take,
               
               
                  And then our men ſo furiouſly did ſlay,
                  With th'aid of thoſe that him accompanied,
                  That they compelled were to giue him way,
                  And at the laſt in extreame feare they fled,
                  And left me in great danger all alone,
                  To fight with that moſt mighty Champion,
               
               
                  And when I ſaw there was no remedy
                  To ſcape from death, I did with courage ſtout
                  Defend my ſelfe, and ſmot him ſodainly
                  Vpon the face, and thruſt his eye cleane out,
                  Which done, I went vnto my companie,
                  And with them to our ſhips in haſt did flie:
               
               
                  And no man did perceiue which way we tooke,
                  And finding wind and weather fit to go,
                  We went aboord and ſpeedily forſooke
                  That countrey, as beſt for vs ſo to do,
                  For there was no abiding then for vs.
                  (Of Poliphemus Ovid writeth thus,
               
               
                  That he a huge and mighty Gyant was,
                  Whoſe face was couered ore with beard & haire,
                  So thicke and ſo defuſedly, that as
                  Men lookt on him, they were in mighty feare,
                  The rather for that he deformedly
                  In middeſt of his forehead had an eie,
               
               
                  And none elſewhere, as men are vſd to haue,
                  Which eie when as Uliſſes had ſmit out,
                  He did therefore ſ
                        •
                     extreamely rage and raue,
                  That he ran blindfold groping round about
                  Ore hils & dales, and whereſoere he paſt,
                  Huge rocks and mighty ſtones about him caſt
               
               
                  In euery place, ſuppoſing ſo to be
                  Reuenged on Uliſſes for the 
                        •
                     ame,
                  As you at large in Ovids booke may ſee,
                  Which he his Metamorphoſis doth name,)
                  And hauing ſo eſcaped from his hand,
                  And ſafely with our ſhips got from the land,
               
               
                  We ſayled all that day vntill t'was night,
                  When as it was our chance vnhappily
                  Vpon a round and little Iſle to light,
                  Which in the middle of the ſea doth lie:
                  (Eludium cald) wherein as then did dwell
                  Dame Circes, who in magicke did excell,
               
               
                  And would that which ſhe tooke in hand performe
                  So cunningly, that by her Art ſhe could
                  A man or woman when ſhe liſt transforme
                  Into what kind of ſhape ſo ere ſhe would,
                  And make them in that ſort to liue as long
                  As pleaſed her, (her potions were ſo ſtrong.)
               
               
                  And likewiſe made her ſelfe by Art ſo faire,
                  That none like vnto her was to be found,
                  For that whoſoere did to her Iſle repaire,
                  Could not get out of that accurſed ground
                  Without her leaue, for by that Sorceres,
                  My mind was ſo poſſeſt with careleſnes,
               
               
                  
                  That I had no deſire at all to go
                  From thence, but there with a yeare did ſtay,
                  And truth to tell, I was enchanted ſo,
                  That I could not get thence by night nor day,
                  So pleaſant was the life that there I led.
                  And while that I with her continued,
               
               
                  She did conceaue with child by me, and had
                  A ſonne that Thelagenius had to name,
                  For which cauſe much account of me ſhe made,
                  And lou'd me more then others for the ſame:
                  But yet at laſt by ſecret providence,
                  I in her Art had ſuch experience,
               
               
                  That maugre all inchantments ſhe could vſe,
                  I ſtole away from her; and to conclude,
                  Though ſhe ſo many others did abuſe
                  By Art, I did her diveliſh Art delude:
                  And by that meanes eſcaped from her hand,
                  And with my men got free out of her land.
               
               
                  But neretheleſſe it did me nought availe,
                  For that when I had been a little while
                  Vpon the ſeas, and forward thought to ſaile,
                  A wind contrary blew me to an Iſle,
                  That farre remote within the ſea did ſtand,
                  And was exceeding rich, and fertile land.
               
               
                  Wherein Calipha, Circes ſiſter raignd,
                  Whoſe Art and foule inchantments were ſo ſtrong,
                  That ſhe againe my liberty reſtraind,
                  And ſpight my heart there alſo held me long:
                  But (truth to ſay) ſhe did ſo much abound
                  In courteſie, the which in her I found,
               
               
                  And was a Lady of ſuch excellence,
                  For rareneſſe of her qualities and wit,
                  That tarrying there to me was no offence:
                  But though that I well pleaſed were with it,
                  Yet loath to ſtay, I did her Art prevent,
                  And ſecretly eſcapt from her, and went
               
               
                  Directly to an Iſle wherein did ſtand
                  A Temple, where there was an Oracle,
                  And whoſoere therein did chance to land,
                  Might anſwere haue (as't were by miracle)
                  Of any thing whereof he wold enquire.
                  Whereas I did moſt earneſtly deſire
               
               
                  To know what fortune ſhould vnto me fall,
                  And alſo how I might prevent the ſame,
                  Where I was told my future fortunes all,
                  What ſoere I ask
                        •
                     , ſaue only what became
                  Of ſoules of mortall men when they are dead,
                  For nothing therevnto it anſwered.
               
               
                  As being that which is not in the might
                  Nor power of any creature to tell,
                  For that belongeth wholly and of right
                  To God that doth in higheſt heavens dwell,
                  For it is cleane beyong the reach of man.
                  And from that Iſle I once againe began
               
               
                  To hoyſe vp ſailes in ſurging ſeas, & ſcourd
                  The ſame, but with contrary
                  In Caribdis, where Mermaids vſe to lie,
                  That from the middle down-wards fiſhes are,
                  And from the middle vpwards, women are.
               
               
                  Whoſe cuſtome is vpon the ſeas to 
                        •
                     leet,
                  And ſing with ſuch a pleaſing harmonie,
                  Their ſugred Syrens ſongs with voyces ſweet,
                  That they are able with their melodie,
                  To raviſh any mortall man aliue,
                  And for a time his ſpirits all depriue,
               
               
                  And bring him therewithall in a ſuch a trance,
                  That for a while he thinketh vpon nought,
                  But is bereau'd of his remembrance,
                  Till vnawares he is in danger brought,
                  And with their pleaſing ſongs caſt in a ſleepe,
                  Till he's by them drawne vnderwater deepe.
               
               
                  And ſo both men and ſhips oft drowned are,
                  And by inticements of their liues bereaud,
                  If ſayling by they haue of them no care.
                  But at that time they were by me de
                        •
                     eaud,
                  For both mine cares with wax faſt ſtopped were,
                  Which made me that I cold by no means heare
               
               
                  The ſweetnes of their warbling notes, whereby
                  (Mans reaſon blinded is, and ſences loſt)
                  And ſo eſcaped by my policy
                  With all my men, and in the ſeas ſore toſt:
                  Did ſaile ſo long till toyld with wearineſſe,
                  It was our chance t'arriue in great diſtreſſe
               
               
                  Before Phenician haven, where we caſt
                  Our Anckors out, and ſtraight on land we went▪
                  
                  But when we thought we had all danger paſt,
                  The people with great malice gainſt vs bent,
                  In fierce and cruell wiſe my men aſſaild,
                  And in ſhort ſpace againſt them ſo prevaild,
               
               
                  That moſt of them were ſlaine, and I be
                        •••
                     t
                  Of that ſmall ſtore of treaſure which I had
                  Within my ſhips, and nought for me was left:
                  And all my men that were not ſlaine they made
                  To go with them, and there in priſon caſt,
                  I left them. And thus in great care I paſt
               
               
                  
                  A world of woes, as Fortune hath me led
                  A dance, with little joy and ſtore of paine,
                  Whereby vnto my coſt experienced,
                  In her vnconſtant courſes that are vaine
                  I fallen am, in need and poverty,
                  And having with moſt great extremity
               
               
                  By ſea and land, through many dangers paſt,
                  With heart poſſeſt with ſorrow, woe, and griefe,
                  I am vnto your preſence come at laſt,
                  In hope to find ſome ſuccour and riliefe
                  At your hands, to whom with griefe and care,
                  I am thus bold my Fortunes to declare.
               
               
                  Preſuming with my ſelfe as you are wiſe,
                  That you will take my comming in good part,
                  And therefore at this time let this ſuffice
                  That I haue ſaid. And ſo with heavy hart
                  And woefull cheare, when he had ſighed ſore,
                  He held his peace a while, and ſpake no more.
               
               
                  Which long diſcourſe Idumeus having hard
                  
                     Uliſſes tell, he did all that he might
                  With words to comfort him; and nothing ſpard
                  That might in any wiſe breed his delight;
                  Thereby to put all griefe out of his mind:
                  And was to him ſo loving and ſo kind,
               
               
                  That willing him his heavines to leaue,
                  Aſſured him as long as he remaind
                  With him in Creet, he would vnto him giue
                  Whatſoeuer he did want, and entertaind
                  Him in ſuch wiſe, that in ſhort ſpace he was
                  Well eaſed of his ſorrow. And when as
               
               
                  He had a while repoſd himſelfe and ſtaid
                  In Creet, and that his griefes ore paſſed were;
                  He tooke his leaue and to Idumeus ſayd
                  He would go home: which when the king did heare,
                  He gaue him clothes as his eſtate requird,
                  And all things els whatſoeuer he deſird,
               
               
                  And needfull was to ſerue his turne, and when
                  He ſhould depart and ſhips prepared were
                  In readines for him, he gaue him men
                  And victualls ſtore to ſerue him, and to beare
                  His charge till he got home. And ſo he went
                  To ſea againe with ſpeed, and homeward bent
               
               
                  His courſe, and as he ſayld along the way
                  He ankored with his ſhips and went on ſhore
                  To ſee King Alphenon, whoſe countrey lay
                  Not farre from his, (who likewiſe longed ſore
                  To ſee him and to heare his Eloquence,
                  The which in him did flowe by influence
               
               
                  Of nature, and did pleaſure therein take.)
                  By whom he was receau'd and welcomed
                  Moſt hartily, and of him then did make,
                  So much that with great honour he was led
                  Vnto his Royall Pallace, where as he
                  T'encreaſe his joy heard of Penelope
                  
               
               
                  His true and loving wife, whoſe conſtancie
                  Was ſuch that while ſhe liu'd on earth, the ſame
                  Was much extold, and ſhall continually
                  Be ſpread throughout the world by flying Fame:
                  As ſhe whom no temptation ere could moue;
                  In thought or deed to be vntrue in loue
               
               
                  Vnto her Lord, while he was in the warre▪
                  
                  So that through all the Grecian land ſhe was
                  The Myrrour, and the commendation bare,
                  To be the onely woman that did pas
                  All others for her modeſtie. Yet ſhe
                  Was knowen and held moſt beautifull to be,
               
               
                  And therewithall of noble howſe and blood,
                  And yet nere any more temptations had
                  To try her, which ſhe conſtantly withſtood,
                  And gainſt them all ſo great reſiſtance made:
                  That never any breach of loue was found
                  In her, that could to her diſhonor ſound.
               
               
                  For when her Lord from her was gone ſo farre,
                  She never left to mourne for ſtill his ſake,
                  When as ſhe thought vpon the deadly warre
                  Wherein he was, and fearefully would ſhake
                  For th'abſence of her Lord, both eve & morrow,
                  Was vnto her continuall griefe and ſorrow.
               
               
                  And ever when ſhe heard of Hectors name,
                  She preſently in floods of ſalt teares drownd
                  Her comely face, and cheeks, and with the ſame
                  Oft fainted, and did fall into a ſwound:
                  With mighty feare which in her heart ſhe had
                  To thinke vpon his ſtrong and trenchant blade
               
               
                  Wherewith ſo great a ſlaughter he did make,
                  Among the Greeks continually in fight,
                  Leaſt that her Lord of pride ſhould vndertake
                  To trie his force againſt that worthy knight,
                  And looſe his life, and many times ſhe paſt
                  The weary night with fearefull dreames that caſt
               
               
                  Her into many doubtfull thoughts, and made
                  Her loath, and ſhun the company and ſight
                  Of other men, as ſhe that chiefely had,
                  Her ſole and only comfort, and delight
                  In her deare Lord, and other joy had none
                  In all the world, but onely him alone.
               
               
                  
                  And did for him all others loue refuſe.
                  And therefore he that with a peeuiſh mood
                  In word or deed doth offer to abuſe,
                  And ſpeake of women otherwiſe than good:
                  I wiſh him to remember and to ſee
                  The life and praiſe of Queene Penolope.
                  
               
               
                  Leaſt that for doing ſo he might be dam'd,
                  And therefore to thee Guido I muſt tell
                  That thou within thy heart ſhouldſt be aſham'd
                  For writing of them otherwiſe then well:
                  For though ſome women do offend, and bee
                  Vnconſtant, and vnfaithfull too, yet ſhee
               
               
                  That liueth well and doth deſerue no blame,
                  Is not to be reproued for their ſins.
                  And whereas Guido writeth, and doth name
                  Some that liud bad, and in his Booke begins
                  To ſhew th'vnconſtant life of Creſida,
                  
                  Th'adultrous mariage of Queene Helena.
                  
               
               
                  And cruell mind of falſe Medea, who
                  Her children and her ſelfe ſo fiercely ſlew,
                  Let him not ſpeake too partially, but do
                  As right requires, and giue to them their due.
                  And tell you of Penelope the Queene
                  That faithfull was. And of faire Policene
                  
               
               
                  That liu'd and di'd a Virgin without ſpot.
                  And with them alſo ioyne Queene Hecuba,
                  
                  Whoſe like for vertue while ſhe liu'd was not
                  In all the world, and alſo Caſſandra,
                  
                  That did deſerue great praiſe for ſtedfaſtneſſe,
                  And Panthaſilia for her gentleneſſe.
               
               
                  With many more that well might be ſet downe:
                  And he ſhall find if hethe truth confeſſe,
                  The vertuous and ſuch as deſerue renowne
                  The greater number be▪ and th'other leſſe
                  Gainſt whome he doth ſo enviouſly invay,
                  And all men that do favor them will ſay
               
               
                  That he did erre in his opinion,
                  To tax them ſo without exception.
                  And while Vliſſes ſtaid with Alphenon,
                  
                  Ere he from thence determind to he gon:
                  A meſſenger vnto him certified,
                  That if from home he did long time abide
               
               
                  Without all doubt his Queene Penelope,
                  
                  By ſome great Lords whoſe countrey bordred
                  Next vnto his, by force ſhould rauiſht be,
                  And in deſpight of all his men be led
                  Out of his land full ſore againſt her will,
                  For ſhe to him remained conſtant ſtill,
               
               
                  Yet neretheleſſe they had all flatly ſworne,
                  That if by force ſhe were not reſcued,
                  She ſhould without delay away be borne:
                  And to that end with her continued,
                  And would not part from thence but with her ſtaid,
                  Who in hir heart therefore was much diſmaid:
               
               
                  But yet ſo wiſely with them dalied,
                  That they could get no vantage at her hand
                  But with delaies to their demands were fed.
                  Which heavy newes when he did vnderſtand,
                  And knew the truth by letters which ſhe ſent
                  To him, he was in heart ſo fiercely bent,
               
               
                  That he would ſtay no longer but begon
                  In haſt from thence, and then moſt humbly praid
                  His ſure and truſty friend King Alphenon,
                  
                  To bring him home, which he not once denaid:
                  But with him put to ſea when wind was good,
                  And finding nought that them theron withſtood
               
               
                  They ſoone ariud within Uliſſes land,
                  And in the night were ſecretly conuaid,
                  Vnto the place where thoſe that did withſtand
                  And make reſiſtance gainſt his wife, then ſtay,
                  Where ſodainely before they could awake,
                  He did them vnawares ſurprize and take.
               
               
                  And without more delay or mercy ſhewen,
                  As he them found faſt ſleeping in their beds,
                  He cauſd them all in peeces to be hewen,
                  And on the caſtle walles did ſet their heads:
                  The which before the Cocke next day did crow,
                  Were ſeen thereon to ſtand vpon a row.
               
               
                  Which done, that night they there continued cloſe,
                  Till morning that the Larke with pleaſant ſong,
                  Began to mount aloft when Phoebus roſe,
                  At which time with a mighty force and ſtrong
                  They entred in the towne, and by the Queene
                  Were welcomed, as ſhe that 
                        •••
                     g had beene
               
               
                  In ſorrow great, and had endur'd ſuch paine
                  For th'abſence of her Lord ſhe lou'd ſo well,
                  That wonder twas ſhe could ſo long maintaine
                  Her health, but if I ſhould vnto you tell,
                  And orderly ſet downe the pleaſures great,
                  And joy they did conceiue when as they met,
               
               
                  And what they to each other friendly ſaid
                  Wi
                        ••
                      
                     
                        ••
                     ry 
                        ••
                     es, and many 
                        •
                      ſweet embrace,
                  When as they were in bed together laid,
                  And lovingly beheld each others face:
                  As alſo what great joy their ſubiects made,
                  When they beheld their ſoueraigne Lord that had
               
               
                  
                  So long been abſent from them in the warre,
                  And what rich preſents they to him did make,
                  To ſhew the loue which they vnto him bare,
                  And that he did a new alleigeance take
                  Of them againe, and how that every one
                  Great honor ſhew'd vnto king Alphenone.
                  
               
               
                  And thank't him for the ſuccour he had lent
                  Vnto their Lord to helpe him in his need,
                  And how ere he out of that countrey went
                  A mariage was by thoſe two Kings agreed,
                  Betweene the daughter of king Alphenon,
                  
                  (Cald Naufica) and young Prince Thelamon
                  
               
               
                  
                     Uliſſes Son, whereby an aliance great
                  Betweene thoſe Kings perpetually was made.
                  It would be overlong for me to ſet
                  It downe to you, and be a meanes t'orelaid
                  My Booke with that, wherein I would be briefe
                  As Guido is, who toucheth but the chiefe
               
               
                  And ſpecialleſt matter, and goeth on
                  To ſhew how, when that mariage was agreed
                  And conſumated twixt them. Alphenon
                  
                  Tooke ſhipping and went home againe with ſpeed
                  Into his Land, and left Uliſſes ſtill,
                  In ioy with Queene Penelope, vntill
               
               
                  That fierce and cruell Atropos did bend
                  Herſelfe againſt them both, and did bereaue
                  Him of his life, and vnto him did ſend
                  A ſodaine death: vntill which time Ile leaue
                  To ſpeake of them, and for a little while
                  Change matter, and to Pyrrhus turne my ſtile.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  ¶ Here the Author ſheweth the ſtocke of Pyrrhus by lyneall diſcent, and telleth how his Grand-fathers name was Peleus, and his Grand-mother Thetides.
                  
               
               
                  AS Guido doth, ſo muſt I likewiſe tell
                  And ſhew at large what of Achilles Son
                  Young Pyrrhus did become, and what befell
                  To him when as the Troian warre was don.
                  Whoſe grand-fire as the ſtory telleth vs,
                  While he did liue, was cald King Peleus.
                  
               
               
                  His grand-mother nam'd Thetides, whoſe Son
                  
                     Achilles was, (that falſely loſt his life
                  Within the towne of Troy, when he had won
                  Great honor at that ſiege,) that tooke to wife
                  
                     Dardanica the faire, (who as I read
                  Was daughter to a King cald Lycomead.)
               
               
                  And on her his Son Pyrrhus did beget,
                  Whom ſome men vſe to call Neptolemus)
                  Her grand-ſire King Ataſtus was ſo great
                  An enemie vnto King Peleus,
                  
                  
                     Achilles, and to Pyrrhus, with the reſt
                  Of that ſame ſtocke, that he did ſore deteſt
               
               
                  And hate them all, and furiouſly when as
                  King Peleus ſtaid in Theſſaly alone,
                  And then without his Son Achilles was,
                  Who to the mighty ſiege of Troy was gone:
                  He entered by force into his land,
                  And finding none that could him there withſtād,
               
               
                  He tooke the ſame from him, and made him flie
                  Into a Caue with Thetides his wife:
                  And there he was compelled ſecretly
                  To hide himſelfe, whereas to ſaue his life,
                  Long after in great miſery he lay,
                  While cruell King Ataſtus every day
               
               
                  Sought all the meanes he could deviſe or find,
                  To bring his Nephew Pyrrhus to his end,
                  And therevpon determind in his mind
                  In ſecret wiſe his knights abroad to ſend,
                  To take and to intrap him on the way
                  As he returned home, and him to ſtay.
               
               
                  But Pyrrhus out of all the ſnares eſcapt,
                  Which he for him did lay by ſea and land,
                  And at the laſt as Fortune for him ſhapt,
                  (As no man can his Deſteny withſtand.)
                  With loſſe of many men and treaſure great,
                  Before the towne of Malaſus did get
               
               
                  Vnto the ſhoare: where he did vnderſtand,
                  Of Thetides and Peleus banniſhment
                  By violence out of their natiue land,
                  And how falſe King Ataſtus was ſo bent
                  Gainſt him, that he each hower and minit ſought
                  His death, & nere would ceaſe till he had brought
               
               
                  
                  The ſame to paſſe. Which when as Pyrrhus knew,
                  He purpoſed his malice to prevent
                  By ſome ſiniſter meanes, and to eſchew
                  The furie of Ataſtus gainſt him bent.
                  (Who as the ſtory ſaith, had two Sons more,
                  Th'one the name of Menalippus bore,
               
               
                  The other of them was Poliſtenes,
                  
                  Two Knights of great renowne, and valorous,
                  And one faire daughter named Thetides.)
                  While his old aged grandſire Peleus
                  
                  With Thetides his wife lay in a caue,
                  In great diſtreſſe their woefull liues to ſaue.
               
               
                  And yet cleane out of hope relieud to be,
                  Or comforted in that extremety,
                  Vnles it were by Pyrrhus meanes, when he
                  Returnd, for which he praid continually,
                  And curſt the time of his ſo long aboad.
                  Which heavy newes when Pyrrhus vnderſtood
               
               
                  At Malaſus, he ſtraight to ſea did hie,
                  With full intent if he did ſafely get
                  Vnto his natiue land of Theſſalie,
                  
                  He would falſe King Ataſtus purpoſe let,
                  And be reuengd on him ere it was long
                  For all the miſchiefe, cruelty, and wrong,
               
               
                  That he had done vnto King Peleus.
                  
                  But firſt before that to the Sea he went,
                  He cald to him two knights, one Crilippus,
                  
                  The other named Adraſtus, whom he ſent
                  To Theſſalie to heare and vnderſtand
                  Where King Ataſtus kept within that land,
               
               
                  And what gainſt him he did intend to do.
                  And that they might the better bring't to pas,
                  He gaue them letters, which he ſent vnto
                  One Aſſandrus a Lord, that ſometime was
                  A counſellor vnto King Peleus,
                  
                  And▪ Chamberlin: and when he had done thus,
               
               
                  He entred ſhip and would no longer tarry,
                  But through the ſeas did ſcowre and ſtaied not,
                  Although the wind and weather were contrary,
                  And ſtormes aroſe till at the laſt he got
                  To Theſſalie, where t'was his chance to land
                  (Hard by the place wherein the caue did ſtand.
               
               
                  Where Peleus and his wife themſelues did hide
                  Mong buſhes, briers, and thornes,) & all alone
                  Did walke vpon the ſand without a guide,
                  And when he had with heavy heart thus gone,
                  A little while, King Peleus comming out
                  His Cau
                        •
                      to take the aire, was in a doubt
               
               
                  To looſe his life, when as he ſaw a knight
                  There all alone, and ſore abaſhed ſtaid
                  Till he of him had taken better ſight,
                  And when he had beheld him well, diſmaid
                  In mind, he thought that he Achilles ſaw,
                  And therewithall did neerer to him draw.
               
               
                  (For he ſo like vnto Achilles was,
                  For viſage ſhape and perſonage, that none
                  Could know the one from th'other well,) ſo as
                  King Peleus to himſelfe did muſethereon:
                  And ſtraight with teares diſtilling downe his face
                  He ran his nephew Pyrrhus to embrace,
               
               
                  And being ſomewhat better comforted,
                  With ioyfull heart (though grieud) to him did tell,
                  How cruelly he had been baniſhed,
                  And forced in a caue long time to dwell
                  In miſery and woe, and nothing left
                  To ſuccour him, but all from him bereft,
               
               
                  With crowne and Kingdome, by the cruelty
                  And hatred of Ataſtus that had don
                  It cauſeles vnto him, whoſe tiranny
                  For want of ayd he could by no meanes ſhon,
                  Which Pyrrhus hauing heard and marking well,
                  Into ſo great an agony then fell,
               
               
                  That he ſtood ſtill and would not ſpeake a word,
                  And therewith in his heart exceeding wroth
                  To heare the cauſe, (ſo much the ſame abhord,)
                  That ſpeechles to his ſhips from thence he goeth,
                  (And would not make an anſwere therevnto,
                  Still ſtudying with himſelfe what he ſhould do.)
               
               
                  Till he was told how that the ſelfe ſame day
                  
                     Ataſtus with his Sons was ridden out
                  Into a wood not far of from that way
                  To hunt for deare, and that they were in doubt
                  To be aſſayld by him, which when he knew
                  He ſtayed not, but ſtraight himſelfe withdrew,
               
               
                  And putting of his clothes, apparelled
                  Himſelfe like one of poore and meane degree,
                  And girding on his ſword without all dread,
                  Went all alone into the wood to ſee
                  What Fortune or advantage he could find
                  Therein, to eaſe his ſad and troubled mind.
               
               
                  And as he went along from place to place,
                  Much like a man that ſeem'd to make great mone;
                  At laſt it was his chance to heare the chace,
                  And therewithall he ſlept aſide that none
                  Of them ſhould ſee nor find him where he ſtood:
                  And when he had a while been in the wood,
               
               
                  
                  It was Prince Menalippus chance to ride
                  That way with Prince Poliſtines his brother▪
                  
                  Where Pyrrhus, thē did ſtand▪ whom whē they ſpid,
                  They ſtaid their horſe, and both of them together▪
                  
                  With countnāce ſterne before they thēce wold pas,
                  Went vnto him, and askt him what he was,
               
               
                  And whence he came, and why ſo poorely clad
                  He wandred in that manner all alone,
                  Like one that neither ioy nor comfort had?
                  And he that ſeemd in heart to ſigh and groane,
                  With heavy cheare, and countenance full ſad,
                  Replied to them againe, and anſwere made,
               
               
                  That he by chance was caſt vpon that ſhore
                  By tempeſt, and how all his companie
                  Were drownd at ſea, and that he and no more
                  Eſcapt with life, but yet vnhappelie
                  Had loſt all that he had, and without joy
                  A Grecian borne that lately came from Troy,
                  
               
               
                  There wandred ſolitarilie, and praid
                  Them that they would vpon him then beſtow
                  Some money and apparell for to aid
                  Him in his need, that had been brought ſo low.
                  Who pitying his eſtate, did not denay
                  To do him good, but bad him there to ſtay,
               
               
                  That they might ſee what he could do: & whan
                  They had ſaid ſo, and turn'd their heads aſide,
                  Behold a mightie Hart before them ran,
                  Wherewith Prince Menalippus ſtraight did ride
                  In haſt to follow it, with ſpheare in hand,
                  And left his brother there who ſtill did ſtand
               
               
                  By Pyrrhus, talking with him all alone,
                  And ſeeming to be wearie, lighted there
                  Off from his horſes backe, which hauing done,
                  He laid him downe to reſt, and giving eare
                  Vnto the woefull moane that Pyrrhus made,
                  No feare of any hurt or treaſon had.
               
               
                  Where ſodainely ere he perceiu'd the blow,
                  He was by Pyrrhus thruſt into the hart,
                  From whence the blood in ſtreame began to flow,
                  And there he died, while Pyrrhus ſide-waies ſtart:
                  And left him lying groueling on the plaine,
                  Till Menalippus came to him againe,
               
               
                  Where while with weeping eies and colour wan
                  To looke vpon his brothers corps he ſtood,
                  Fierce Pyrrhus in great furie to him ran
                  And with a mind that thurſteth after blood:
                  Straight with his ſword his life from him bereft,
                  And by his brother dying there him left.
               
               
                  And ſo they were vnfortunatelie ſlaiue
                  By Pyrrhus, who when he had done the ſame,
                  Withdrew himſelfe out of that place againe,
                  And as he went he ſaw a Knight that came
                  Vnto him wards, of whom he did enquire
                  His name, and what the reaſon was that there
               
               
                  He road alone ſo farre out of the way,
                  Who anſwered his name was Cineras,
                  
                  Great King Ataſtus knight, who that ſame day
                  Did hunt within the wood, and that he was
                  Not far from thence, whom Pyrrhus without 
                        ••
                     ord
                  Repli
                        •
                     d to him againe, ſmot with his ſword▪
                  
               
               
                  And kild him in that place, and then forſooke
                  The Forreſt, and directly went his way
                  Vnto his ſhips (with fierce and furious looke)
                  Where he put of his clothes, and did array
                  Himſelfe in purple velvet like a king,
                  And to the Forreſt backe againe did fling.
               
               
                  Where ſodainely while he walkt too & fro,
                  He met with king Ataſtus all alone,
                  Who wondring much to ſee him clothed ſo,
                  Askt what he was, & why there making mone
                  He wandered ſo ſolitarilie?
                  T'whom Pyrrhus anſwere made, and for replie
               
               
                  Said full of griefe and woe I doe confeſſe
                  My ſelfe to be, and therefore wandering
                  Alone I go to thinke on the diſtreſſe
                  That happened hath to Priamus the King,
                  Whoſe Son I was, and by the fall of Troy
                  
                  Bereft of all my honor, wealth, and joy.
               
               
                  I now am made a priſoner gainſt my will
                  To Pyrrhus, vnto whom I promiſe made
                  To be his priſoner true, and to fulfill
                  His heſt in every thing, and therefore ſad
                  And heavilie I walke, and ſo ſaid he,
                  I haue you told how it now ſtands with me.
               
               
                  Which when he had ſo ſaid vnto the King,
                  
                     Ataſtus friendly ſpake to him againe,
                  And queſtioned with him of many a thing,
                  And mongſt the reſt where Pyrrhus did remaine
                  In Theſſalie, and what he went about?
                  And Pyrrhus ſaid, to put you out of doubt,
               
               
                  He doth as now continue in a caue
                  Not farre from hence, and there doth cloſely ſtay
                  In mightie feare and dread, his life to ſaue,
                  And pointed to the caue where Peleus lay:
                  The which he did to make him looke about,
                  While he in furious wiſe his ſword drew out,
               
               
                  
                  Intending there Ataſtus to haue ſlaine,
                  But as he thought to giue the fatall blow
                  Queene Thetides came running to the plaine,
                  And weeping at his feet her ſelfe did throw,
                  And holding faſt his ſword, did make him ſtay
                  His hand, and thus vnto him ſhe did ſay,
               
               
                  Let it ſuffice good nephew thou haſt don,
                  And from ſo ſore revenge thy ſelfe refraine,
                  (Sith gainſt things paſt remedy there is none,)
                  Haſt thou not kild (ſaid ſhe) my brethren twaine,
                  And wilt thou without mercy take away
                  My aged fathers life? I pray thee ſtay
               
               
                  Thy cruell ſword, and now no more blood ſhed,
                  (Remembring that the blood thou ſpilſt is thine,)
                  And pittie take vpon thy kindered,
                  From whom thou comſt by right paternall lin
                        •
                     
                  
                  For all men cruell Paraſites contemne,
                  And for vnnaturall murtherers▪ condemne.
               
               
                  The which when Pyrrhus heard like Tyger wroth,
                  He ſaid, whoſoere againſt the ſame will ſtand,
                  Deſpight of him whether he be leefe or loth,
                  He ſhall be ſlaine at this time by my hand:
                  For hath he not (ſaid he) by force and might
                  Bereft my grand-ſire Peleus of his right.
               
               
                  Whoſe Queene you are, and he your Lord & king,
                  Whoſe part you ought to take, and not to ſtay
                  My hand from doing of ſo iuſt a thing,
                  And therefore without faile I will him ſlay:
                  For nought there is that now his life ſhall ſaue
                  Vnleſſe my grand-ſire Peleus doth it craue.
               
               
                  And therewith aged Peleus did begin
                  To creepe out of the caue, and when he ſaw
                  What danger King Ataſtus then was in,
                  He praid his Nephew Pyrrhus to withdraw
                  His hand, and not to kill him in that place,
                  But rather to reſpect his woefull caſe.
               
               
                  And thinke ſayd he vpon the extreame ſmart
                  Of him, that weeping ſore with cruell paine
                  Before thee ſtands, with cold and dying hart,
                  To ſee his Sons here lie before him ſlaine
                  By thee, the which (ſaid he) if thou be wiſe,
                  I pray thee at this time let it ſuffice;
               
               
                  And thinke thy ſelfe enough revengd to bee
                  On him, if thou conſidereſt well thereon,
                  And ſith he doth ſubmit himſelfe to thee,
                  I pray thee for my ſake let him alone
                  And ſpare his life, that ready is to die
                  For griefe, which thou ſhalt not to me denie▪
                  
               
               
                  The which when Pyrrhus heard he did refr
                        ••
                     n
                        •
                     
                  
                  From killing him▪ as P
                           •
                        le
                           ••
                        s 
                     
                        •
                     ade 
                        ••
                     queſt,
                  And when he had put vp his ſw
                        •••
                      
                     
                        •
                     gain
                        •
                     ,
                  Perceaving that he had done for the haſt:
                  While theſe two aged kings together were,
                  He made accord betweene them both, 
                        ••
                      there
               
               
                  They did agree on either ſide to make
                  Diviſion of the land of Theſſalie,
                  
                  And each of them the halſe thereof to take,
                  And of the ſame to haue the ſoveraignty:
                  And never more to ſtriue nor to contend
                  For it againe, till they their liue
                        •
                      ſhould end.
               
               
                  And while they two and Pyrrhus there alone
                  Within the wood did ſtand and no man by,
                  
                     Ataſtus in this wiſe to ſpeake begon▪
                  
                  And ſayd, my Lords I can it not deny.
                  (As both of you, as well as I, do know)
                  That crooked age hath broght me down ſo low,
               
               
                  That nature in me now begins to drie,
                  And all my wits and ſences ſo decay,
                  Whereby I feele ſuch inſufficiency
                  Within my ſelfe, that I muſt truely ſay,
                  That I am farre vnfit to take the paine,
                  Within the land of Theſſalie to raigne.
               
               
                  For ſeeing that both of my ſons are dead,
                  And I am left alone without an heire,
                  And haue no children living to ſucceed
                  Me in my throane, I wholly do deſpaire
                  Of worldly ioy and all felicity,
                  For wavring fortunes mutability▪
                  
               
               
                  Hath taught me (as I muſt of force confeſſe)
                  That no man doth in certaine ſtate abide,
                  And that there is no truſt nor ſtableneſſe
                  In worldly ioyes: and thereforeile provide
                  While time doth ſerue, that ſtrife there ſhall be none
                  For Thaſſalie, when I am dead and gone.
               
               
                  Forgainſt the will of God ile not repine)
                  And to that end the Scepter of thi
                        •
                      land,
                  And regall throane for my part I reſigne,
                  And giue into my Nephew Pyrrhus hand:
                  And with that work his faith and troth he g
                        ••
                     e▪
                  
                  That he poſſeſſion ſtraight therof ſhould 
                        ••••
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               
                  In preſence of his daughter Thetides.
                  
                  And Pyrrhus that no other likewiſe ment,
                  Said, ſith that is doth king Ataſt
                           ••
                        
                      pleaſe
                  Here to reſigne hi
                        •
                      part, I am concour
                  To do the like, affirming that long ſince,
                  It ever was his purpoſe and pretence,
               
               
                  
                  And th'onely worldly ioy he had, to leaue
                  His Crowne vnto his Nephew, whenſoere
                  Death with his dart ſhould him of life bereaue,
                  As lawfull heire vnto the ſame: and there
                  In preſence of Ataſtus, and his wife,
                  To Pyrrhus ſaid, to end all warre and ſtrife
               
               
                  Betweene vs twaine, I will likewiſe reſigne
                  My Scepter, Sword, and Crowne into thy hand,
                  As fully and as whole as ere 'twas mine,
                  And makethee Lord of my part in this land,
                  Which freely vnto thee I now do giue,
                  To be thine owne as long as thou ſhalt liue.
               
               
                  Which having ſaith and this agreement made
                  Betweene the kings, as you haue vnderſtood,
                  
                     Ataſtus knights, who in the meane time had
                  Diſperſt themſelues abroad within the wood,
                  Came thither, and were willed by their Lord,
                  To ſweare and vow to hold & keepe th'accord
               
               
                  Betweene them made, whereto they gaue conſent.
                  And ſo together in a company,
                  Each for his part well pleaſed and content,
                  They road vnto the towne of Theſſalie:
                  Where king Ataſtus cald a Parliament,
                  And therein by expreſſe Commandement,
               
               
                  Caus'd all his ſubiects whatſoere they were,
                  (Eſpecially his whole Nobility)
                  In open Court to take their oaths, and ſweare
                  To yeeld vnto the ſoveraignety
                  Of Pyrrhus: and with full and free accord,
                  T'acknowledge him to be their King & Lord
               
               
                  Of Theſſalie, and none but he alone;
                  At which time Pel
                           •••
                        
                      likewiſe did the ſame.
                  Which being thus on either ſide ſo done,
                  By ſound of trump the Heralds did proclaime
                  King Pyrrhus in each ſtreet of Theſſalie:
                  
                  And afterward with great ſolemnity,
               
               
                  They crownd him king of all that land, & made
                  Such triumph at his Coronation,
                  And alſo ſuch a royall banquet had,
                  That if I ſhould thereof make mention,
                  It were too much, and I muſt it forbeare,
                  Becauſe mine Author writes not thereof here.
               
               
                  But briefly tels, that Pyrrhus by his might
                  Encreaſed much the Land of Theſſalie,
                  
                  And raign'd long there with equitie and right▪
                  
                  And no more thereof ſpeaketh preſently,
                  But vnto other matter turnes his ſtile,
                  And ſhews how king Idumeus dīd the while
               
               
                  In Creet, where he long time had raigned king,
                  And after him his ſonne Prince Merryone
                  
                  Succeeded, who vntimely death did bring
                  Vnto his end: and children hauing none,
                  His brother Prince Leorica obtaind
                  The Crown of Creet, & therin long time raignd.
               
               
                  And while in Creet this change of Princes fell,
                  
                     Ataſtus by conſent of Pyrrhus, made
                  A rich and ſumptuous tombe which did excell
                  For workmanſhip, wherein (when as he had
                  According to his mind full finiſhed
                  All that thereto belong'd) he buried
               
               
                  His ſons which by king Pyrrhus had been ſlaine
                  Within the wood. And leaving him doth ſhow,
                  How while that Pyrrhus proſperouſly did raigne
                  In Theſſalie, and did in wealth oreflow:
                  He was provoked want only to luſt,
                  For that which by Gods law is held vniuſt,
               
               
                  And fell in loue with faire Queene Hermion,
                  
                  
                     Horeſtus wife, and had ſo great deſire
                  To her, that he did wholly thinke thereon:
                  Whereby his heart was ſet on ſuch a fire
                  Of luſt, that he by no meanes could content
                  His mind, till he vnto Methena went.
               
               
                  And there his purpoſe brought ſo well about,
                  That watching time and oportunity,
                  When Horeſtus her husband was gone out,
                  He raviſht her, and after ſecretly
                  Tooke her away and held her as his wife,
                  And long with her liu'd an adulterous life.
               
               
                  (For which Horeſtus hated him ſo ſore
                  That he ſought all the meanes he could deviſe
                  Or find, to be reveng'd on him therefore,
                  But held his peace (as being very wiſe)
                  And for a little while ſuſtaind that wrong,
                  As knowing well that Pyrrhus was too ſtrong
               
               
                  For him to deale withall, t'revenge the ſame
                  At home within his land. Who alſo made
                  
                     Andromecha (Prince Hectors wife, that came
                  With him from Troy) his Concubine, and had
                  A child by her, who by his Grandſiers name
                  
                     Achillides was cald, and with the ſame
               
               
                  She nouriſhed Prince Hectors eldeſt ſonne
                  
                     Laomedon,) who Pyrrhus being ſlaine,
                  And left no child to be his heire, (but one
                  A baſtard borne) his kingdome did obtaine:
                  By gift of yong Achillides his brother,
                  Whome Pyrrhus did beget vpon his mother.)
               
               
                  
                  Which women being both of high eſtate,
                  And living in great pleaſure and delight,
                  Could not content themſelues, but ſo did hate
                  Each other, that Queene Hermion in deſpight
                  And iealouſie, that Pyrrhus loved better
                  Her Feer then he did her, did ſend a letter
               
               
                  To Menalus her father, t'whome ſhe wrot,
                  That notwithſtanding her ſo great degree,
                  She well perceau'd that Pyrrhus lou'd her not,
                  But favored more Andromecha then ſhe:
                  Deſiring him with ſpeed to come to kill
                  Her and her ſonne, who granted to her will.
               
               
                  And in great haſt went vnto Theſſalie,
                  
                  To be reveng'd on them that never had
                  Offended him, but yet his cruelty
                  Could not ſo farre extend, but he was made
                  To leaue the ſame, by thoſe that did withſtand
                  Him in the towne, and tooke her out his hand,
               
               
                  And did abhorre ſuch inhumanity,
                  (Eſpecially in him that was a king)
                  Vnto a woman done, which certainly
                  In my conceit is ſuch a hainous thing:
                  That it doth make me bluſh for very ſhame,
                  That I ſhould be compeld to tell the ſame.
               
               
                  But you muſt vnderſtand that this was done,
                  When Pyrrhus was from home & gone away,
                  For he that time on pilgrimage was gone
                  To Delos, there to ſacrifice and pray
                  Devoutly for his fathers ſoule vnto
                  
                     Apollo, and ſuch other things to do,
               
               
                  As he had vowd and promiſt to fulfill,
                  For ioy of that revenge that had been made
                  At Troy, on thoſe that did his father kill,
                  And for that great good fortune that they had,
                  To triumph ore his Troyan enemy.
                  Which vantage when Horeſtus did eſpy,
               
               
                  Who ſtill laid watch for him both day & night,
                  He did no time nor no occaſion let,
                  But ſtraight to Delos went with many a knight,
                  And on him there ſo furiouſly did ſet,
                  That Pyrrhus was not able to withſtand
                  
                     Horeſtus, but was ſlaine there by his hand,
               
               
                  And all that were with him in company▪
                  
                  (And ſo king Pyrrhus dy'd and loſt his life,
                  For iuſt reward of his adultery,
                  And foule abuſe done to Horeſtus wife.
                  And let all thoſe that vſe to do the like
                  Remember this, & know that God will ſtrike
               
               
                  Them likewiſe when they little thinke thereon.)
                  Whoſe body was in Delos Temple layd,
                  Within a coſtly Marble tombe, which done,
                  
                     Horeſtus there no longer time delayd,
                  But ſtraight when as his enemy was ſlaine,
                  He went and got his wife by force againe
               
               
                  Out of the towne of Theſſalie, whereas
                  He found not one that durſt againſt him ſtand,
                  Such feare & griefe amongſt them then there was,
                  When they of Pyrrhus death did vnderſtand:
                  And that to rule and governe them was none
                  Then left, but yong Achillides his ſonne,
               
               
                  A child as then not fully three months old,
                  Whoſe yong and tender age was not to take
                  So great a charge in hand, and yet they would
                  Not put him from't, but for his fathers ſake
                  They were content that he ore them ſhold raigne.
                  But when he did to lawfull yeares attaine,
               
               
                  He did reſigne his crowne and all his right
                  In Theſſalie vnto Laomedon,
                  
                  His brother by the mothers ſide (a knight
                  Of worthy Troyan blood, Prince Hectors ſon,
                  Begotten on his wife Andromecha)
                  (Protector while he liu'd of Phrigia.)
               
               
                  And made him king & Soveraigne of that land,
                  Deſpight of all that durſt the ſame denie.
                  Who when he had the Crowne & chiefe command
                  Of all the puiſſant Realme of Theſſalie:
                  
                  He let the Troyan captiues all go free,
                  Where as they liſt at their owne liberty,
               
               
                  And no exception made of any one,
                  But freed them of all ranſome whatſoere
                  They were to pay: and when he had ſo done,
                  And ſet all things in peace and quiet there,
                  And much encreaſt the bounds of Theſſalie,
                  
                  He raign'd long there in great proſperity.
               
               
                  But of the acts of king Laomedon,
                  
                  Or of king Pyrrhus and his kindered,
                  Ile ceaſe to ſpeake as now, becauſe thereon
                  Mine Author writes no more that I can read:
                  Who briefly by the way ſomewhat doth ſhow,
                  (But to what purpoſe well I do not know)
               
               
                  Of Menons wife (whome fierce Achilles ſlew,
                  Becauſe when he Prince Troyelus had kild,
                  And at his horſes taile his body drew,
                  He valiantly withſtood him in the field,
                  And made him leaue his body, & by force
                  Sore wounded, beat him down off frō his horſe.)
               
               
                  
                  Whoſe body was entomb'd by Priamus
                  
                  In Troy, within a little Temple, where
                  It lay cloſe by the Tombe of Troyelus,
                  
                  And after did ſtand therein many a yeare.
                  Who ſaith, that long time after ſhe was dead,
                  And in her natiue Country buried,
               
               
                  Did ſodainly at Menons Tombe appeare,
                  (In ſhape and forme like to an Angell bright,
                  Environed with ſtars that ſhone moſt cleare,
                  And round about the place caſt ſuch a light,
                  That no man could behold her ſtedfaſtly,
                  Her countenance did ſhine ſo heavenly.)
               
               
                  Deſcending from the skies celeſtiall,
                  In ſight of many men, apparelled
                  Divinely, and in preſence of them all,
                  Did make her husbands tombe be opened:
                  And out of it did take his bones, and beare
                  Them (in a cheſt of gold which ſhe had there
               
               
                  Of purpoſe brought downe with her) cleane from thence,
                  And on a ſodaine vaniſhed away,
                  And never was ſeen there before nor ſince.
                  Which did the ſtanders by ſo much diſmay,
                  That at the ſight thereof they were affraid,
                  And every one his iudgement thereof ſaid,
               
               
                  Some thinking't was a Goddeſſe, others, ſome
                  Celeſtiall power deſcended from the skie,
                  Or elſe the ſoule of Menon that did come,
                  To beare his bones vp to the Deitie:
                  But what it was I know not, neither will
                  Preſume to iudge of that is paſt my skill,
               
               
                  As being loath to climbe aboue my reach.
                  And therefore of the ſame ile ſpeake no more,
                  But turne againe whereas I made a breach,
                  When of Vliſſes life I ſpake before:
                  And tell you of his hard and fatall end,
                  When Atropas loath longer time to ſpend
               
               
                  In ſpinning of his threed of life, agreed
                  With Parchas fell her office l'execute,
                  Who having preordaind the ſame, with ſpeed
                  Tooke out her ſheares and it in ſunder cut.
                  Defend thy ſelfe therefore Uliſſes now,
                  Without all feare to ſhun the fatall blow,
               
               
                  Which by thy ſons ſharp ſword thou ſhalt receaue.
                  For I am now prepard, and do intend
                  To ſharpe my pen once more (before I leaue
                  My worke long ſince begun) to write thy end:
                  And with the ſame my Books full period make,
                  For that my hand with wearineſſe doth ſhake.
               
               
                  But yet ere that I thereof make an end,
                  I muſt of force to make my Booke compleat,
                  A little longer time about thee ſpend,
                  And of thy fatall fate and death entreat:
                  Which vnto thee did happen by the dart
                  Of him whom thou didſt loue with all thy hart.
               
               
                  But firſt I muſt deſire the ſleepy God,
                  (By Poets Morpheus cald, who by the might
                  And power ſupreame of his inchanting rod,
                  Doth rule mens minds and fanſies in the night:
                  And makes men dreame & divers viſions ſee,
                  Which many times prognoſtications bee,
               
               
                  And warnings vnto men of future good
                  Or ill, that vnto them ſhall after hap,
                  The which cannot be any way withſtood,
                  For no man may Gods iuſt decree eſcape.)
                  To rule and guide my wit and pen as now,
                  That I to you Uliſſes dreame may ſhow.
               
               
                  The which he had not long before he dyed,
                  Wherewith by ſignes that true and certaine were,
                  He was forewarnd and fully certified,
                  His end by vnexpected death drew nere:
                  Who as he in his bed faſt ſleeping lay,
                  About the time when Cocks crow fore tis day;
               
               
                  He thought there did before him then appeare
                  A woman of ſo heavenly feature,
                  That ſhe did ſhow as ſhe an Angell were,
                  And not to be an earthly creature:
                  Who was ſo faire and beautifull of face,
                  That ſhe did ſeeme t'jlluminate the place
               
               
                  Wherein ſhe was, and therewithall her eyes
                  Did ſhine as cleare and bright as any ſtarre,
                  And able were t'intrap, and to ſurpriſe
                  Their hearts that lookt vpon her neere or farre:
                  And no defence againſt them could be made,
                  So exquiſite a looke and face ſhe had.
               
               
                  Whom when Uliſſes did perceaue, he was
                  So much amaz'd to ſee her, that the more
                  He lookt on her he liked her, ſo as
                  He did faſt ſleeping lye, he ſighed fore:
                  And (as he thought) put forth his hands to take
                  Her in his arms, but ſhe frō him ſhruncke backe:
               
               
                  And ſtill the more his eyes on her he caſt,
                  The farther ſhe from him did ſeeme to flie,
                  As if ſhe would haue ſhund him, till at laſt
                  (When ſhe perceiu'd his importunitie)
                  She ſpake to him, & askt him what he would
                  With her, and why he did her ſo behold.
               
               
                  
                  In truth (ſaid he) faire Lady I confeſſe,
                  That I am ſo much blinded in my ſight,
                  That I cannot perceaue nor truely geſſe
                  By outwards ſignes, if I ſhould ſpeake aright,
                  Whether that your ſhape divine or earthly be,
                  So excellent it ſeemeth vnto me.
               
               
                  But this I dare affrme and boldly ſay,
                  That at this time my life & death doth ſtand,
                  And are at your devotion, if I may
                  Craue ſo much grace & favor at your hand,
                  (Preſuming not thereon by any right)
                  To pitty me that am your faithfull knight,
               
               
                  And ſo devoted vnto you, that ſure
                  If I do not my mind as now fulfill,
                  And ſo much favour at your hands procure,
                  As this night for to grant me your good will
                  To lie with me, there is no remedie,
                  But for your ſake of force I needs muſt die.
               
               
                  And thus twixt hope and feare I haue you told
                  My mind, (ſaid he) wherewith ſhe ſtaid awhile,
                  And did him with a countnance ſad behold;
                  Yet at the laſt vpon him gan to ſmile,
                  And ſaid, the loue which you to me do beare,
                  Will be both our deſtructions I do feare,
               
               
                  It is ſo doubtfull and ſo dangerous,
                  That without doubt (belieue it certamly)
                  If we together take our pleaſure thus,
                  One or elſe both of vs ſhall ſurely die,
                  For that the end thereof can be no other,
                  If we as you deſire, ſhould lie together.
               
               
                  Which ſaid, Uliſſes looking on her ſtill,
                  And therewithall approaching ſomewhat neere
                  Vnto her, to behold her at his will,
                  (Who in his mind did ſhew ſo bright and cleare)
                  He ſaw that in her hand a ſpeare ſhe held,
                  Which on it had a flag, whereof the field
               
               
                  Was blew, and in the midſt a Crowne of gold,
                  With fiſhes white environd round about,
                  Which while he did moſt earneſtly behold,
                  She did begin to leaue him and go out
                  Whereas ſhe was, but ere ſhe left the place,
                  She ſtaid a little while, and turnd her face
               
               
                  To him, and ſaid, I tell you true and plaine,
                  That after this we never more ſhall ſee
                  One th'other, but for parting of vs twaine,
                  This greeting ſaid, our laſt farewell ſhall bee:
                  And there withall her leaue of him ſhe tooke,
                  Aud after that he ſodainly awooke.
               
               
                  And did begin t'imagine curiouſly,
                  And muſe vnto himſelfe within his mind,
                  What that ſtrange dreame he had might ſignifie.
                  But when he could the ſame by no means find,
                  (As being that he did not vnderſtand)
                  He ſent for all th'Inchanters in the Land,
               
               
                  And ſuch as could the depth and meaning ſhow,
                  Of dreames that vſe to happen vnto men
                  When they do ſleepe, that he of them might know
                  The expoſition of his dreame. And when
                  They vnderſtood the ſame, they did agree
                  All in one point, and told him plaine that hee
               
               
                  Should ſhortly be bereft of life by one
                  That neereſt of his kindred was, and that
                  T'avoid it way nor meanes for him was none:
                  Which when he heard he woondred much thereat,
                  And did begin to looke with viſage pale.
                  But when he ſaw it could him not preuaile,
               
               
                  To grieue, his head was fild with fantaſies
                  And deepe conceits, t'imagine and to ſee
                  If he could find, or ſhape a remedie,
                  By any meanes to ſhun that would not bee:
                  But yet for all his policie and wit,
                  He could not reach vnto the depth of it.
               
               
                  For thinking that he would the ſame prevent,
                  De did ſuppoſe that no man but his ſon
                  Was he that ſhould it do, and therefore ſent
                  With all the ſpeed he could for Thelamon,
                  
                  And caſt him into priſon, ſo to ſhun
                  That which the Fates decreed ſhould be dun.
               
               
                  Remembring not the ſpeare with ſteeled head,
                  Nor yet the flag thereon with azure fild,
                  With fiſhes on't which in the ſeas do feed,
                  Nor Circes faire who in her hand it held:
                  (Which ſignifi'd nought but hoſtility,)
                  Nor yet the Crowne and regall dignity
               
               
                  Of one that raign'd within an Iſle, that ſtands
                  In middeſt of the ſea, that ſhould be hee,
                  Who gainſt his will ſhould ſlay him with his hands,
                  And execute thereby the iuſt decree
                  Of God, the which Uliſſes thought not on;
                  But onely did ſuſpect Prince Thelaemon,
                  
               
               
                  Whom he then held cloſe priſner in a tower.
                  And to prevent all other meanes what s'ere,
                  He never ceaſt to muſe thereon each hower:
                  And at the laſt grew thereof in ſuch feare,
                  That he did cauſe a Caſtle to be made,
                  And built of Marble ſtone, the which he had
               
               
                  
                  Deviſed in ſuch ſort, that there was none
                  Like vnto it in all the world throughout
                  For ſtrength, and had no gates in it but one
                  To enter in the ſame, and round about,
                  A ditch moſt deepe and broad on every ſide,
                  Did compaſſe it. Wherein he did abide,
               
               
                  And cloſely kept himſelfe from ſight of all
                  The world, but thoſe which on him did attend,
                  And ever held a watch vpon the wall,
                  Both day and night moſt ſtrictly, to the end
                  That no man ſhould ſo hardy be to venter,
                  Without his leaue into the ſame to enter,
               
               
                  Vnleſſe it were thoſe that therein did lie.
                  Now as the ſtorie vnto vs doth tell,
                  
                     Uliſſes had a Sonne begotten by
                  Queene Circes, who in valor did excell
                  So much, that he was comp'rable to none
                  In all that land, whoſe name was Thelagon.
                  
               
               
                  Borne in an jſle among the furious rage
                  Of foming ſeas that compaſt it about,
                  Who at that time attained had to th'age
                  Of twenty fiue yeares old: who ſtood in doubt
                  What man did him beget, or who ſhould be
                  His father, whome he longed much to ſee.
               
               
                  And having great deſire the ſame to know,
                  He fell before his mother on his knee,
                  And did intreat her earneſtly to ſhow
                  The truth to him, who might his father bee,
                  And what he was, & where he then did dwell:
                  But ſhe long time by no meanes would it tell,
               
               
                  But put him off, and fed him with delay,
                  Till when ſhe ſaw ſhe could not be at reſt
                  For him, that did torment her every day,
                  And would not ceaſe till he had his requeſt:
                  She ſhewd him that Vliſſes was his ſire,
                  And where he dwelt, who with moſt great deſire
               
               
                  To ſee him, tooke his leaue of her with ſpeed,
                  And told her that he ſtraight frō thence would go:
                  But when the Queene perceau'd, he had decreed
                  To go to ſeeke Vliſſes, and that no
                  Perſwaſion in the world could him withhold
                  From doing it, her heart it waxed cold,
               
               
                  And in her breaſt ſhe felt exceeding paine.
                  And when ſhe ſaw he would by no meanes ſtay,
                  She prayed him to come with ſpeed againe
                  Home vnto her. And ſo the ſelfe ſame day
                  He put to ſea, and ſaild ſo long, till he
                  He arriued where he did deſire to be.
               
               
                  And when he was within Achaia land,
                  He never ceaſt to ride from place to place,
                  And reſted not till he did vnderſtand
                  Where king Vliſſes royall Pallace was:
                  Which when he knew he made no more aboad,
                  But ſpeedily vnto the Court he road.
               
               
                  Whereas the king within his Caſtle ſtayd,
                  And early on a Munday morning came
                  Vnto the gate and draw-bridge, where he prayd
                  The Porter, who at that time kept the fame,
                  To giue him leaue a word or two to ſpeake
                  Vnto the king, who to him gaue a cheake,
               
               
                  And churliſhly did thruſt him from the gate▪
                  
                  And proudly ſaid he ſhould not enter in,
                  And with ſome other ſpeeches told him that
                  He muſt be gone: whereat he did begin
                  To be in ſuch a rage, that there with all
                  He did vpon the Porter fiercely fall,
               
               
                  And furiouſly did take him by the beard,
                  And gaue him ſuch a blow, that there with all
                  He fell dead on the bridge, which when they heard
                  That were within, they iſſued and did fall
                  On him, but he ſo hotely them withſtood,
                  And fought with ſuch a fierce & ſurious mood,
               
               
                  That many of them cleane ore the bridge he caſt,
                  And when as more vpon him iſſued forth,
                  And on all ſides began t'aſſaile him faſt,
                  He did begin to be exceeding wroth,
                  And with his ſword about him made ſuch way,
                  That he therewith did fifteene of them ſlay.
               
               
                  And fought ſo long that he was out of breath,
                  And ſcarce could hold himſelfe vpright, ſo that
                  Sore wounded he expected nought but death,
                  Wherewith Vliſſes came vnto the gate:
                  And when vpon the bridge he did eſpie
                  His men on heaps dead on the ſame to lie;
               
               
                  Sore mou'd thereat, he tooke a dart in hand,
                  And there with all in furious wiſe did throw
                  At Thelagon, who then did leaning ſtand
                  Vpon his ſword, but it did light too low,
                  And hurt him not at all: but Thelagon
                  
                  Straight ſtooped down, & laying hands theron,
               
               
                  Did throw it at Vliſſes in great haſt,
                  And there with all did ſtrike him ſuch a blow
                  Into the breaſt, that through his ribs it paſt,
                  And gaue him his deaths wound: but did not know
                  That't was the king, nor that he ſo had ſlaine
                  His father deare, who then could not ſuſtaine
               
               
                  
                  Himſelfe vpright, but to the ground did ſlide,
                  With pale and deadly face, and ſo he lay
                  Amongſt his men that ſtood on either ſide,
                  And buſie were to beare him thence away,
                  Suppoſing that he verily was dead:
                  But ſodainly he lifted vp his head,
               
               
                  And having ſtill a perfect memory,
                  He cald to mind the viſion he did ſee,
                  And how that he was told aſſuredly,
                  That one of his ner'ſt kinſmen ſhould be hee
                  That with a dart, of life ſhould him bereaue,
                  And for becauſe 
                        ••
                      could not well conceaue
               
               
                  Who it ſhould be; He bad his men to bring
                  The young man that before the gate then ſtood
                  With ſpeed to him, without once offering
                  To wrong him for ſo ſheading of their blood.
                  And when that he was brought into the place
                  Whereas he lay, he look't him in the face:
               
               
                  And marking well his countenance, began
                  To aske him for what cauſe he did come thither,
                  And what occaſion moved him as than
                  T'aſſaile his guard, that he and they together
                  Had fought, and he had ſlaine them ſo, whereby
                  Himſelfe ſore wounded was, and like to die.
               
               
                  To whom with courage bold he ſpake, and ſayd,
                  The onely cauſe why I came hither was
                  To ſee the King, but by the Porter ſtaid,
                  (Whom I entreated courteouſly to pas)
                  And churliſhly put backe, with words moſt vile:
                  I ſeeing that he did me ſo revile,
               
               
                  Much grieued that he vſd me in that ſort,
                  Did kill him with a blow on th'eare: which whan
                  The guard did ſee (that watch held in the fort,)
                  They iſſued, and together on me ran:
                  And I compeld to fight (though gainſt my will)
                  In my defence, fifteene of them did kill.
               
               
                  Whereby I am thus wounded as you ſee,
                  And like to looſe my life, as well as they
                  That ſought (if that they could) t'haue killed me.
                  And this (if theſe here preſent truth will ſay)
                  The reaſon was we fought, and they were kild
                  By me, which when Uliſſes heard, he wild
               
               
                  Him to declare where he was borne, and what
                  His Father was, and where he then did dwell?
                  Who anſwered the King, and told him that
                  He would the truth thereof vnto him tell:
                  And ſaid, he was borne in an Iſle that ſtood
                  Within the ſea, of high and Princely blood,
               
               
                  And that he to his mother had a Queene
                  Cald Circes, who both f
                        •
                     r and n
                        •••
                      was knowne,
                  And how he had his Father neuer 
                        ••
                     erio,
                  But ſaid, that by his mother he was ſhowne
                  That he was gotten by a king, who as
                  He did returne from Troy did chance to pas
               
               
                  Along that way, and as ſhe told to me
                  (Said he) his name Vliſſes was. Whom I
                  Did long, and ſuch deſire had to ſee.
                  That taking ſhip I ſet ſayle preſently,
                  And in ſhort ſpace I came into this land,
                  Where I was told and given to vnderſtand,
               
               
                  That I ſhould find my Father in this place;
                  But now I ſee my labour is in vaine,
                  And feare that I ſhall never ſee his face:
                  And therefore ſith I haue tane ſo much paine,
                  And cannot vnto my deſire attaine,
                  I will if that I liue returne againe
               
               
                  Into my natiue ſoylo, and ſeeke no more
                  With danger of my life, for that which I
                  So long to find: and yet it grieues me fore
                  T'haue tane ſuch paines and cannot ſatisfie
                  My mind. This is all that I can you ſhow
                  (Said he) of that which you deſire to know.
               
               
                  Whereby Vliſſes (ſighing ſore when as
                  He had heard him that anſwere to him make)
                  Perceiving he his Son by Circes was,
                  With griefe began to tremble and to quake.
                  And ſheading ſtore of blood out of his wound,
                  He fainted, and did full into a ſwound.
               
               
                  And with a countnance heavy, dead, and pale,
                  Said, now I ſee my woefull Deſtiny
                  Fulfilled is, for by this young mans 
                        •
                     ale,
                  I know and find there is no remedy
                  For me, and that the time is now too l
                        ••
                     e
                  To ſtrine againſt my hard and cu
                        •
                     ſ
                        ••
                      Fa
                        •
                     e.
               
               
                  For now my Son which here by me doth ſtand
                  Hath given me
                        ••
                     y death, and made an end
                  Of his old Fathers life, and with his hand
                  Hath finiſhe that, whereto my dreame did tend.
                  Which words pronounſt, young Thelagon began
                  With countnance ſad, and face 
                        •
                     oth pale & wan,
               
               
                  To ſigh, when as he knew and vnderſtood
                  That gainſt the lawes of nature he had flame
                  His Father, and ſo fiercely ſhed his blood,
                  That him begot, and felt ſuch grieuous paine
                  In heart, that he did preſently ſincke downe,
                  And fore them all did fall into a ſwone.
               
               
                  
                  And comming to himſelfe, when he had torne
                  His clothes, and puld his haire off from his head:
                  He ſaid, alas, that ever I was borne,
                  That by my hands my Father ſhould be dead.
                  Curſt be my hard and woefull Deſtiny,
                  And fortune fell the which I could not flie.
               
               
                  Curſt be the hand that hath been ſo impure,
                  Whereby this wicked deed by me is don.
                  Accurſt be I of every creature,
                  Accurſed be my conſtellation.
                  And curſed be and moſt vnfortunate
                  The hower wherein my father me begat.
               
               
                  Oh would to God for this vnhappy deed
                  T'excuſe his death, I might for my reward
                  In preſence of you all die in his ſteed,
                  And wholy of all comfort be debard:
                  And that men would me vtterly forſake.
                  But when the King ſuch ſorrow hard him make,
               
               
                  And knew he was his Son that Circes bore
                  By him in th'iſle Aulides as be found
                  By many ſignes which he rehearſt before,
                  He made him to be tane vp from the ground
                  Whereon he lay, and pardned him his death,
                  Being ready then to yeild his vitall breath,
               
               
                  And lying in ſo great extreamitie,
                  With ſpeed did call for his Son Thelamon.
                  
                  Who at that time in priſon ſtraight did lie;
                  Who preſently when as he heard thereon▪
                  
                  Vnto his Father went, and when he ſaw
                  That he began vnto his end to draw,
               
               
                  And by enquirie knew the truth, and found
                  That Thelagon who fore him there did ſtand
                  Was he that had given him his deadly wound,
                  With mighty rage he tooke his ſword in hand:
                  And thought his brother Thelagon to kill,
                  But ere th
                        ••
                      he of him could haue his will
               
               
                  
                     Uliſſes made his men to run and hold
                  His hand, and then for all the paine he had,
                  He cald his Sons and told them that he would
                  Haue them t'agree, and to be friends▪ & made
                  Them gra
                        ••
                      and promiſe to be ſo, which 
                        •
                     on
                  He did expreſly charge Prince Thelamon,
                  
               
               
                  That he without diſſimulation
                  Should loue, and in moſt friendly manner liue
                  (While vitall breath did laſt) with Thelagon
                  
                  His brother, and to him the halfe ſhould giue
                  Of all his goods, as heire by true diſcent
                  To him, whereto he freely did conſent,
               
               
                  And neuer from his Fathers will did varry.
                  Which ſaid, his men a Chariot did provide,
                  And did him to his chiefeſt Citie carry,
                  Where afterward within three daies he dide.
                  Whoſe body was interred by hie Sonne,
                  Within a coſtly Tombe of Marble ſtone.
               
               
                  And after that they Crowned Thelamon
                  
                  And made him King with great ſolemnity,
                  With whom a whole yeare after Thelagon
                  
                  His brother ſtaid, to whom moſt lovingly,
                  And kindly, he nere any thing denide.
                  And when he would n
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      there abide,
               
               
                  He dubd him Knight, and after did prepare
                  A ſhip, and gold for him, (whereof he had
                  Great ſtore,) wherewith he did againe repaire
                  Home to Aulides Iſle, and thereby made
                  His mother Circes heart exceeding glad,
                  That had for his long abſence been full ſad.
               
               
                  For ſhe by Negromancian Art could tell
                  That he through many dangers great had paſt,
                  And ſcapt them all. And after that, ſhe fell
                  Into an extreame ſickenes, and at laſt
                  Well ſtricken in yeares ſhe died, (as all men muſt
                  When as their time is come.) For God moſt juſt
               
               
                  Hath death ordaind for every living thing.
                  Who having vnto nature paid her debt:
                  Prince Thelagon her Son was Crowned King
                  Of Aulides, whereas with honor great
                  He did his Crowne & Kingdome long maintaine,
                  And threeſcore yeares full cōpleat ther did raigne.
               
               
                  While Thelamon liu'd in Achaia land,
                  And thereof held the Scepter and the Crowne
                  For ſeaventy yeares together in his hand,
                  Till from his throne death proudly puld him down
                  Vnto the ground, and with his piercing dart▪
                  
                  In cruell wiſe did ſtrike him to the hart.
               
               
                  This ſhall ſuffiice to let you ſee and know,
                  Th'adventures of the Greeks by ſea and land
                  When they returnd from Troy, and for to ſhow
                  That whatſoeuer man doth take in hand,
                  The iſſue doth vpon Gods will depend,
                  For he tis giues an ill or happy end.
               
               
                  Which is well proved by this Hiſtorie,
                  Wherein you ſee, that though the Greeks did win▪
                  
                  And had a moſt triumphant victorie
                  Againſt the Troians and their Towne; wherein
                  They did obtaine that which they did deſire,
                  Which was their wil
                        •
                      and t'honor to aſpire:
               
               
                  
                  Yet cauſe the warre which they with Troy began
                  Was done of pride, and in an envious vaine
                  Without juſt cauſe, they rather loſt then wan.
                  For that vpon their ſide more men were ſlaine
                  Then on the Troians part, (for all they loſt
                  Their towne) ſo that they had no cauſe to boaſt.
               
               
                  Conſidering that beſides their loſſe fore Troy,
                  
                  When they were into Greece returnd, moſt part
                  Of them that liu'd, did not long time enioy
                  Their victorie, for that with envious heart
                  Each th'other did deſtroy, and ſought to kill
                  By trecherie, the Proverbe to fulfill,
               
               
                  (That blood with blood alwaies reveng'd will be)
                  
                     Troyes fall doth teach all Princes to take heed,
                  When as they liue in great proſperitie,
                  Not to be too ſecure, leaſt that they ſpeed
                  
                     As Priam did, who would not be content
                  When he did liue in peace, (but t'envie bent)
               
               
                  Old quarrels with his Grecian foes renew'd,
                  Suppoſing that's his wealth and power great
                  He could do what he liſt. But what enſu'd
                  Thereof, the ſtorie plainelie downe doth ſet:
                  Which ſaith, that he therby wrought's owne decay,
                  To ſhew that man hath here no certaine ſtay.
               
               
                  THus haue you heard as much as I can tell,
                  Of all the Troian warre as it's ſet downe,
                  By Dares Frigius who therein did dwell,
                  And wrote the ſtorie thereof in the Towne,
                  And every day a view thereof did take,
                  Who of this ſame an end herewith doth make.
               
               
                  With whom the Grecian Ditus doth agree,
                  And in like ſort his Hiſtorie doth end,
                  Twixt whom in truth no difference I can ſee,
                  For both their works vnto one purpoſe tend:
                  Which is the true proceedings to expreſſe
                  Of that whereof they were eie witneſſes.
               
               
                  Though not in verball forme, yet in effect
                  And meaning both alike, and true they are.
                  Which is the thing men chiefely ſhould reſpect.
                  But that the Grecian Ditus doth declare,
                  And ſaith, that while the ſiege did there remaine,
                  The number of the Greeks that there was ſlaine
               
               
                  Amounted to eight hundred thouſand men.
                  And of the Troiaus ſide as Dares ſhoe▪
                  
                  Six hundred thouſand ſeaventy and ſixteene
                  Then loſt their liues, mōg whom are reckned thoſe
                  That to the Towne from other countries came,
                  And there were kild by ayding of the ſame.
               
               
                  For that of hundred thouſands that did aid
                  King Priam, and of diuers countries were
                  It is not found, (as it before is ſayd,
                  Though they behaud thēſelues moſt brauely there,
                  So many of them in that warre was ſlaine,)
                  That there did go fiue hundred home againe.
               
               
                  And both of them in this point do agree,
                  That full ten yeares, ſix moneths, & 12. daies more
                  The ſiege did laſt, with great hoſtilitie
                  And loſſe of men on either ſide, before
                  The Greeks for all that ever they could do,
                  Could win the towne o
                        •
                      enter thereinto.
               
               
                  Till Synon by his craft did it betray,
                  As it at large declared is before,
                  And further of the ſame I cannot ſay,
                  Becauſe mine Authors thereof ſay no more.
                  And for to adde more then they write thereto,
                  Were in me great preſump'ion ſo to do.
               
               
                  The time when I this worke had fully don
                  By computation juſt, was in the yeare
                  One thouſand & foure hundred twenty one
                  Of Ieſus Chriſt our Lord & Saviour deare.
                  And in the Eight yeare compleat of the raigne
                  Of our moſt noble Lord and Soveraigne
               
               
                  King Henrie the fift, who in deſpight
                  Of all his foes, Brutes Albion doth maintaine
                  In honor great, for by his puiſſant might
                  He conquered all Normandie againe.
                  And valiantly for all the power of France,
                  
                  Hath won from them his owne inheritance.
               
               
                  And forced them his title to renew
                  To all the Realme of France, (which doth belong
                  To him and to his lawfull heires, by true
                  Diſcent, the which they held from him by wrong
                  And falſe pretence,) and to confirme the ſame▪
                  
                  Haue given him the honor and the name
               
               
                  Of Regent of the Land for Charles his life,
                  And after his deceaſe they haue agreed
                  (Thereby to end all bloody warre and ſtrife)
                  That he as heire ſhall lawfully ſucceed▪
                  
                  Therein, and raigne as King of France by right,
                  As by records which extant are to light,
               
               
                  It doth appeare. And then I hope we ſhall
                  Enioy againe the time ſo proſperous
                  And fortunate, the which men vſe to call
                  The good and golden world, and that to vs
                  God will afford his bleſſing and his grace,
                  That Mars no more our countrey ſhall me
                        •••
                     ce.
               
               
                  
                  Nor with his countnance furious and wood,
                  Moue war and ſtrife between theſe countries twaine
                  Nor be the cauſe of ſheading of their blood,
                  Whereof till now they both may well complaine:
                  And that our noble King will ſo provide
                  By wiſedome and by power, that either ſide
               
               
                  Shall liue in peace and henchforth ſo agree,
                  That both the realmes of England, and of France,
                  
                  By one Prince ruld, ſhall ſeeme all one to bee,
                  And ever more liue without variance:
                  And from their hearts all hate and malice chaſe,
                  By th'influence of Gods moſt mighty grace;
               
               
                  And heavenly power which ruleth every thing,
                  And who by his great providence divine,
                  Hath ſuch an alliance made betweene our King
                  And France, by marying Lady Katherine
                  
                  The French Kings daughter, that we hope it ſhall
                  Procure vs peace and joy perpetuall.
               
               
                  And that the Royall iſſue of them twaine,
                  (Will be a meane and way without all feare)
                  That England ſhall for evermore obtaine
                  The ſole command of thoſe two Realmes, & weare
                  Their Diadems imperiall both together,
                  And that the faire Queene Katherines cōming hither
               
               
                  Will nouriſh ſo great loue and vnitie
                  On both ſides, that we never ſhall haue need
                  Nor cauſe to feare nor feele adverſitie;
                  And that it will be th'only meanes to breed
                  Our honor, joy, and great proſperitie,
                  Wealth, pleaſure, peace, and all felicitie,
               
               
                  And driue away all miſchiefe whatſoere
                  Out of this Land. So that with heart & thought
                  We ſhall haue cauſe with voices lowd and cleare
                  To pray for her that hath it to vs brought:
                  And him that by his valor great and might,
                  Hath ſhew'd himſelfe ſo puiſſant a Knight,
               
               
                  That he hath won, and cleerely doth poſſeſſe
                  All that to him belongs, and now it's ſet
                  Accompanied with his faire Empereſſe,
                  Victoriouſly with praiſe and honor great,
                  In his moſt Royall throne: to whom God giue
                  As long as he vpon the earth ſhall liue,
               
               
                  (And doth enioy the full fruition
                  Of all that vnto him belongs of right,
                  And holds the ſame in his ſubiection,)
                  Encreaſe of comfort, pleaſure, and delight:
                  And t'ſend him home with triumph & with honor
                  As great as ere had any Conqueror.
               
               
                  And long time after grant him to poſſeſſe
                  His kingdomes, and his Regall Dignitie,
                  (With his faire Queene) in joy and quietnes,
                  If poſſible it were perpetuallie:
                  And I will never ceaſe both night and day,
                  Withall my heart vnto the Lord to pray
               
               
                  For him, by whoſe commandement I tooke
                  On me (though farre vnfit to do the ſame)
                  To tranſlate into Engliſh verſe, this Booke,
                  Which Guido wrote in Latin, and doth name
                  The ſiege of Troy, and for his ſake alone
                  I muſt confeſſe that I the ſame begon,
               
               
                  When Henrie whom men fourth by name did call,
                  (My Princes Father) lived and poſſeſt
                  The Crowne. And though I be but ruſticall,
                  I haue therein not ſpard to do my beſt
                  To pleaſe my Princes humor. Though
                  A thing that I ſhould not haue tane on me,
               
               
                  (Which am a Monke by my profeſſion
                  In Berry, cald Iohn Lidgate by my name,
                  And weare a habit of perfection:
                  Although my life agrees not with the ſame)
                  That meddle ſhould with things ſpirituall,
                  As I muſt needes confeſſe vnto you all.
               
               
                  But ſeing that I did therein proceed,
                  At his command whom I could not refuſe,
                  I humbly do beſeech all thoſe that reade,
                  Or leyſor haue this ſtory to pervſe,
                  If any fault therein they find to bee,
                  Or error that committed is by mee▪
                  
               
               
                  That they will of their gentlenes take paine▪
                  
                  The rather to correct and mend the ſame,
                  Then raſhly to condemne it with diſdaine.
                  For well 
                        ••
                     vot it is not without blame,
                  Becauſe I know the verſe therein is wrong,
                  As being ſome too ſhort and ſome too long▪
                  
               
               
                  For if with faults men ſhould not ſometime beare,
                  But all for ſome ſeeme wholy to refuſe,
                  Then muſt I ſay in vaine my labor were.
                  Let ignorance and rudenes me excuſe:
                  For though my verſe for harſhnes you reiect,
                  Yet if you to the ſome haue good reſpect,
               
               
                  I doubt not but that you therein ſhall find,
                  That all the ſubſtance of the matter is
                  Set downe that Guydo wrote, to pleaſe your mind.
                  And if that any word be plaſt amis,
                  I pray you mend the ſame in curteſie:
                  For to condemne an error vtterly,
               
               
                  
                  Which is not made nor done with bad intent,
                  No commendation to him that's wiſe:
                  For no man vnto ſcoffing more is bent
                  Behind mens backs, nor ſooner will ſurmiſe
                  A lie, then he that hath no wit at all,
                  He treadeth ſure that neuer hath a fall.
               
               
                  I oft haue read in Authors new and old,
                  Which write of mens behaviors good and ill,
                  That no man is more fooliſh and more bold,
                  Then he that is an Idiot without skill.
                  For that blind Bayard feares nothing at all
                  Till in a ditch he ſodainlie doth fall.
               
               
                  And none ſo ready is to prate and prattle,
                  Nor ſooner will condemne a man then he.
                  But for all thoſe that vſe ſuch tittle tattle,
                  I care not what they ſay or ſpeake of me:
                  For I do not to them direct my Booke,
                  But vnto ſuch as with a ſincere looke
               
               
                  Pervſe the ſame, and with mens falts do beare,
                  And can amend an error without blame
                  To him that writes, and tell not what they heare
                  To hinder or impeach a mans good name:
                  But vſed are to ſpeake well of their friend,
                  Whereto all honeſt men their wits ſhould bend.
               
               
                  For Chawcer that my maſter was, and knew
                  What did belong to writing verſe or proſe,
                  Nere ſtumbled at ſmall faults, nor yet did view
                  With ſcornefull eie the works and Bookes of thoſe
                  That in his time did write, nor yet would taunt
                  At any man, to feare him or to daunt
               
               
                  His courage in that kind of exerciſe:
                  But rather vſe their weaknes to ſupport,
                  And as he was well learned and very wiſe,
                  And able to inſtruct and to exhort
                  Such as did uſe to write, would winke and ſmile
                  At faults, and yet ſay nothing all the while▪
                  
               
               
                  So that if to deſcribe him I ſhould ſtriue,
                  I muſt needs ſay (vnleſſe from truth I varry)
                  That never any man as yet did liue
                  Vntill this day, that worthy was to carry
                  His inckhorne in reſpect of Poetrie.
                  But if within this Land or Realme there be
               
               
                  Such men as able be his ſteps to trace;
                  To them it is that I direct my Booke,
                  And wholy to their skills referre my caſe,
                  With their judiciall eies thereon to looke:
                  Beſeeching them to mend what is amis,
                  And t'adde, or to diminiſh all that is
               
               
                  Super
                        ••
                     uous, or elſe wanting. And although
                  They find therein no phraſes that are new,
                  Nor Eloquence (as they ſuppoſe) enough,
                  Yet I do hope that they ſhall find all true
                  In ſubſtance as mine Author wrote the ſame,
                  Wherein I know I ſhall incurre no blame.
               
               
                  ANd he that liſt and doth deſire to ſee
                  The wavering ſtate and infelicity
                  Of ages paſt, may here inſtructed be,
                  And find how Fortunes mutability
                  Hath alwaies been ſo great, that no man could
                  Put truſt in her. And therewithall behold▪
                  
               
               
                  How Princes cleane bereft of Royalty,
                  Were ſodainely brought into great diſtreſſe.
                  And Kings redu'ſt to ſuch extremity,
                  That poverty and want did them oppreſſe.
                  Great ſlaughters made in kingdomes enviouſly.
                  Murthers committed by conſpiracie.
               
               
                  Falſe treaſon, ſecret ambuſhes, deſpight,
                  Subverſion of whole kingdomes ſodainely,
                  The raviſhing of women for delight,
                  The root of warre and great hoſtility.
                  Maintaining of moſt fowle adulterie,
                  Which cauſed many Princes great to die.
               
               
                  To ſhew thereby that ſince the cauſe of all
                  Such wickednes receiues reward moſt iuſt,
                  Which ſodainely vpon mankind doth fall,
                  For that in worldly ioyes there is no truſt.
                  And in this Booke examples you ſhall find,
                  If you conſider well thereof in mind,
               
               
                  How every man muſt vnto nature yeild,
                  When time doth ſerue, both young and old of age,
                  And wither like the graſſe within the field,
                  For here our life is but a Pilgrimage
                  Repleat with ſorrow, miſerie, and woe,
                  Which if men mark't & tooke good heed therto
               
               
                  And wiſely would conſider of their end,
                  They would eſteeme all pleaſure but a toy,
                  And no more time therein ſo vainely ſpend,
                  Nor take ſo much delight in worldly joy.
                  For by Troyes fall it plainely doth appeare,
                  That neither King nor Emperor hath here▪
                  
               
               
                  A permanent eſtate to truſt vnto.
                  Therefore to him that died vpon the rood,
                  (And was content and willing ſo to do,
                  And for man-kind did ſhead his precious blood,)
                  Lift vp your minds and pray with humble 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  That he his aid vnto you will impart.
               
               
                  
                  For though you be of extreame force and might,
                  Without his helpe it will you nought availe,
                  For he doth giue man victorie in fight:
                  And with a few is able to prevaile,
                  And overcome an armie huge and ſtrong,
                  And by his grace makes kings and Princes long
               
               
                  To raigne here on the earth in happineſſe,
                  And Tyrants that to men do offer wrong
                  And violence, doth ſodainly ſuppreſſe,
                  Although their power be nere ſo great & ſtrong▪
                  
                  And in his hand his bleſſings all reſerveth,
                  For to reward each one as he deſerueth.
               
               
                  To whom I pray with humble mind and hart,
                  (And ſo I hope all you wil doe no leſſe)
                  That of his grace he would vouchſafe t'impart,
                  And ſend all joy, wel fare, and happines,
                  Health, victory, tranquilitie, and honor,
                  Vnto the high and mightie coqueror
               
               
                  King Henrie the Fift, (that his great name
                  May here on earth 
                        •
                     'extold and magnified
                  While life doth laſt, and when he yeilds the ſame
                  Into his hands, he may be glorified
                  In heaven among the Saints & Angels bright,
                  Therein to ſerue the God of power & might.)
               
               
                  At whoſe requeſt this worke I vndertooke
                  As I haue ſayd. And now that I haue don,
                  And with great labour finiſhed my Booke,
                  I doe intreat all thoſe that looke thereon
                  T'accept thereof, and tak't in as good part,
                  As I it ſend to them withall my hart.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   