
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     THE True Hiſtory of the Ciuill VVarres of France, betweene the French King Henry the 4. and the Leaguers.
                  
                  Gathered from the yere of our Lord 1585. vntill this preſent October. 1591.
                  By Antony Colynet.
                  
                  
                     Romanes 13.
                     
                     He which reſiſteth the power, reſiſteth the ordinance of God.
                  
                  Printed at London for Thomas Woodcock, dwelling in Paules Churchyard, at the ſigne of the black Beare.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI AC DOMIno D. Iohanni Cantuarienſi Archepiſcopo, & totius Angliae primati, ac Metropolitano, domino ſuo colendiſſimo gratiam & pacem exoptat.
            
            
               SApienter a Sophocle ſcriptum eſt mundum eſſe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , quod vt Paulus teſtatur adeo luculenter 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                eius, nimirum & 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vt nedum oculis conſpici, imo & mambus facile contrectari poſsint. Nam cum in mirifica coelorum, terrae, mariſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                pulchritudine, bonitate, ordine & motu, eius ſapientiae veſtigia eluceſcant: imprimis vero in hominum conſociatione tuenda conſeruanda
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                apparent. Etenim cum propter multiplices humanae mentis errores, cordis deprauationem, & voluntatis auerſionem, quae ſecuta ſunt primi parentis lapſum, tanta 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                omnes & ſingulas naturae humanae facultates muaſerit, vt nihil niſi labi, neſcire, errare, decipi, & in exitium ruere hominum genus poſsit: ſapientiſsimus ille Graecorum Socrates, apud diuinum Platonem in his quos de republica ſcripſit libris, intelligit & diſerta inductione ab ipſa vniuerſali experientia ſumpta demonſtrat: equos ab equis, boues a bobus, capras a capris, oues ab ouibus regi nullo modo poſſe; ſed a praeſtantiori natura & humana: ita hominum genus ſine diuina pręſentia nullo modo gubernari poteſt. Ideo bonus ille rerum opifex hominum quaſi tutelae procurationem ſuſcipiens, res humanas non modo curat, vrumetiam ea prouidentia, qua praeterita, praeſentia & futura, cernit, homini ſalutaria conſilia ſuppeditat, actiones fortunat, diſtortas cogitationes, affectibus prępedita conſilia & iniuſtos conatus damnat euertit & punit. Et vt tutius res hominum agantur ipſe 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , clam per ciuitates obambulans ſingula ſpeculatur, aliorum conſilia regit, aliorum v
                  •
               ro obſeruat ad vindictam, immanem improborū audaciam retundit, & diabolorum furores coercet. Quam ob cauſam hominum coetus poteſtatis & obedientiae docendi & diſcendi iudiciorum, & multorum cum multis contractuum, officijs arctius colligauit. Neruos autem huius conſociationis familiam, eccleſiam & regnum

eſſe voluit; quarum altera ſua foecunditate generis humani propagationem ſuppeditaret, & ſpecei conſeruationem perpetuaret. Altera vero veram ſapientiam, dei agnitionem, veros cultus, ac denique ſuppellectilem omnium doctrinarum & bonarum artium tāquam in arce repoſitam, cuſtodit fidem & veram innocationem, bonos mores & ſalutem monſtrat, rationibus, commonefactionibus & obiurgationibus tanquam fraeno hominum cupiditates vndique diffluentes obſtruit. Regnum vero autoritate & dignitate conſpicuum, robore & potentia inſtructum tāquam in ſummo loco poſitum eminet, vt quos neque paterna autoritas, neque docentium diligentia, in officio retinere poteſt: vi & via peruulgata legū cohibeantur. Quae cum 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                & ordine coherent, ſuauiſsimum diuinae ſapientiae, bonitatis iuſtitiae & 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                odorem, generi humano reddunt: Sin abrumpantur haec ſocietatis vincula, patrum docentium & legitime imperantium autoritatem labefactari & humana retro conuerſa ruere & concidere neceſſe eſt. Vt autem haec manifeſtius cernerentur voluit ille ſapiens rerum opifex ſuā ipſius imaginem in ipſo patrum, docentium & magiſtratuū vultu inſculpi, & inſculptam elucere. Muniuit his propugnaculis deus generis humani ſocietatem, vt ad eum tanquam ad fontem boni in natura hominum ſalus referretur, vt naturae intelligentes autorem huius opificij, & colligationis hominū inter ſe celebrarent, colerent, inuocarent, ei cōfiderent, & abeo ſolo penderent. Verum 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                iſte mendax & 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , haec vincula humanae ſocietatis apud omnes & omniaetate diſſoluere, & abrumpere conatur. Parricidijs, idolomania, ſeditionibus, clandeſtinis conſilijs proditionibus familiam, eccleſiam, & ciuitatem implet: In parentes qui primum legitimi imperij gradum tenēt contemptum excitat, odijs, ſchiſmate, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , & haereſi, eccleſiam vndi
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                turbat, reſpublicas ciuitatum euerſionibus vaſtat, ſanguine irrigat, caedibus contaminat, regna funditus euertit, & orbi vaſtitatem affert, prole impia, leuibus ingenijs, turbulentis ciuibus. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in hominum cordibus delet, veram religionem corrumpit, officium & obtemperationem debitam magiſtratibus ex ciuium animis euellit, impietate, ambitione, prauis conſultoribus, malorum conſuetudine fraterculis, Ieſuitis, & perduellibus. Harum peſtium teſtis eſt, & vetus & recens hiſtoria omnium imperiorū, retumpub. & gentium. Sed imprimis florentiſsima

Gallia, Europae decus, quae totos hos 30. annos inteſtinis diſsidijs exarſit; & facta eſt immanis ſaeuitiae, & pontificiae truculentiae laniena, hominum luxu, ambitione & impietate perditorū domicilium, ſcelerum omnis generis ſentina, rapinarum & hominum rapidorum receptaculum, malorum lerna, & teterrimi odoris camarina. Cum autem in otio minime otioſus eſſe vellem, & magnopere cuperem cariſsimae patriae excidium cognoſcere, cauſas, progreſſus, periodos & euentus rerum geſtarum exquirere, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                quaedam ad priuatum vſum annotaueram: vt tantarū calamitatum cauſas exquirentibus ſatiſfacerem, vt deplorarē patriae interitum, & vt ad dei timorem me inſpectione tātarum pooenarū excitarem. Tandem approbatione & iudicio amicorum maiore, diligētia rem aggreſſus ſum, & vt plurimum ex his libris qui Gallice ijſdem de rebus ſcripti ſunt, tranſtuli; ex varijs regū Henricorū 3. & 4. declarationibus, edictis, proſcriptionibus, proclamationibus, apologijs, accuſationibus, articulis, & multorū Epiſtolis, & id genus ſcriptis narrationes plurimum auxi, & perpetuam rerum explicationem conſarcinaui, ſperans hunc meum laborem bonis viris gratiſsimum futurum.
            Hae narrationes tot ſunt conciones de ira diuina in contemptores euangelij, & eos qui caeca ambitione, aut praua aliqua cupiditate incitati ciuitates, reſpublicas, regna, & imperia concutiunt legitimis magiſtratibus obſiſtunt, orbis pacem turbant, humanae ſocietatis neruos reſecant. Hae narrationes poenas à lege diuina propoſitas, & mercedem impietati debitā, homines ſceleſtos ſubijſſe digito monſtrant. Praeſentiam vero diuinam in conſeruanda, & liberanda eccleſia, fidem promiſsionum, timentibus dei iudicia ratam certám
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                permanere. Anglica vero & vernacula lingua rem deſcripſi, aſpera quidem & inculta, ſed qua proprietate homini peregrino licuit, vt lectores etiam ineruditi iudicia diuina admirari, & timere diſcerent, euangelium reuerenter amplecti, & vitae nouitate poenas peccatis debitas, retardare & auertere, magiſtratibus diuitius conſtitutis, ſe qua decet obſeruantia ſubijcere, reipublicae & eccleſiae pacem, non temerè ira, odio, moroſitate, libidine aut ambitione turbare, & diſciplinā laxare: deni
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                mortales vt diſcant iuſtitiam moniti, & nō temnere diuos. Si quid autem videatur acerbius dictum id nō ni veram nobilitatem & familias de republica,

Chriſtiana benemeritas, dictum boni viri autument. Nam vt eſt vetus dictum 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , huiuſmodi mycteriſmis ſarcaſmis & acerbioribus verbis degeneres à vera nobilitate mores impietatem, hypocriſin, ambitionem, libidines, ſaeuitiam, & immanitatem ſacro ſanctorū regum laeſam, & violatam maieſtatem, à perduellibus, & proditoribus, ſacri iſtius (ſi dijs placet) foederis taxaui. Deſinant igitur malefacere malefacta ne audiāt ſua. Exiſtimo enim nullis ſatis atrocibus verbis rebellionis crimen, defectionem, & coniurationem in maieſtatem regiam a ſacri iſtius foederis, autoribus & principibus excitatā exprimi poſſe. Quod ſi violatae maieſtatis crimen ſummum in toto genere humano malum, malis verbis tanquam proprijs epithetis ornauerim, veteres oratores Demoſthenem, Aeſchinen, & praecipue Ciceronem autores habeo, imo ipſum Chriſtum & Apoſtolos, Petrum, Paulum, Iacobum & Iohannem, qui acerbis verbis impios inſectantur. Quos eo conſilio ſecutus ſum, vt atrocia flagitia, atrocibus verbis monſtrata omnibus execranda proponerem. Vt enim acutis morbis, acutam curationem adhibere ſolent medici, ita ſimilem in genere humano, non antè auditam defectionem, & Chriſtianis regibus & principibus ſeruitutem, aut exitium minitantē iſtius foederis coniurationē non ſatis odioſis verbis regni legitimi amantibus odioſam reddere conatus ſum, non vt foedus iſtud curarē (curationē enim non patitur) ſed vt quantū in me eſſet alios a ſimilibus malis auerterē & reuocarē. Calumnias vero pontificiorū, & eor
                  •
               m qui ſunt euangelij & legitimae poteſtatis hoſtes haud moror. Mihi vero ſatis probe ſatiſfactū erit, ſi bonis quibus placere ſtudeo, ſatiſfecero, & exēpla in hac narratione propoſita alios cautiores efficere poſsint: ne in eoſdem errores prolapſi eaſdem ſubeant poenas. Tuae vero ſapientiae huius narrationis iudicium permitto: vt quicquid hic narratū fuerit tuo iudicio ſtet cadátue. Quod tuis auſpicijs vt teſtimoniū meae in te gratitudinis & obſeruantiae in lucem prodeat, & vt pro tua benignitate & fauore, quo & bona & bonos omnes excipere ſoles, aequi bonique conſulas, te magnopere oratum velim Octob. vigeſimo. 1591.
            Tui ex animo obſeruantiſsimus. A. C.
         
         
            
            To the Chriſtian Reader.
            
            
               
                  TVlly (the glorie of the ancient Rome) defineth the hiſtorie to be a witneſſe of time, and a remembrance of things that are paſt; this is to ſay ſomewhat, but not enough. For it is a witneſſe and record of the execution of Gods iustice in reuenging the corrupt iudgements, vncleane affections, and wicked deedes of men, and of Gods good will and fatherly goodnes in defending, deliuering, and rewarding the iuſt. Therefore (Chriſtian Reader) I haue to warne thee of three things; of the vſe, order, and locution of this hiſtorie: deſiring thee to reade this, not onely to delight thine affection in ſeeing this man doo proſperouſly and commended for his proweſſe and vertue, and another diſpraiſed according to the deſert of his actions; but ſpecially to conſider the preſence of God in gouerning the one, and prospering him, in doing profitable things for the defence of a iuſt cauſe and his countrey: and the iudgement of God, which according to the threatnings of his law, doth leade the wicked to puniſhment: if not at all times and after all ill actions, yet moſt commonly and at length, alwaies doth make him ſwallow downe the dregges of his wrath. Feare therefore and keepe thy ſelfe within the bounds of that vocation, which the lawe of God hath preſcribed thee.
            The greateſt part of this Historie is tranſlated out of French, which was ſet foorth concerning theſe affayres of the holy League, encreaſed much out of the ſeedes of actions, diſperſed in the declarations, edicts, proſcriptions, apologies, aduertiſements, agreements, articles and letters written by the Kings Henry the iij. and iiij. now raigning, and other noble men acquainted with the publique affayres and estate.
            The latter part of the Historie, to wit, from the death of Henry the third, is a gathering of ſuch euents as haue been publiſhed from time to time. And as for the distreſſing of Paris, and the horrible famine there, I haue for the moſt part followed the report of Pedro Corneio a Spanyard, which was then in the citie during the ſiege thereof, which doth report it after a more incredible ſort then I dare lay downe.
            Of ſuch things which I doo ſuspect, I doo note the vncertaintie thereof by

the word of report, following therein that famous Hiſtoriographer of our time Iohn Sleyden.
            
            I haue written this Historie in forme of Annales, reducing the actions of euery ſeuerall yeare into a ſundrie booke, ſaue onely the firſt, which is a collection of the ſecret practiſes of many yeres, to bring that ſtate to that confuſion which we ſee it now. The new Popiſh Kalender hath brought ſome diuerſitie in the date of dayes, moneths and yeares, ſome following one Kalender, and ſome another: yet I haue reduced it to the old ſo farre as I could do it.
            Foraſmuch as the rebellion of the holy League is the greateſt conspiracie that euer was heard of againſt all Christian Kings and Princes, threatning all of bondage and ſubuerſion, and firſt put in vre in the kingdome of France, as moſt fit to receaue the ſame, by reaſon of the diſſentions long cōtinued there, wrought by the vileſt men and meanes that euer were heard of, hauing attempted & atchieued moſt haynous & outragious murthers, I haue thought good to decke the parties with titles and ornaments fit for ſuch deedes, to wit, with ſharpe words to expreſſe more effectually the greatnes of the offences, proteſting not to touch the noble families of Chriſtendome, whom I reuerence, but the degenerating of them, who hauing put aſide the robes of true Nobilitie, are become ſlaues of all treacheries and rebellions, and haue clothed them ſelues with diſhonour and infamie: to the end that the Christian reader may by the ſignification of grieuous Epithetes, comprehend the greatnes of ſuch tranſgreſſions as doo boyle in ſuch men, and learne to auoyde the ſocietie of all damned congregations of Corah, Dathan and Abiram.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE TRAGICAL HISTOrie of the ciuill Warres raiſed vp in the Realme of France.
            
               THE FIRST BOOKE.
               
                  
                     CLaude of 
                     Ʋaudemont, otherwiſe of Lorrayne, came into France in the time of Lewis the xii. in a manner with a wallet and a ſtaffe, that is to ſay, a beggerly gentleman, in compariſon of the great reuenewes which hée and his haue had afterward in France. For all his reuenewes when he came into France, was not aboue xv. M. Franks. He began to growe vnder King Francis the firſt, by crouching and capping and double diligence: vnder whom, after that all offices had béen beſtowed, hée obtained to bée the Kings Faulkner, at the ſuite of other Noble men. That was an office giuen before that time to Gentlemen of ſmall accompt. Notwithſtanding ye baſenes of his degree in Court, he was beholden with a ſuſpicious eye by King Francis, carying in his mind a certaine preſage of that which hath happened afterward. For when he had marked with a wiſe prudencie the ſawcines of him and his children, hee vttered his iudgement concerning them in theſe words; That they will turne his children into their doublets, and his ſubiects into their ſhirts.
               
               The yeare 1515. in the abſence of the Duke of Guelders, he had the charge of the Swizzers, which King Francis had hyred for his iourney to Millaine.
               
               The yeare 1523. the Lord Trimouille left him the gouernment of Burgondie.
               
               The yeare 1527. at the ſuite and interceſſion of Noble men, the King erected his Village of Guize, ſituated vppon the riuer Oyſe in the confines of 
                     Ʋermandoyſe, into a Duchie.
               His Children were the Dukes of Guize, Aumale, the Marquiſe D'albeuf, the two Maſſing Prieſts of Lorraine and Guize.
               
               
                  
Theſe Faulkners did ſo apply their buſines, partly with flattering, partly with the aliance of lagrand Seneſchal, which was the Paramour of King Henry the ſecond, and the Duke D' Aumale maried her daughter, as good as the mother, but eſpecially by the facilitie, or rather fondneſſe of the ſaide Henry the ſecond, that within fewe yeares they obtayned in land and penſions one milion of Frankes, beſide their Ciuill and Eccleſiaſticall offices, dignities & liuings, which did amount to ſo much. But ſpecially they aduaunced themſelues greatly in the time of King Francis the ſecond, by reaſon of their aliance with him, who had married their Néece the Quéene of Scots.
               
               In his time they diſpoſed of all things after their owne willes. For the King ſawe nothing but by their eyes, heard nothing but by their mouthes, did nothing but by their hands; ſo that there remained nothing but onely the wearing of the Crowne vpon their owne heads, and the name of King.
               In this great proſperitie they lacked nothing, neither will nor meanes to attaine to their intent, but that the Nobilitie of France was a perilous blocke in their way, which they could not lep ouer, for to aſcende to ſo great and high ſeate of Maieſtie, and in ſtead of a veluet cap to weare a Crowne of pure gold.
               In this proſperous ſucceſſe it hath happened to them as the Prouerbe is, Set a begger on horſebacke, and he will ride vntill he breake his necke: which the tragicall end of them hath verified.
               But they fearing no ſuch bloodie euents, and intending to turne their maſter out of the houſe, and to ſeaze on the poſſeſſion, and to lodge themſelues therein, they vſed cunning and policie.
               The firſt ſteppe to reach to that which they intended to get, was a dreame in this Iulling of Fortune, vnaccuſtomed to them or theirs. For they in their dreame, dreamed and ſawe in a viſion, that they were deſcended from Charles the great, and conſequently that they had right to the Crowne, and that Capet (who had diſpoſſeſſed their aunceſtors) (as they ſay) and his poſteritie, which now enioy it, are but vſurpers.
               But conſidering that to enter into any action of law about ſuch a matter, would be a dangerous courſe, and that a peaceable ſtate would rather helpe them backward, than forward; and that ſuch a fiſh would bee caught rather in a troubleſome, than in a cleare water, the ſtreame muſt needes be ſtirred.
               The occaſion of the time fell out fitly to further their intent, and to trouble the ſtate: They therefore tooke the diſſenſion of Religion to colour the ſame: (than the which they thought no better could be deuiſed) for the people was alreadie in ielouſie one againſt another through the diuerſitie of religion. Unto this opportunitie came many helping cauſes,

as the minoritie of the houſe of 
                     Ʋaloys, the ambition and atheiſme of the Q. Mother, the great credite and power which the parties themſelues had gotten alreadie afore hand in the Realme: the facilitie or rather inconſtancie of Anthonie of Burbon King of Nauarre: and laſt of all, the headie frowardnes of the Conſtable, and Annas of Monmorency: which things conſpiring together fitly to further their deſires, they thought it was time in ſtead of Atheiſme to put on Popiſh ſuperſtition, and their ambition ſhould runne for burning zeale of Poperie. This part they tooke not for any religion which they cared for, but being the ſtronger and more fauourable ſide, by the which they might get both credite and ſtrength.
               By theſe meanes the ciuil warres being eaſily ſtirred vp, they thought all by one meane both to weaken the Nobilitie, and to oppreſſe the houſe of Burbon; which being made away, they ſuppoſed either that they could eaſily ſubuert the houſe of Valoys, being all children: or els to ſuruiue them, and as then to make an open claime to the Crowne.
               The ciuill warres being by them and their meanes begun, they haue entertained them from time to time. And when through wearines or weakenes of their part they haue come to peace, they haue through treacherie ſo manured it, that peace hath been more domageable to the profeſſors of the Goſpell, than open warre; as it may appeare by the murthers which they procured and performed at Paris, and in other Cities in France the yeare 1572.
               After the which murther, they alſo procured King Charles the ix. to impriſon the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and afterward Monſieur the Kings yongeſt brother.
               The King of Nauarre hauing béen kept priſoner with a garde the ſpace of thrée yeares and more, at length in the yeare 1576. went foorth out of Paris to hunting in the Forreſt of S. Germayne en faye, accompanied with a great number of Catholike Gentlemen, among whom was alſo the Duke Espernon. When he came to the Forreſt hee opened his minde vnto them that hee was not determined to returne to the Court. The Gentlemen conſidering his hard intertainement, and the greatnes of his perſon, were ſo farr from compelling him to returne from whence he came, that they profered to conduct him whereſoeuer he would, and ſo they brought him to the Towne of Alenſon 45. leagues from Paris, where was a great number of them of the reformed Religion, whether alſo he had requeſted the Gentlemen to accompanie him.
               Shortly after his arriuing there, when the reformed Church had aſſembled together, the ſaid King in the face of the ſaid congregation, confeſſed that for feare of death he had conſented to the abominations of Poperie, and with many teares very feruently prayed to God to forgiue

him, exhorted the Church to take heede, not to followe his frailtie, willing them not to be offended with his fall, and with an earneſt inuocation of Gods moſt holy ſpirit, promiſed euer hereafter (by Gods grace) conſtancie and ſtedfaſtnes in the confeſſion of the trueth.
               After a long and wofull warre (the particular accidents whereof I here omit, as haſtening to my purpoſe, and referre the reader in that reſpect  to ſuch treatiſes as are of purpoſe written concerning thoſe matters) at length a peace was concluded about the 27. of Iuly 1576. which was ſworne vpon by the King, by the King of Nauarre, Monſieur the Kings onely brother, the Prince of Conde, and Caſimire, & other Nobles with the lifting vp of their hands.
               The King, to wit, Henry the 3. to ſhew how well pleaſed he was with this peace, willed and commanded, that it ſhould bee called his peace, becauſe he had graunted it with his owne will and proper motion.
               The King of Nauarre then had not onely a iuſt cauſe, but alſo opportunitie to complaine of diuers iniuries done vnto him, at and after the murther of Paris, and alſo to demaund amends for his great loſſes, yet he neuer mooued one word, leaſt by any priuate commodities of his owne, the peace ſhould haue béen hindered.
               By that concluſion of peace the King graunted eight Townes (beſide them which they held before) vnto them of the reformed religion, to bee gouerned vnder his obedience by the King of Nauarre, for the ſpace of ſixe yeares. It was agreed alſo at the requeſt of the reformed religion, that the King ſhould call the States of the Realme, to confirme this peace, and to reſtore the ancient dignitie of that kingdome.
               Theſe States were ſo cunningly handled, that it did almoſt fall to the vtter vndoing of them of the religion. For the Guizes, with the colluſion of the King, made ſuch meanes as none other might be admitted to the ſame States, than the profeſſed enemies of the Goſpell. For they cauſed conuocations to bee aſſembled in the ſeuerall Prouinces, who appoynted ſuch, as were farre from peace, with ſecret inſtructions to bee preſented at the ſaide States, without making the Townes, Cities, or Commonalties priuie to the ſame.
               They alſo cauſed infamous Libels to be printed and propoſed in their ſeuerall conuocations, denouncing open warre vnto them of the reformed religion, and vnto all that would not conſent to the vndoing of them. Furthermore, they deuiſed alſo the meanes to interrupt that peace, which of late concluded by their conſent, and yet ſo politickly, that the cauſes ſhould not bee founde in themſelues, but in the profeſſors of the Goſpell. For they procured infinite iniuries and violences to be done vnto them of the Religion by their partakers, hoping that through diſpaire and impatiencie they would breake the peace, and ſo the King would

arme the Duke of Guize againſt them, that in the meane time hauing the Kings power in hand, he might growe in authoritie, and the King  decreaſe.
               Immediatly after the concluſion of peace made, the Guizes perceiuing that theſe three noble Princes had auoyded their clawes, (for the King of Nauarre was gone into his kingdome, the Prince of Conde had auoided into Germanie, & Monſieur had bin ſet at libertie) without any hope to bring them againe within their reach, and that not onely they were a terror, but alſo would be great lets to their drifts, and that they were able to cut them out more worke, than they would be able to patch as long as they ſhould liue, conſidering the name, roome, authoritie and power that they were of, both in France and with forraine Nations: To the ende that at the States appoynted they might oppreſſe theſe Princes, with the reſt of the Nobilitie which would not take part with them; to ground a ſure foundation vpon a ſtrong Councell, then ſent they their agent the Biſhop of Paris, and the aduocate Dauid (a worſe man did not liue then vpon the earth) to Rome the holy Citie, to take good aduiſe and ſpiritual counſell of their ghoſtly father.
               The Biſhop of Paris and Dauid with him came to Rome, the Schoole of all murthers, treaſons, poyſonings and ſlaughters, againſt all the Princes and States of Chriſtendome. There aſſembled all the ſchoolemaſters and teachers of the Sciences aboue ſaide, I meane the Cardinalls, among whome Sir Hugh bon companion Vicar of Rome, (for ſo was his right name afore he was Pope) was the forman.
               There was great complaints framed againſt the King, Monſieur his brother, the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, againſt all the houſe of Burbon, and the Nobilitie of France.
               
               The King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde were heretickes and relapſe. The King and his brother, with a great number of the Nobilitie, if they were not heretickes, yet were they fauourers of heretickes, they cauſed hereſies to grow and to take roote, by making peace with heretickes, to the vtter ouerthrowe of holy Church of Rome. And that it was high time that Sir Hugh (Vicar of Rome) ſhould prouide for ſome ſpeedie remedie to preuent the miſchiefe.
               There it was ſhewed (to render the King and all the Princes odious) how the houſe of Capet had alwaies withſtood the holy Church of Rome, and that they had ſupported in old time the Valdenſes and Albigeoys, and now that either they are ioyned with the Hugonets, or els are fauourers of them.
               But on the contrary ſide, the houſe of Charles the great (which was wrongfully diſpoſſeſſed of the Crowne) by the Papall bleſſing, had a ſpeciall grace giuen them to helpe holy Church, and had left yet ſome luſtie

buds, which are they of the houſe of Guize, in whom is all the hope of holy Church, to roote out the hereticks, and to reſtore all things. The fable of this Popiſh bleſſing heere aboue mentioned, is in the Chronicles of Rhegimon a Monke of S. Benet.
               
               In the time of Pipin father to Charles the great, Stephen Pope of Rome being a factious and turbulent man, through his ambition did trouble Italy. And when Arſtulphe King of the Lombards (a nation not vſed to bee controulled by Prieſts) went about to chaſtize him, fled into France, to ſtirre Pipin (which a fewe yeares before had vſurped the Crowne of France by the helpe of Pope Zachary) againſt the ſayd Arſtulphe. This Pope being at S. Denis nigh Paris, fell brainſicke, and in his ſicknes the diuell deluded him with an entuſiaſme, making him to ſee in a viſion Peter and Paule before the high Altar in their Surpleſſes, by the which (as he ſayd) he knewe them. Then came in S. Denis with a leane face, hauing a Cenſor in his hand, whom Peter and Paule ſent to the ſayd Stephen to heale him, who charged him to hallowe the ſayd Church. Pope Stephen could this viſion to them which were preſent there, and being about to riſe out of his bed to doo what he was commanded, they ſayd vnto him that he doated. But after he had told this follie to Pipin, the 13. of Auguſt 753. he annoynted Pipin King of France and Berte, and with his Popiſh bleſſing ſanctified all the Barons & Nobles of France, binding them with an oath neuer to chooſe King of France but of that raſe of Pipin. Thus goeth the ſottiſh fable of the brainſicke entuſiaſme Pope Stephen. The Guizes fayning to haue deſcended out of that raſe by the helpe of this fable, beſides the determinations, ſet downe concerning other States of Chriſtendome, it was concerning Fraunce thus decreed. That the houſe of Capet, which was the houſe of Valoys and Burbon, with the reſt of the principall Nobilitie, muſt needes be rooted out, and that theſe luſtie buds of Charles the great muſt haue their turne: and for to bring to paſſe theſe things, the wofull Tragedie muſt be thus played.
               The Guizes muſt kindle the fire.
               The Prieſts, Friers and Ieſuites ſhall blowe it with the bellowes of 
                     •
                  ayling and ſedition.
               The King ſhall ſit ſtill vntill his brother and the Burbons come to their triall.
               The Pope ſhall play the Monarcho. This Monarcho was of late yeares a franticke Italian, well knowne both in Germanie and England, who imagined that all the Kings of the earth were his vaſſals: ſo Sir Hugh Vicar of Rome, ſitteth a farre off, will not drawe nigh the fire, and imagineth that all is his: wherevpon he condemneth the 
                     Ʋaloys and Burbons and the Nobilitie of France, to the ſlaughter.
               
                  
The name of the States ſhall be vſed and waite vppon the Guizes to play the hangman, and when all things be in a readines, the King, all the  Princes and Nobilitie ſhall be caſt into the fire, there to be conſumed and deſtroyed.
               When all this is happily performed, there will be a newe heauen and a newe earth. For the Guizes, and Sir Hugh bon companion Vicar of Rome, and all his bands, Ganimedes and Chaplaines ſhall haue all, and may take their paſtimes with their Curtizans, without any feare or controulment of the Hugonets.
               
               Here followe the acts of this Tragedie, or the ſumme of the ſecret Counſell of Rome holden, contayning the meanes how to deſtroy the kingdome of France, as they were deliuered by Sir Hugh vnto his ſtage players.
               Firſt, the houſe of Guize and their partakers ſhall procure new Commotions in the Realme, and intertaine warres. They ſhall alſo league the Nobilitie with their othes to perſecute the Goſpell, and that they ſhall not acknowledge any other Captaine and head of the League but onely the Duke of Guize.
               
               2 The King ſhall be counſelled to fit ſtill, and to take no care for ſuch vprores: but to let the Duke of Guize alone, for hée knoweth well how to handle the matter.
               3 The King ſhall ſend his mother to Monſier her ſonne, to perſwade him to come to Bloys to the States.
               4 In the meane time the King ſhall goe from Paris into a place of ſure acceſſe, and voide of ſuſpition, where he ſhall entiſe by fayre promiſes, by fayre meanes and fayre words, the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, if it may be done; whom he ſhall receiue with as much entertainment and courteſie, as he may ſhewe them. So the King was made a foole at Rome by a ſort of beggerly Friers and godles rabble. But in the meane while that the King ſhall ſhewe ſuch fayned courteſies to his brother and the Princes of his bloud, the Guizes ſhall retire from the Court with tokens of diſcontented minds.
               5 Theſe things being a working, the King ſhall aſſemble the States at Bloys, and ſuch as bee deuoted to the League ſhall bee ſent to the ſeuerall Prouinces, to picke out ſuch Deputies as may bee well taught and ſkilfull to play their parts.
               6 During theſe ſtirres, the Friers and Ieſuites, ſhall mooue vp the people to vprores, by ſeditious Sermons againſt the Hugonets.
               
               7 The Prieſts in their Pariſh Churches ſhall ſecretly take the names of able men, and by appoynted Captaines it ſhall be ordered what weapons be moſt fit for them, and in their ſhriuing they ſhall warne them to prouide ſuch weapons.
               
                  
8 The States holding ſhall ſweare to obſerue and obey whatſoeuer  ſhall be concluded, and ſhall binde themſelues and their commonalties to beare the charges of the play.
               9 But if Monſieur, the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and others of the houſe Burbon, doo not appeare, they ſhall bee condemned of contumacie, and as Rebels. And furthermore, all other who ſhall ſeeme to oppoſe themſelues againſt the States, ſhall be executed if they can bée taken, and if not, rewarde to be appoynted to ſuch as ſhall kill them.
               10 All theſe things being thus compaſſed, the States ſhall be ſworne to the Sea of Rome, and to obſerue the Councell of Trent.
               
               11 Requeſt alſo ſhall be made to the King by the States, that in caſe any man ſhould reſiſt theſe procéedings, hee ſhall appoynt the Duke of Guize his Generall to purſue them by all meanes to death.
               12 Yet the morrowe Maſſe Prieſts muſt come once more vppon the ſtage, and there they ſhall cauſe their Captaines to muſter them of the conſpiracie, and to make them readie to march when the aſſemblie of the States is once begun.
               13 All theſe things being ſo brought to paſſe, the States ſhall picke out Minos and Rhadamanthus to enquire and iudge of the life and déeds of Monſieur, for ioyning himſelfe with the Hereticks, and to make his proceſſe, after the naturall and godly example of the King of Spayne, which ſacrificed Charles of Austrich his naturall ſonne a Prince, (a Prince of great hope) vnto Moloch the Idoll of the Ieſuites.
               14 When Monſieur is condemned, the forces ſecretly gathered ſhall march to ſtrengthen the execution.
               15 Then immediatly the conſpired Souldiers ſhall ſet vpon the Hugonets in all Prouinces, without any reſpect of perſons.
               16 The Duke of Guize, that great Captaine, yt great Charlamaigne with his power ſhall deſtroy all, ſhall take the King and his mother, eyther put them in Monkeries, or els to rid them out of this world, according to the Prouerbe, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . By this wee ſee that the King long agoe was condemned at Rome either to be a Frier, or els to be ſlaine by a Frier.
               So all theſe things thus happily done, loe the Duke of Guize ſhall haue all, and in ſo doing the Crowne ſhall returne to the bleſſed ſtocke of Charlamaigne, and he and his ſucceſſors hencefoorth ſhall holde the Crowne of France of the Apoſtolike ſea, and ſhall aboliſh the prerogatiues of the French Church. Valete & plaudite Calliopius recenſui.
               
               Now I pray you good Sir Hugh good maſter Vicar, ſeeing you haue ſo wel ſped, let vs haue a fine Te Deum landamus, and a demure ſolemne Proceſſion, and all in your Pontificalibus, ſuch as wee had for the noble and famous victorie of the Spanyards againſt the Engliſhmen before Calis
                  
the 29. of Iuly 1588. And after a ſweete Maſſe of that Holy ghoſt which appeared to your predeceſſors at the Councell of Laterane, in the  viſible forme of an Owle, goe againe to ſchoole with your Chaplaines, and let vs knowe of you what the Hugonets will dóo all that while: or els ſeeing you haue that power to binde and to looſe, I pray you binde them hand and foote, that we may make quickly an end of them, or els euery one will ſay (to the great ſlaunder of holy Church) that Sir Hugh is a great Pazzo, for not being able to performe all that he taketh vppon 
                     In Italiō a Sot.
                   him to doo.
               And of all loue be good to maſter Francis of Lorrayne, deuiſe ſome good meanes that when the Crowne is ſet vpon his head, the heauines thereof ſhould not put him to paynes, and perhaps breake his necke. And then what would the world ſay, beſhrew you Sir Hugh, for in following your counſell we haue loſt a great Captaine and a newe King, and then be ſure that you will neuer be good after.
               But now to ſpeake in ſadneſſe, by theſe inſtructions, according to the which all the ciuill warres haue been directed euer ſince the yeare 1576. vntill the death of the laſt Duke of Guize, we may iudge what wiſedome and bleſſings are to be expected from Sir Hugh and his Chaplaines.
               Whileſt theſe things were at working in Rome, the Guizes followed diuers wayes to interrupt the peace: but now by the returne of Dauid from Rome, with theſe aforeſaide inſtructions, they went to worke ſubſtantially, and by the colluſion of the King, they made ſuch meanes as none might be admitted to the States, but the profeſſed enemies of the reformed Churches. For they cauſed priuate conuocations to be aſſembled in the ſeuerall Prouinces, which appoynted ſuch as were farre from peace, & were of the conſpiracie of Guize, hauing their ſecret inſtructions to be preſented at the States, without making priuie to their counſels any Townes, Cities or Commonalties.
               They ſpread abroad, that the Edict of peace could not bee publiſhed nor admitted in Townes and Cities, than the which nothing was more deſired of all ſorts of men, except onely them of the conſpiracie.
               They cauſed alſo infamous Libels to be printed and propoſed in their ſeuerall conuocations, being of ſuch men, as knowing the reports to bee moſt falſe, yet were readie to make themſelues to be true. As that they of the reformed religion requeſted the exercize of the ſame, not for ſatiſfying or contenting of their conſciences, but for the maintenance of factious and practizes againſt the King, and to fortifie themſelues, that vpon opportunitie, they might ſhake off the yoke of obedience due to the King.
               They ſpread abroad alſo, that they of the reformed religion had ſurprized Lachorite, and many Townes and Forts in Poytow, Xainctonge, Guyen, Languedock, and Daulphine, and that they had committed ſundry

murthers and cruelties vppon the Catholikes, and therefore in the ſame aſſemblies they did denounce warre vnto them of the reformed religion,  and to all them which would not conſent to their vndoing.
               They procured infinite number of iniuries and violences to bee done by their partakers euery where, to them of the religion, hoping through impatience, to cauſe them to breake the Edict of peace, ſo that the cauſes being found in them, the King arming the Duke of Guize, ſhould encreaſe his ſecret enemies authoritie, and decay his owne.
               Notwithſtanding theſe manifolde iniuries proffered vnto them of the religion, and the breaking of the peace, they of their part obſerued the Edict of pacification, without moleſting the Catholikes, but ſtoode onely vpon the defenſiue.
               The Guizes haſting ſo much as euer they could, their enterprizes (by their partakers) procured many Townes and Prouinces to rebell and to breake the peace, pretending that they of the religion ſought the oppreſſion of the Cleargie.
               Beſides the practizes afore mentioned, theſe good huſbands being loth to leaue any ſtone vnſtirred, that happily might any way further their deuiſed plot, did not ſticke to attempt euen contrary meanes. For in like caſe they followed the olde tricke of Barcocab, they went about cloſely and vnder hand, to drawe into their League them of the reformed religion, promiſing them the exercize of their religion, according to the Edict of peace, and more if they would.
               They ſolicited alſo Iohn Caſimier Prince Palſgraue to enter in league with them, promiſing to doo nothing againſt the reformed religion, and to deliuer him Townes in their gouernments for pledges. And herein if they could haue effected their deſire happily, they would not haue pretended ſo rigorous a courſe againſt them of the reformed religion, as afterward they did, when they perceiued that they of the reformed religion did ſmell, detect, and abhorred their treacherous ambition, and that they were taken forbeu cozba. If they might haue preuailed with the reformed, they would haue ſtoode vppon ſome plauſible Common-wealth. For their intent herein was (not that they cared or regarded any religion) but to bring the King and the Princes of the bloud into hatred, and the people into a miſtiking of the gouernement.
               And ſeeing their offers were reiected by the reformed, they determined to roote them out, aſſuring themſelues generally of the Catholikes, vnder colour of zeale of Poperie which they fayned more and more.
               And to begin, the Q. Mother (according to the Goſpell brought from Rome by Dauid, as is aboue ſayd) was ſent to bring Monſier her ſonne to the States at Bloys, which ſhe performed.
               Many fayre words were ſpent, many fayre promiſes giuen, and many

ſore threatnings were vttered, either to entice, or els to enforce the King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, to the States at Bloys. But  they refuſed their companie, knowing well what their meaning was. During this time, they were very buſie to make Leagues and confederacies, and to erect euery where fraternities, which they called of the holy Ghoſt, by ſuch meanes to fortifie themſelues, as they pretended, againſt the Heretickes, but indeede to conſpire the ſubuerſion both of the King and of the Burbons, which could not bee done (as they thought) without the rooting out of the profeſſors of the reformed religion.
               The ſecret Councell of Rome could not bee kept ſo cloſe, but that the King of Nauarre had intelligences what was paſſed at Rome, and therefore ſendeth a Gentleman of his to the King, with remembrances to aduertiſe him of the conſpiracie already concluded at Rome, againſt him and his eſtate. Monſieur his brother in like manner informed him, that there were things paſſed at Rome, againſt him, his Crowne and ſtate.
               
                  Iohn Caſimier Prince palatine out of Germany, ſendeth in like manner aduertiſements vnto the King about the ſame matter: and beſides by Praillon giueth him notice of the drifts of the Leaguers, which were to let the free holding of the States, by corrupting of the Deputies, and by letting that none of the Princes of the bloud, or any that haue cauſe of complayning, might appeare with free acceſſe.
               Thus the Guizes furthering their buſines by all meanes (as is aboue ſayd) in the Prouinces, for the making of a ſtrong league with as many as they were able, they procured the towne of Montmarſan in Gaſcoyne, to rebell againſt the King of Nauarre: which he ſhortly after ſurprized in one night, and brought the inhabitants to their duetie without any bloud ſhedding.
               By their meanes alſo the Towne of Rauſe, in the Countie of Armignake, belonging to the King of Nauarre, as the ſayd King had entered into the Towne, without any miſtruſt, with eightéene Gentlemen, the partakers of Guize there let the Percullis fall at his heeles, and ſetting vppon him one offered the Caliuer at his breaſt. But the ſayd King neuertheleſſe ſeazed vppon a Tower with his companie, and made way to the reſt of his traine to enter into the ſayd Towne, not ſuffering any of the inhabitants to be put to death, bu
                     •
                   onely him which had leuelled the Caliuer at his breaſt, and that at the earneſt ſute of the Magiſtrates of the Towne, accuſing him with diuers other crimes.
               In Ianuary the King ſendeth an Ambaſſador to the Prince Caſimier Palatine of Rhine, named Vilaquier, to excuſe his doings with lyes, ſurmiz
                     •
                  s  and ſlaunders, as that they of the reformed religion had ſeazed vppon diuers, and had committed murthers and cruelties vpon the Catholikes, and that they required not the exercize of the religion for any conſcience,

but for faſhion ſake only, and that his States will not ſuffer him to execute the Edict of peace.
               Vnto this meſſage the Prince Caſimier anſwered, as ſhewing how  the King was abuſed by the States, which were none other but ſuch as were enemies of his eſtate, and perturbers of the peace vnder the name of the States: and laſtly willeth him not to caſt his Realme into a miſerable flame of ciuill warres for other mens pleaſure.
               The Prince Caſimier alſo ſendeth Butrich his Ambaſſador to the King, to perſwade him (if poſſible were) to entertaine the p
                     •
                  ace which  was made ſo ſolemnely, which he alſo willed to be called his peace. The ſayd Ambaſſador had audience at Bloys the 23. of February.
               The 7. of March enſuing, the ſayd Butrich Ambaſſador, ſurrendred in his Maſters name, the lands, Lordſhips, penſions and offices which the  King had giuen him at the concluding of the peace. For as much as the Guizes had ſpread abroad both through France, Germany, and other countries, that the ſaid Prince (in conſideration and reſpect of his particular profite) was preiudiciall to the publike commoditie of his Souldiers.
               The pariſh Prieſts about this time tooke the names of able men; Souldiers were euery where ſecretly muſtered, according to Sir Hugh his counſell, as is aforeſaid. The Ieſuits alſo began to take the matter in hande, to further conſpiracies by rayling Sermons, who by theſe meaues crept ſo deepely into the Kings fauour, that he preferred the ſawcieſt of them, and them who could thunder moſt furiouſly againſt the reformed religion, to Biſhoprickes, Abbeyes, Prebends, and other fat Benefices; nouriſhing in his boſome from time to time the firebrands, to ſet him and his Realme in combuſtion at the firſt opportunitie.
               The Guizes ſeeing they could not win them of the religion to fauour their doings, but rather that their agents were taken forbeu cozba, conſidering alſo that they were not able to haue their deſire vpon them, fearing greatly the King of Nauarre, whoſe wiſedome, vertue, and valour they knewe well, goe about to make him to ſome hatefull, and to others contemptible. Therefore the Admirall Villars, father in lawe to the Duke de Mayne, raiſed vp vpon him the old lye and flander reported of the Chriſtians of the Primitiue Church, vp the Pagans, (to the end that Sathan might bee like to himſelfe) to wit, that the ſayd King being at Agen, in the night, the candles ſhould be put out. That falſe report was ſpread abroad throughout France, afore that any man had heard of it in the Citie of Agen. It was alſo reprooued for a moſt falſe lye by many Noblemen and Ladies of both religions which were then preſent.
               Now, the concluſion or rather colluſion of the States, was that they required the Edict of peace to bee reuoked, the exercize of the reformed religion inhibited, and Poperie to be ſet vp euery where.
               
                  
The King was as deſirous to graunt them, as they to require the breach of the peace: wherevpon fearefull perſecutions were raiſed vp euery  where; great cruelties effected in diuers places vpon them of the religion, and open warre denounced.
               And for as much as the condemnation and execution of Monſieur could not be brought to paſſe as yet, for many cōſiderations, it was kept cloſe, and deferred to a fitter time. But ſpecially for that he might be a good inſtrument to be occupied againſt the King of Nauarre, and them of the reformed religion.
               Therefore they thought good to make him and the Duke of Guize Generall ouer the Kings forces. Him I ſay, to giue the more authoritie to the actions and enterprizes with greater terror. The other was ioyned in Commiſſion to preuent what might happen, that Monſieur ſhould not in any wiſe fauour the King of Nauarre, nor his partakers any whit at all.
               The King of Nauarre hauing ſuch power as he could make in Guyen, prepared himſelfe vppon the defenſiue; and hauing a mightie power of Germaines readie to enter into France, his enemies hearts were ſomewhat cooled, and began to faint.
               On the other ſide, the King wanting money, nothing was done. By this expedition, & a great terror of the Germaines, hauing ſeazed France, the King now ſheweth himſelfe as deſirous of peace, as he was not long before of warre, and ſendeth his Mother to the King of Nauarre to treat for peace. Now old Catie muſt ſhewe ſome Italian iuggling, or els farewell Poperie. After much chopping and chaunging of words, the bargaine was made. The King of Nauarre being at Nerack in Gaſcoyne, receiued the peace, with ſome reſtructions of the former Edict, abhorring the ſlaughters of the Nobilitie, and oppreſſions of the people.
               This peace being concluded at Nerack, the Guizes tooke it very grieuouſly, as vnprofitable for the aduancing of that myſterie which did lye hidden in their braine: and alſo for that the King went about to reforme many abuſes, brought in by warre, and to reſtore the Nobilitie, to eaſe the people of diuers charges. For the Guizes would haue all theſe abuſes to continue, that in time it might ſerue for an olde cloake to couer withall their treacherous drifts, as they did afterward at the riſing of them in armes 1585. Diffidence and iealouſies therefore did growe daylie betweene the King and the Guizes. But the King to obtaine his intended purpoſe, thought good to pacifie them, calleth them to the Court, dooth aſſigue them great penſions, beſtoweth great gifts and honors vppon them. Yet they hauing alwaies a hartburning, tickled with their accuſtomed ambition, watching for the death of Monſieur, determined to haſten them: foraſmuch as they feared him more than the King.
               
                  
In the yeare 1579. the Guizes ſent Frier Claude Mathew (abuſie Ieſuite of Pontamoſſon in Lorrayne) to Rome, to put Sir Hugh to worke,  and to lay downe ſome newe direction to execute the ſecr
                     •
                  t Councell of Rome, ſeeing that the former deuiſes had failed.
               Fri
                     •
                  r Claude from thence tooke his iourney into Spayne, to giue ſome ghoſtly counſell to Dom Philipporey deſpagna. Out of this voyage came the expedition of Italians and Spanyards into Ireland, vnder the leading of Captaine Saunders, which there dyed mad wandring in ye woods. From thence alſo came the luſtie flight of Locuſts the Ieſuits into England, vnder the banner of their Generall Campion, to roote out the Goſpell, and to plant Poperie, if it could be done. But if not, to worke ſome buſie peece of worke to her Maieſtie, that the Guizes in the meane time might work more ſurely in France, without hope of any help out of England to the King, and to the King of Nauarre, or to them of the reformed religion, if they ſhould ſtand in any neede. The Guizes of their part were not idle, but by ſundrie practizes had renewed the ciuill warres: and by the Kings conſent Monſieur his brother and the Duke de Mayne were in Commiſſion for the conducting of the Kings Armies: which thing they did as well as they could, with as great preparations as might bée, but yet without doing any harme. But becauſe the common report went that Monſieur ſhould paſſe into England, and from thence ſhould go take poſſeſſion of the Dukedome of Braban
                        •
                     , which was offered him by the States of the Lowe Countrey, they were content yet once againe to winke at peace, that they might be rid of him, hoping that he would neuer returne into France to trouble them.
               Therefore in the yeare 1580. Monſieur (before he tooke his iourney) was ſent to the King of Nauarre, which both met at Fleyx, a Towne in Perigord, ſituated vppon the riuer of Dradogne, where they concluded a peace, not much varying from the former. Which thing being done, Monſieur haſted to his iourney.
               Now this being done, Frier Mathew (the Guizes Purſiuant) of méere deuotion muſt needs poſt to Rome yet once againe to viſite the Stewes, and to aduertize Sir Hugh what was paſt in France, to knowe of him how the Guizes ſhould worke vppon this preſent occaſion. There Sir Hugh ſtayed ſomewhat his wiſedome, afore hee would giue anſwere, knowing not well what counſell to giue or to followe, becauſe his Armado in Ireland, vnder the conduct of Captaine Saunders Doctor of Militarie Diſcipline, and his Locuſts, vnder the leading of the luſtie Campion, had ſped but ſo ſo, and had a very hot entertainment. His brains therefore was driuen to peruſs his Chriſteroſſe, ſo that in this dumpe Sir Hugh muſt take counſell of Dom Philipporey deſpagna. Therefore maſter Frier muſt trudge ouer the world. Haue with you maſter Frier into

                  Spayne to eate a peny worth of Raphams. Vpon this hard miſchances of fortune, Sir Hugh thought good that Dom Philippo ſhould play Xerxes, 
                   and whileſt he is a preparing the inuincible Arinado, meanes ſhould bee made to doo away both Monſieur and the Prince of Orenge, that by the death of the one, the Low Countreys ſhould be left headleſſe & vnable to reſiſt the petie Duke of Parma; and by the others death, the driſts of the Guizes might be eaſily executed in France. The procuring of ye death of the Prince of Orenge was committed to the petie Duke of Parma, petie ſonne to the holy man Pedro Aloiſio, who for his religion, vz. his abominable and monſtrous whoredomes, was hanged at the windowe of his owne houſe, a holy Martyr, and baſtard ſonne to Sir Alexander Farneſo Vicar of Rome, called otherwiſe Paulus tertius. This Duke of Parma acquitted himſelfe pretily well of his charge, as ſhall bee ſayd hereafter. The death of Monſieur was vndertaken by the Guizes, that that if GOD himſelfe would not kill him, they would doo it, which they alſo performed in time.
               Frier Mathew Ieſuit (carrier of the Court of the Guizes) returning out of Spayne, fell ſicke at Barbaste in Gaſcoyne, not for any ſurfet which he tooke in Spayne, except it were for eating too little. The poore Pardoner there was ſo ſicke, that he would haue eaten any kinde of meate if he could haue had it. But his good Maſters did ſo diet him, that according to his profeſſion he afflicted his bodie with faſting out of meaſure, to pull downe his courage, leaſt when hee ſhould come into the Stewes to giue ghoſtly counſell to the Curtizans, he ſhould doo any thing to the diſcredite of holy Ch
                     •
                  rch▪ and to the ſlaundring of the holy order of Ieſuits: for ſuch faſting as he vſed in that iourney would doo greater miracles in keeping a Frier cha
                     ••
                  , than all the weeping which the Ieſuites doo vſe can doo.
               The King ſending his brother into Brabant, determined to appoynt him a Counſell. But the Kings Counſell being in a manner all Leaguers, appoynted him two manner of men, one to accompanie him, and the other to counſell him. They therefore prouided that ſuch counſell ſhould be giuen him, as either ſhould altogether nouſell him in all filthie life, or els ſhould worke ſuch meanes as might diſhonor him, or put him in danger of his life. Another companie was appoynted him of vertuous Noble men of both religions, onely to accompanie him to countenance the matter, but not to counſell him.
               
                  Monſieur therefore in this equipage of men of ſo ſundrie colours and  qualities, taketh his iourney firſt into England, and from thence into Brabant the yeare 1582. there to bee inueſted of that Dukedome of the holy Empyre, which was duely and ſumptuouſly performed.
               Whileſt Monſieur ſoiorneth in the Low Countrey, the partakers of

the Guizes, thinking ye time long, were very importunate to ſet the Duke  forward about the buſines which he knewe, conſidering the good opportunitie of the abſence of Monſieur. For if he ſhould returne (ſayd they) and finde all things peaceable, it would bee hard for them to worke any thing; for as much as Monſieur had knowledge of their drifts, who aſſuredly would ſeeke to ouerthrowe all, and being in France of ſuch power, would goe nigh to doo it. To theſe and like perſwaſions the Duke of Guize was wont to anſwere, that hee will enterprize nothing openly, whileſt the King had any brother; but if he could ſee one day the laſt of the houſe of Valoys to ſit vpō the Throne, he promiſed them with a round oath to ſet his hand to worke ſo ſurely, that if he did not carrie away the whole, yet he hoped to haue a good part of the cake. In the meane time the Guizes began to ſell the moſt part of their offices, and to gather great ſummes of money, making their reckoning ſhortly to haue all and to diſpoſe of all. But thinking the time long, that neither ſicknes, nor the fortune of warre had ſhortned the life of Monſieur, which greatly they deſired, they determined to do that which God would not do, and to execute Sir Hughs ſpirituall counſell.
               There was one Salcedo a Spanyard, which before had eſcaped the gibbet of Roan, for coyning falſe coyne, with his falſe gold and ſiluer wrought by Alchimie, fled into Spayne, and from thence into Lorrayne, where the Guizes hiered him for ſixe thouſand Crownes (which they payed him at Nancie in Lorrayne) to murther Monſieur. This Salcedo therefore hauing his money and his leſſon without the booke, went into France, proffered his ſeruice to Monſieur afore he went into the Lowe Countrey, and at the recouerie of Cambray ſhewed ſome token of dexteritie, and in the Low Countrey did all that could be to creepe into greater fauour with Monſieur. But withall entered in familiaritie and communication with the yongeſt ſonne of Egmond, for which cauſe the ſayd Egmond began to be ſuſpected both of Monſieur and the Prince of Orenge: who being examined by the ſayd Prince about Salcedos familiaritie, anſwered that their communications were about Alchimie. The Prince with a certaine preſagious minde replied, that he feared that a more dangerous Alchimie would enſue of their familiaritie: admoniſhed the ſayd Egmond to call to remembrance the dealing of the King of Spayne with his father. The Prince of Orenge and Monſieur departed from Antwerpe to Bridges in Flanders, where they arriued the 17. day of Februarie.
               Now, this conſpiracie deuiſed at Rome, confirmed in Spayne, brought from thence by Frier Mathewe the Pardoner, ſet in readines to Nancie in Lorrayne, the Duke of Parma aduertized thereof, thought good with one dayes worke to diſpatch theſe two noble Princes: He thought good

to bring ſomewhat of his owne, leaſt the Leaguers onely ſhould haue the  glorie of this murther: therefore to Salcedo he ioyned two companions, knowing that a ſtring twiſted is not ſo eaſily broken. Theſe two fellowes were Franciſco Baza an Italian, of the band of Fernando Gonzago (which was in the Campe of the petie Duke of Parma) and a Wallon.
               During the time theſe two Princes were in Bridges, Salcedo aduanced himſelfe ſo neere Monſieur, that vpon ſuſpition he was apprehended: then ſtayed there in the Court without the ſayd Italian and the Wallon tarying for Salcedo. This Italian expecting with great deſire when Salcedo ſhould come foorth, aſked of another whether Salcedo were within ſtill. Anſwere was made that he was, being aſked the queſtion whether hee knewe Salcedo. When the Courtier was gone in againe, the Italian entring in feare would haue fled: but being ſuddenly layd hold on, was examined, and confeſſed the whole conſpiracie. Salcedo which would not know the Italian before, now when he was accuſed by Baza, ſayd that the ſayd Baza was a muletier and a lyer. But Baza anſwered, he would ſhewe before Salcedo his face ſuch proofes of this matter, that his declaratiōs ſhould be found true. The malcontent Wallon fled away.
               The 24. of Iuly the young Egmond being brought to the Court to Monſieur, & perceiuing how Salcedo had accuſed him, reuealed all whatſoeuer  
                  Salcedo had opened vnto him. Vpon which confeſſion Egmond was committed priſoner to the Magiſtrate of the towne.
               The 28. Franciſco Baza the Italian was examined vppon the Racke,  who confeſſed and reuealed horrible things.
               The 30. this deſperat Italian with a knife which he had craftily gotten,  firſt ſtrooke himſelfe in the bellie nigh the nauell, and after in the breaſt on the left ſide, and ſo killed himſelfe. And immediatly after, by the Magiſtrate of the Citie, was condemned for a murtherer and a Traytor.
               The Wallon malcontent named Nicholas Hugo, alias de la borde, being afterward taken and examined, confeſſed the conſpiracie.
               The King vnderſtanding what was done, purpoſed and attempted, ſent two of his Counſell into the Lowe Countrey to Bridges, to bring the ſaid Salcedo into France, tooke the paynes in his owne perſon to examine him, and hauing by the ſaid Salcedo his owne confeſſion knowne what was intended at Nancie, attempted at Bridges, cauſed the ſayd Salcedo to be condemned of treaſon by the Court of Parliament of Paris, and by their ſentence the ſayd Spanyard Salcedo was drawne and torne with foure Horſes. There were alſo ſome priſoners at Paris about that matter.
               About the ſame time, or not long after, one Monſieur de Muy being wounded at the ſiege of Fere, the Duke of Guize went out of Paris in poſt to be his ghoſtly father, and to giue him ſome good ghoſtly counſell, not to tell tales out of the ſchoole, nor to diſcouer holy myſteries.
               
                  
The Archdeacon of Toul in Lorreyne, named des Roſiers, had written a booke of genealogies of the Lorreyns, bringing them out of the belly of the  houſe of Eroy, to the defacing and diſalowing the poſſeſſion of the crowne by the Valoys. About the ſame time the King ſendeth the preſident Brulard to make his proceſſe, and by him was condemned of high treaſon: but afterward by interceſſion made, was quited by recanting and condemning his booke before the Kinges counſaile.
               The Guyzes being thus diſappointed of their driftes with the loſſe of 6. thouſand crownes, faint not for all yt, but follow on their courſe: for they muſt néeds to ſee an end of Monſieur whom they thinke to be ſuch a blocke in their way, as they cannot ouerl
                     •
                  ape without ſtumbling dangerouſly.
               There was a holy woman in Paris, by name Madam ſainte Geneuieue, who was ſo holy, that both the King Henry the third, and Monſieur his brother, would often times goe a pilgrimage to her with much Romiſh deuotion, but with litle honeſty, ſhe muſt do the feat for the aduauncing of the holie League, and vpholding of the holy Church. The Guyzes therefore to ſpéede well, muſt offer a candell to that Saint of Paris, to bée good to them, and to doe for them that which God would not doe, at their earneſt prayers to repaire to Monſieur, which was thenat Chasteautierry, vpon the riuer of Marne in Brie: and that ſhe ſhould haue with her boxes of Concerues.
               This bleſſed Virgin therefore tooke her iourney to Monſieur ward with her holy boxes with her: ſhée was the more welcome to Monſieur, becauſe he had not ſéene her of a long time: he being otherwiſe ſomewhat penſiu
                     •
                  , for miſſing of his purpoſe in the low Countrey, and for the loſſe of his credit, which he left behinde him at Antwerpe, yet for the recreating of him ſelfe with his olde acquaintance, they muſt banquet together, and haue a good merry day once ere they depart. Shée came forth with her holy boxes, where holy dregges of Rome had béene, out of the which ſhe gaue him a bole ſo hard of digeſtion, that it did him no good: for it did lie ſo heauie vpon his heart, that he neuer left vomitting of blood as long as there remained life in him, and in like maner as his brother Charles the ninth did before him: he died the 10. day of Iuly, on the which day his father Henry the ſecond died 24. yeares before.
               As ſoone as the King was certifyed of the death of his brother, he ſendeth the Duke de Eſpernon to the King of Nauarre, to aduertiſe him that he held him for his ſonne and true heire of the Crowne in France, in caſe he doth deceaſe without iſſue.
               But to come to the matter: now here is a bleſſed daies worke for the Guyzes and holy Church. Vp maſter Frier, and get you to Rome the holy Citie once againe, to Sir Hugh, to ſhew him what good lucke wée haue, and that all thinges do happen as wée would haue them: but that

we haue néede of his ghoſtly counſaile. 
               
               Whileſt Frier Mathew (carier of the Guyzes) goeth to do his meſſage as well as he could, they of the Guyze with their partakers do diſpearſe themſelues into all partes of the Realme, to allure Townes and Cities, but eſpecially them that were Malecontentes, to their deuotion: after the which progreſſe of theirs with importunacy, they do procure the King to call the aſſembly of the ſtates of the realme at Bloys, to the which they had altogether laboured their fauorers, and ſuch as did deſire nothing more then the decay of the King, and increaſing of the Guyzes.
               
               In the ſame aſſembly, that the King might haue the blame himſelfe of the breaking of the peace, it was requeſted.
               Firſt, that the edict of pacification ſhould be reuoked, and the exerciſe of the reformed religion forbidden.
               Secondly, that the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and all the nobilitie profeſſing the ſame religion, ſhould be exiled out of the realme, & all others of the ſame profeſſion ſhould be enforced either to abiure, or els to depart forthwith out of the Realme.
               Thirdly, that the 8. townes which were giuen them for 6. yeares, ſhould be put into the kinges handes, alleaging that the time was expired.
               The king being deſirous to entertaine his ſubiectes in peace, knowing well the frutes of ciuil warre, diſſolued the ſtates, promiſing ſhortly to aſſemble the beſt, wiſeſt, and moſt experienced of his realme, to haue their aduiſe for the reformation of all thinges.
               About the ſame time of the ſtates beeing at Bloys, the king of Nauarre ſendeth new aduertiſementes to the king, about the intent and open practiſes of the league, willing him to haue ſome care of himſelfe, and ſheweth him the preſent danger that he ſtood in.
               After the returne of Frier Mathew from Rome, the Barieſuits in the latter end of September held a certaine Synode or Clandeſtine conuenticle in Paris, in the which the ſaid Frier Mathew as preſident, did rule the roſt, hauing receaued direction of Sir Hugh vicar of Rome, where according to the ſaid directions, they lay downe the methode to ſtirre vp the coles, to raiſe vp ſeditions and rebellious in all partes, but eſpecially to increaſe the hatred of all men againſt them of the religion, but namely againſt the king of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde, and for that end they forged an infamous libell, as more amply ſhalbe ſhewed.
               The king according to his promiſe made to the States at Bloys, in the latter end of the yeare 1584. called (at Saint Germayn in Faye) his chéefeſt and beſt learned Senators of all his Parliamentes, there to ſhew him the beſt and readieſt meanes to eaſe the people, and to reſtore the realme to ſome good ſtate.
               On the other ſide, the king of Nauarre, conſidering that the time appointed

to ſurrender the 8. townes committed to his cuſtody, was expired,  and that the rage of his enemies was rather increaſed then diminiſhed, and that their meanes, their factions and their furie was now greater then euer it had béene, and that imminent daungers were at hand: aſſembled a méeting of the Nobilitie, which profeſſed the reformed religion at Montaulban, a ſtrong City in Quercye, where Monſieur Belieure (one of the kinges counſaile) was preſent to prouide for their common affaires.
               And whereas the king of Nauarre his enemies had ſpread abroad, both by falſe rumors and libels, that immediatly after the death of Monſieur, he  was returned to the Catholike religion, and was gone to Maſſe: the ſaid king of Nauarre therefore to ſatiſfy all men againſt that falſe rumor, and ſlaunder, proteſted openly that he knew the truth to be on his ſide, and that by Gods aſſiſtance he would ſtand to the profeſſion and defence of the reformed religion, vnto the end, and that hée would acknowledge none other fortune but onely that.
               There by the common aduiſe of all that aſſembly, it was thought good, that conſidering the great daungers which ſeeme to threaten them of the reformed Religion, and generally all France, a ſupplication ſhould bee preſented to the king, that of his méere fauour & clemencie be would continue the kéeping of the ſaid Townes to the king of Nauarre for certaine yeares more.
               Vpon this concluſion the Lord Laual, with other deputies, were ſent to the King at the aſſembly which was at Saint Germain, and ſhewing the cauſe of their comming to the king, and complaining of diuers iuiuries daily done to them of the reformed religion, by the leaguers: the 11. of December 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   the king granted them the keping of the ſaid townes for 2. yeares longer, charging them that for iniuries done to them, they ſhould not ſéeke to reuenge their owne cauſe, for breaking of the peace. But that they would ſhew their gréefes to the King of Nauarre, who thereupon ſhould make meanes to him for amendes.
               Whileſt all theſe thinges were working on euery ſide, the king of Nauarre, ſéeing that neither ſo many aduertiſementes from euery part of France geuen to the king, neither that which hée himſelfe ſaw, namely the partialities, ſocieties, fraternities, leagues, confederacies, and preparations of the houſe of Guyze, did any whit moue or warne the king to looke to himſelfe and to his affaires (which thing he might eaſily haue done in time.) The ſaid king of Nauarre had ſent the Lord de Segur Pardillan ſuperintendent of his houſe to the Quéene of England, the king of Dēmarke, the Princes electors, the Lands-graue of Heſſen, and to other States of Germany for thrée cauſes: firſt to compound the controuerſies about certaine articles of religion not as yet agréed vpon in the reformed Churches, yt the enemies of the commō cauſe might not diſtoine them by that occaſiō.
               
                  
Secondly, to renue the ancient friendſhip and aliaunce in that ſort, as it had véene of old. 
               
               Thirdly, to diſpoſe a ſumme of money in Germany, in ſuch order that therby he might there prouide ſuccour, if he were aſſaulted by his enemies. The ſaid Lord Perdillane returned home to the king of Nauarre in December 1584. when the king did hold his counſaile at Saint Germayn.
               
               The end of the firſt Booke.
            
            
               THE SECOND BOOKE.
               
                  NOw when the Guyzes do draw néere their time, to bring forth that monſter of treaſon which they had conceaued: they haue many ſecret conferences with yt Duke of Parma, pety ſonne to Peter Aloyſe Pharneſe the Popes baſtard, hanged at his windowes by his owne ſubiectes for his execrable life. Alſo with Bernardine Mendoze, & Giouan Bardachino the king of Spaine his Coriero: the Biſhop of Cominges, baſtard ſonne to the Lord Lanſake, playing Dromo betweene them. For a Stage play can not haue good grace to make the people laugh, except there be a popiſh Prieſt to play the Deuils part. All this whiſpering among them was about a great ſumme of money, which the king of Spaine ſhould lay out for to beginne the play: and leaſt the ſayd king of Spaine ſhould be coſened of his money, the Duke of Guyze to deliuer him the dukedome of Britayn, yt Cityes of Bourdeaux, and Marſeilles: and for the performance thereof, he ſhould ſend ſome of his children to the Duke of Sauoy in hoſtages.
               Therefore now the Guyze is as full of Spaniſh piſtolets, as a Dogge is full of Fleas (as the Prouerbe is, when wee will ſignify great aboundance of thinges). He geueth great ſummes of this Spaniſh liberality to his partakers, but ſpecially to diſcontented perſons. He profereth alſo of this Spaniſh money to many, which neither require it, neither would haue of it. But all men did excéedingly wonder whence ſhould come this plenty, ſéeing that it was well knowen, that he was déepely indebted.
               Now when all thinges ſéemed to be in a readines, to begin the tragedie, the Fryers of the ſociety of Barieſe the ſorcerer, named by cutting ſhort Ieſuits, do play the prologue: for they ſteppe vp into Pulpits euery

where, whom they haue turned to trompets and drommes of the Deuill,  to blow and ſound the alarme of ſedition and rebellion.
               There they do ſhew the decay of popery, which they call the Catholike faith: they do vrge the miſeries of euery degrée to procéede from the Hugonoets and their fauorers (meaning and in a maner openly declaring the king.) They do propound ye great dangers which did hang ouer the heads of the Catholikes.
               There they did tell, how that there was a certaine confederacie of the Hugonoets with the heretikes of Germany, England, Denmarke, and Swiſſerland, to oppreſſe the Catholike Church.
               It is ſaid before that in September laſt, there was holden a certayne conuenticle of conſpirators againſt Chriſtendom in Paris by the Barieſuits, commonly called the Ieſuits, where they forged a certaine infamous libell, to ſerue them for a firebrand of the ſedition.
               There they ſay and lye all at once, that the 14. day of December 1584, ther was concluded at Magdebourge in Saxonie, that the kings of Nauarre and Denmarke, the Queene of England, the Princes of Germany, the Princes Palſgraue, and Orenge, the Landſgraue of Heſſen, they or their Embaſſadors ſhould appeare at Baſill the next moneth of May following. Where is to be noted the impudencie of theſe lying Fryers. For the Princes Palſgraue and Orenge were dead, the one a whole yeare before, the other they had procured to be murthered in Holland by one of their owne Ieſuits 6. moneths before. But theſe two Princes they ſhould raiſe vp by the Borieſu their maſter, whom theſe Coniurers founde in their Pamphlets to appeare at Baſill.
               
               They affirmed alſo in the ſaid infamous libels, that the King of Nauarre ſhould haue taken armes the 18. of Aprill, the yeare 1585. which in déede was the time appointed for the League to riſe vp.
               They affirmed alſo, that the king of Nauarre had promiſed in the aſſemblie of Montaulban, that in caſe he ſhould ſuruiue the king, and that hée might attayne to the Crowne, he would roote out of France all Popiſh religion, and depriue them of the ſaid religion of all ſtate, dignity and autority.
               They ſaid alſo that the miniſters had perſwaded the king of Nauarre to reuenge the murther of Paris, and that it was concluded, that out of euery towne and citie 3. of the chéefeſt Burgeſes ſhould be deliuered to requite the ſaid murther.
               They did reade theſe forged lyes in their Pulpits, where they omitted no point of Monkiſh railing rhetoricke in their ſermons, to ſtirre vp the people to ſedition and warre againſt them of the reformed religion. They crye out, they rage and fume, ſaying that now the time is come, that holy Church (for by this word they meane, the pride, pompe, and voluptuous

life of Biſhops, Cardinals, Monkes, Fryers, and Prieſtes) do craue their helpe, or neuer. They do exhort the people both in their Sermons,  and prinate confetence, and in their ſhriuing of the people, to ioyne with the Leaguers, made them great promiſes of heauenly rewardes, they extolled the noble buds of Charlemaigne, meaning the Guyzes, which haue vndertaken the defence of holy Church againſt the force and attemptes of heretikes, and fauorers of them. They preached alſo their valure, their wiſedome, their woundes and noble feats for the defence of the realme, and holy Church. They ſhewed how eaſie it would be to roote out the heretikes out of all France, hauing ſuch Captaines to manage the warres.
               About the beginning of this yeare 1585. there was a Bachiler, or rather a lodger of diuinitie in Sorboune, which dyed a holy Martir in this wiſe (let good men iudge.) This Diuine had holden in diſputation publikely in the Colledge of Sorboune this Theologall propoſition, ful of Ieſuitical diuinity, which he dedicated to the Abbot of Cluny, baſtard ſonne to the Cardinall of Lorreine: that was, to wit, That it was lawfull for any man priuate or otherwiſe, to depoſe or kill any King or Prince, which were wicked, euill men, or heretikes.
               The king hearing of this new and ſtrange kinde of Diuinitie aryued now of late into the land, was greatly offended, and intended to call this Bachiler to accompt: but he was preuented by theſe meanes,
               For they which had made him ſo ſpeake with Piſtolets of Spaine, hired a good fellow likewiſe with Piſtolets, which ſlew this diuine with all his diuinity in the court of the Colledge: which act done, fled & auoided, leaſt he who had ſet both of them to worke for Piſtolets ſhould be diſcloſed.
               Thus the Prologue being ſo well played, and the hartes of the beholders ſo prepared: the Duke of Guyze alſo with his Piſtolets hauing drawen the Malcontes to helpe to playe the reſt: and the principall Authors themſelues almoſt readie to come forth. There reſted one practiſe more to be ſet downe before the entrance, which was as followeth.
               Betwéene the riuers of Charante, Botonne, and the townes of Niort, Fonteney, and Ralmond, cituated vppon the Ocean ſea, lyeth a Countrey called Annix, pertaining to the gouernement of Rochel: the Riuer Seure comming downe from Niort, afore it falleth into the ſea, méeting with an other riuer running from Fontency, deuideth it ſelfe into many channels, which do make diuers Ilandes, commonly called the Ilandes of Maran, by the name of the chiefe towne there called Portmaran. At euery acceſſe into thoſe Ilandes, there are fortes builded vpon the channels of the ſayd riuer.
               The third day of February the Miniſter of Maran being at Rochel, 
                   was aduertiſed by the letters of a friend, that there was greater and more cruell preparation of warre againſt the reformed religion, than euer had

béen afore time: and alſo that there were drifts to ſeaze vpon the Iles of  
                  Maran, the Caſtle and other Forts, if it were not looked to. For the Guizes intending ſhortly to bring to light their intents heretofore hidden in the darknes of their brayne, and aforehand to ſeaze vpon as many places of importance as they could; determined by all meanes to ſeaze vpon Rochel, which had béen alwayes a great eye-ſore to them. But knowing well that Rochel could not bee ſurprized, they hoped to bring to paſſe by warre that which could not bee done by treaſon nor ſurprize, and therefore they concluded to take theſe Ilands afore hand, out of the which they ſuppoſed greatly to moleſt, and in the end to blocke in the ſayd towne of Rochel.
               
               The Guizes had purpoſed to raiſe their inſurrection the 18. of Aprill. But the ſpirit of ambition did ſo diſquiet them, that without taking any reſt they thought a day to be a yere; which impatient abiding cauſed them to abridge their time, and to anticipate from the 18. of Aprill to the 4. of March. 
               
               Therefore now the Guizes Leaguers (for ſo ſhall they be called hereafter) with their leagued came foorth vppon the ſtage the 4. day of March, which had béen a fatall day to that houſe to worke miſchiefe. For 25. yeres Francis Duke of Guize, father vnto this laſt, vpon the ſame day committed the cruell murther of Vaſſie, which was the breach of the Edict of Ianuary, and the ground of all the ciuill warres which haue followed. The Leaguer and leagued (I ſay) came foorth galloping in troupes in euery part of France, but ſpecially in Normandie, Picardie, Brie, Champaigne, and about Paris. They ſeaze vpon Townes, Cities and Fortreſſes, vpon the Kings money, and vpon euery thing which might doo them good. They ſurprized Compeigne, Guyſſons, Chalons, Toul, Meziers, Montreul, Peronne, and diuers other places in diuers Prouinces.
               The King on the other ſide deſirous to keepe his realme in peace, with the good aduiſe of his Senators, aſſembled at S. Germaine, for a beginning to eaſe the people, had remitted ſeuen hundred thouſand Frankes, diſcharging alſo diuers offices, which were greatly chargeable, and hinderfull to the people, and intended to doo a great deale more hereafter, giuing himſelf wholly to reſtore his realme in his former flouriſhing eſtate. But hearing of this ſudden taking of armour, at the firſt was greatly amazed thereat; yet afterward did beare it with great patience, to ſee what end theſe newe tumults and attempts would come to.
               The 15. day of March the Leaguers being in armour, and dooing all parts of hoſtilitie vpon the Kings ſubiects, ſuppoſing that all France not  onely would tremble at the ſound of their Trompets, but ſo would take their part, were fouly diſappoynted. For in ſome places they were laughed to ſcorne; in ſome other were reſiſted; and by ſome were well beaten for a beginning.
               
                  
And among all others which miſſed of their purpoſe, Monſieur des Roches, according to the determination of the Leaguers, (as is aforeſayd)  ſent to Maran a certaine friend of his named Gareune (who heretofore  in the former warres had commanded there vnder the ſaid Monſieur des Roches) to ſeaze vpon the Caſtle, with the helpe of fiue Souldiers diſguiſed in Marchants apparell, whom he had brought with him, hoping there alſo to haue the helpe of certaine Papiſts of the Towne, but ſpecially of him who had the Caſtle in kéeping named Piguard, a Popiſh ſouldier, which in times paſt had béen in garriſon there, and had married a wife in the Towne. But the watchfull diligence of them of the Religion there dwelling was ſuch, that they diſcouered him the ſame night, and chaſed him away with his Marchants.
               About the latter ende of March, the King perceiuing the drifts of the  Leaguers to procéed to great outrages, and that his long ſuffering might greatly further their deſperatnes, the 28. of March writeth to his officers euery where, certifying them that the Armes were not taken by his commandement, forbiddeth all men to take any Armes hereafter, commandeth them who haue alreadie taken to lay them downe, chargeth his officers to lay hand on them which doo refuſe ſo to doo, and to procéede againſt them by order of lawe as againſt rebels, if they can be apprehended, and willeth the Gouernours of Townes and Prouinces to ſet vpon them as vpon Traytors.
               The King alſo armed the Dukes Ioyeuſe and Eſpernon, with authoritie and power to ſet vpon the Leaguers, who defeated their companies in diuers places. The Marſhall Byron alſo was appoynted with certayne horſmen to ride in the countrey about Paris, and to ſet vpon as many as could be found.
               Marſhall Matignon gouernour of Bourdeaux, putteth out of the Caſtle Trompet the Lord Vailhac, Gouernour of the ſayd Caſtle, for being one of the Leaguers, and for hauing intelligences with the King of Spayne.
               
               Theſe beginnings of the Leaguers being as yet doubtfull, not ſo well frequented, nor ſo lucky as they hoped it would haue béen, nor yet ſo well repreſſed and preuented as the King might haue done, if he had had good counſell, or might haue followed his owne. Theſe beginnings (I ſay) being but wauering, & ſuch as might procure them a great fall, they thought that it was high time to beſtirre themſelues about their buſines, and to ioyne policie with ſuch ſmall power as they had, leaſt that in galloping ouer haſtily, they ſhould fall and breake their neckes. For conſidering that to wrap the Realme of luſtines into new troubles, againſt the Kings will, without rendering a probable reaſon, would procure to them & their houſe more hatred, than they were able to ſuſtain, they labour to doo two things, to wit; to deriue the hatred vpon them whom they had determined to deſtroy,

and then to ſeeke to draw the king in proceſſe of time to their faction, as at length they did, as it ſhall appeare hereafter.
               To couer therfore their ambitious rebellion vnder ſome colour of right,  they hid their ſhame vnder a Cardinals hat; for they bring i
                     •
                   vpon ye ſtage the Cardinall of Bourbon, as the author of this Tragedie, whereon they make him play Getas part. Oh regem me eſse opportuit. A man of great yeares, to contend with his Nephew the King of Nauarre, about the Armor of Achillis afore his death. And for becauſe the Cardinalls hat would not warrant this clayme and rebellion, they goe about to ſhadowe it with ſome colour of pietie and iuſtice (which indeede were trodden vnder foote by themſelues, and by the warres and tumults which they had kindled, foſtered and intertayned fiue and twentie yeares together, to bring to paſſe theſe their now manifeſt intents) they ſet foorth a declaration contayning plauſible cauſes among men of all degrees, of their taking of Armes, bearing date the 31. of March. 
               
               Where note how the Guizes haue hid their treaſon vnder ye Cardinals name, and the Cardinall taketh the cloake of religion and iuſtice; ſo they abuſing that olde Noble man as a Geta or ſlaue, doo make him ſpeake in ſuch ſort as followeth.
               But doo not thinke (gentle Reader) that I ſpeake vnreuerently of that noble Prince, iſſued out of ſuch an ancient and noble raſe, but to ſhewe the vnaduiſed facilitie of that man, who ſuffered himſelfe to be ſo abuſed, as to become a ſlaue and a Geta vnto the ambition of other men, and by the ſame meane hath ſet his Countrey, (in the which hée did beare ſo many honors) his naturall and lawfull Prince, his houſe, his kindred and familie ſo honorable, ancient and famous, in a miſerable combuſtion and daunger to be rooted out, for a vayne imagination to become a King. But to returne to the purpoſe.
               Firſt, they make him require the aboliſhing of the reformed religion, and that the ſtabliſhing of the Catholike religion may not bee interrupted hereafter, whatſoeuer alteration may happen in the ſucceſſion of the Crowne, they all of them (I meane the Leaguers) naming themſelues falſly (only except the Cardinall Bourbon) Princes of the blood, doo require that a Catholike ſucceſſor may be nominated, which to bee the Cardinall himſelfe, becauſe he had (as they ſuppoſed) but few yeres to liue, and therefore was not like to ſtand long in their way.
               Secondly, they doo require that the K. of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and their heires may bee declared incapable to ſucceede to the Crowne▪ in caſe the King ſhould dye without iſſue, alleaging that they are heretickes and relaps. And note, that for the reſt of the Princes of Bourbon, to wit, the Cardinall Vendoſme, the Earles, Princes, and Countie of Soyſſons, they doo exclude them from the ſucceſſion of the Crowne, becauſe they are

ſonnes of an hereticke, or otherwiſe contemptuouſly paſſe them ouer, as not able to buckle with them. The houſe of Monpenſier is beyond the x.  degree of aguation. The King himſelfe cannot liue long, for they will prouide for that: therfore the concluſion is eaſily to be inferred. The Crowne is fallen in the laps of the Péeres of France, they muſt procéede to election of a newe King. And who ſhould bee elected (I pray you) but Maſter Francis of Lorreyne?
               
               Thirdly, they do quarrell with the king for fauouring the Duke Eſpernon: as though the king may not fauour, but whom the Leaguers ſhall appoint him. The cauſe they do pretend is, that Eſpernon is a fauorer of heretikes, that is to ſay: he is too faithfull to the king for their turne.
               Fourthly, they do alleage, that the Clergie, Nobilitie, and Commons are charged with intollerable bondage and exactions, whom they would reſtore to their old dignity and liberty.
               The king had geuen the gouernment of Prouance to Monſieur the great Pryor, who had publiſhed the edict of peace according to the kinges  commaundement, and cauſed it to bee preciſely obſerued in his gouernment of Prouance. But the Leaguers had drawen to their conſpiracie a great number of that Countrey with Spaniſh piſtolets, and ſpecially among others, two noble men, to wit, Monſieur de Saultes and Vines.
               
               Theſe two applyed the market for the League in Prouance with Spaniſh Piſtolets, and woon on their ſide the Conſul of Marſeilles named Darius, and a Captaine of the towne named Boniface.
               
               The 9. day of Aprill theſe two heads of ſedition came in the euening to the doore of one Boniface, brother to this Captayne aforenamed, who was the kings receauer in yt countrey, with fained letters from Mōſieur great Prior, which was at Aix the head towne in Prouance. The ſaid Boniface the kinges receauer came to the dore, his owne wife carrying the Candel before him, who was immediatly ſlaine by the ſaid Captayne his owne brother, the Conſull Darius and their company at his owne doore, and in his wiues preſence. This exploit done, the Parricide himſelf with few of his owne company, went vp to ranſake the houſe, and rifled all that was there to their lyking.
               From thence with a company of ſeditious people armed, they went to the houſes of them of the reformed religion, whom they lead with great violence, and a great number of priſoners into the tower of Saint Iohn, & afterward made great hauocke of theyr goods.
               The 10. day they tooke 4. of them more, & manly, one named Chiouſſe, and the other Antony Lambalent: which they cruelly murthered: and after  that their bodyes had béen drawen through the ſtréetes, at length they were caſt downe ouer the walles into the towne ditch, before the face of them who were detained priſoners in Saint Iohns tower, intending to

diſpatch the reſt in like ſort the morow, or ſhortly after. 
               
               The 11. day the ſeditious ſeaze vpon ye fort of Nostre Dame de la garde, and wrote letters to Monſieur Vines, praying him to come in all haſt,  with ſome fortes to take the towne to the vſe and kéeping of the League, promiſing him their aſſiſtance. 
               
               The Duke of Neuers a man of his owne Countrey, to wit, an Italian did then lurke in Auignon, and had procured 4. Galleyes of the Duke of Florence to be in readines in the hauen, vnder the colour to goe to a maryage into Italy: at the firſt newes to haue haſted out of Auignon, and with his companie ioyning to Monſieur of Vines, to haue made that towne ſure for the kyng of Spaine according to their agreement, when they coſened him of his Piſtolets, or elſe to ſome pety Duke of Italy.
               
               There was a certayne man in the City of great wealth, credit & power, named Boukier: for feare of this man many of the chiefeſt citizens, by reaſon of ſome particular diſpleaſures, ſtanding in great diſtruſt of him, & ſuppoſing that now he would take occaſion to be reuenged of them, fledde into the Abbey of Saint Victor. But Boukier, conſidering the daunger that the towne ſtoode in, and the common perill of them all, ſent to them that had fled into the ſaid Abbey, aduertyſing them that the time did not require to call to remembrance priuat iniuries, aſſured them of his goodwill and ſafety of his part, and required their aſſiſtance in kéeping the ſaid towne in the kinges obedience, and to looke to the common preſeruation of themſelues.
               Theſe fearfull Citizens being ſo reconcyled, and encouraged by this waighty occaſion, and ioyning together, went to know of the ſaid Conſul Darius, & Captaine Boniface, by what authority they did that which they had done. And when they anſwered to haue done it by the commaundement of the grand Prior, and could ſhew nothing for it, they were apprehended: and the ſame day letters were diſpatched to the grand Prior being then at Aix, to aduertize him of the intended and attempted treaſon, and what had paſſed there.
               The 12. day the graund Prior came from Aix to Marſeilles with  2. hundred horſes, and a Chamber of the Parliament of Prouance, who do hold their court there.
               The 13. Day, the ſaid Chamber (after due examination of the fact, and  euident knowledge and proofes of the offences there committed) pronounced ſentence of death againſt the ſaid 2. heads of the treaſon, to Darius & Boniface, which out of hand were executed. Alſo they ſet at libertie them of there formed religion, with commaundement on both ſides to kepe the kinges edict, and ſo by theſe meanes the towne was deliuered from danger of changing of maſtery, the people from death, and vndoing, and the tumult ceaſed. This ſpéedy execution did greatly weaken and preuent the

monopols of the League in the countrie of Prouance. 
                  
               
               About the 15. day the Leaguers haſting to ſeaze vpon as many townes and houldes as they could in all France, to make their part ſtrong, as  well by force as faction, but ſpeciaily in Belgik, where they could do more then in any part of France, there they committed great cruelties in many places, where hauing the vpper hand, they were withſtoode: namely in the towne of Chaſtilion vppon the riuer Marne in the countrey of Brie, they murthered as well the Catholikes as the Hugonets, becauſe they made reſiſtance againſt them.
               About the 20. day the Leaguers did preſent their aſſociation, which  they had ſet forth in writing to many Noblemen and Gentlemen, vnder the name of the King, requiring them to allow of it, and ſubſcribe to it. But contrary to their expectation, many refuſed ſo to do: and diuers who had allowed it, conſidering more déeply in the matter, & perceiuing their intentes, abiured and forſooke it, with proteſtations ſet forth in writing, & printed, wherein they do open the ſecret thoughtes of the Leaguers, and Leagued.
               Firſt, they do proteſt that they do acknowledge none other faith then that, in the which they haue béen baptized, which then they did promiſe to beléeue and defend, and to that promiſe they do ſtand ſtill.
               Secondly, they do refuſe and condemne all manner of aſſociations, vnder what ſoeuer color, which binde them to obay any other then their Soueraygne.
               Thirdly, they do ſhew the League to bee nothing elſe, but the circumuention of the king, the confuſion of the State, a dangerous alteration of y• Realme, the bringing of a new Prince of a ſtrange blood: and finally caryeth with it ſelfe a proſcription, hauocke, and bondage of all good men in all degrées.
               About the 22. of Aprill, the King of Nauarre in ſilence beholding the  rage of this League, and their declaration publiſhed, in the which they had made him the obiect of their inſurrection, ſent the Lordes Clairuant, and Chaſſincourt with letters to the King, in the which he complaineth of the iniuries of the Leaguers proffered vnto him in their declaration, requiring iuſtice to be done for the ſayd iniuries done vnto him. He offereth alſo his ſeruice & power to the King, for to repreſſe the traiterous intentes and attempts of the ſaid Leaguers.
               About the 30. of Aprill the King willeth the ſaid Lordes Clairuant & Chaſsincourt to giue this gentle anſwere to the King of Nauarre from  him. That he doth hold the ſayd King of Nauarre as his ſonne, and heire of his crowne: willeth him alſo to arme himſelfe with patience, & to cauſe the edict of peace to be obſerued by them of the reformed Religion. Furthermore, that hee acknowledgeth the driftes of the Leaguers, aſwell againſt

his own perſon, as againſt the ſaid King of Nauarre, but hopeth that  he ſhal be able himſelfe alone to repreſſe their furies, and to puniſh them wel for their deſertes.
               The ſecond day of May the King by edict and proclamation doth condemnethe  Leaguers and Leagued, guilty of high treaſon, commaundeth his edict of pacification to be proclaimed a new in all partes of the realme, charging all men vpon paine of death to obay and kéepe it inuiolably.
               At the ſame time alſo the King anſwered to euery point of their declaration of the ſaid Leaguers, whereof the ſumme followeth.
               Firſt, the King proteſteth of his Catholike Religion, and calleth to witnes his actions, victories, daungers, and labours taken for the ſame.
               Secondly, he ſheweth that the peace was made, and approoued by the counſell of the Cardinall (in whoſe name they do ſéeme to autorize their  rebellion) and of the reſt of the Leaguers, not to fauour heretikes (as hee tearmes them) but to reſtore the decayed ſtate of the realme, to aſſault them of the reformed religion in conuenient time with greater forces.
               Thirdly, he declareth how he hath fauored the Cleargie, in giuing them liberty to call prouinciall counſels, and to ref
                     •
                  rme ſuch abuſes, as the ciuill warres had brought in, how he hath alſo preferred the woorthieſt ſort to the beſt Eccleſiaſticall liuinges, and hath reſtored to their liuinges them who were diſpoſſeſſed thereofby the former ciuill warres.
               Fourthly, that the Leaguers haue no cauſe to complaine for the geuing of offices. For his predeceſſors and he after them, haue beſtowed vpon the Guyzes the beſt ſort, and moſt honorable dignities, and that in great number, when the Princes of his blood haue béen neglected.
               Fiftly, that it is to force nature, and tyme to compell him by violence of armes to appoint a ſucceſſor, hée being aliue in ſtrength, health, and flower of his age, and not out of hope to haue iſſue.
               Laſt of all, he complayneth that this new commotion is very vnfit and out of ſeaſon, conſidering that he was now earneſtly bent and occupyed to reſtore the Nobilitie to their ancient honor and dignity, and the people to their due liberty. But by this leauie of armes they haue ſtopped his godly procéedinges, and haue taken the way to oppreſſe and root out the Cleargy, nobility and people.
               About the ſame time alſo the King ſent Ambaſſadors into forreine countryes, and commaunded his ordinary Ambaſſadors in the courtes of forreine Princes, to geue them knowledge of the wicked intentes, and trayterous attemptes of the Leaguers.
               The Leaguers in a ſhort ſpace had ſcattered abroad the Piſtolets of Spaine, and about the beginning of Iune they began alſo to take money;  and therefore thought good to ſupply the want of Piſtolets with French crownes, which is ſomewhat purer gold: for they exacted in diuers places

great and exceſſiue ſummes of money vpon the townes and cities, which  they had either ſeduced to their fa
                     ••
                  ion, or otherwiſe ſurpriſed. As by one we may gather the reſt. Bourge being a ſmall towne in Xainctonge ſituated vpon the fall of the riuer Dordonne, into Garomne, a towne leagued and extreamly addicted to the Leaguers, was by them raunſomed to ten thouſand crownes, and afterward the inhabitantes ſo cruelly intreated, that in leaping by night ouer the walles, were enforced to ſteale away for feare of worſe, ſuppoſing them ſelues to haue ſped well in eſcaping with their liues.
               About the ſame time the Lord Saint Luke, gouernor of Browage, ſent a certayne Captayn into the Iles of Maran, vnder colour to buy Oates for his prouiſion, to ſee whether hee could worke ſome ſurprizing of the Caſtell. But the Captayne was ſo roughly ſhouldered and courſed, that he was glad to retire with his whole ſkinne. And after that (leaſt the Papiſtes ſhould put ſome into the Caſtell) euery night 6. or 7. of the reformed religion with Caliuers, conuayed themſelues priuily in the darke of the night into the gate of the Caſtell vntill day. The Papiſtes vnderſtanding this, and alſo hearing the threatnings ofthem of the Religion, to wit, that if they ſhould bee driuen away, they would burne the Papiſtes houſes afore their departing, more for feare then for loue, were content to admit 4▪ of them of the Religion into the Caſt. I, whom they did chooſe from among them that were altogether vnſkilfull in warre. But afterward the Foriners (which are all for the moſt part of the religion) deſired to bee admitted into the keeping of the ſaid Caſtell, and at length it was agreed, that a greater number of them of the Religion ſhould be admitted to the keeping of the ſaid Caſtell: but alwayes notwithſtanding the greater number was of Catholikes, yet it was ſo kept vntill the 20. of Iuly next following.
               About the 5. day of Iune, the King ſent the Lordes Claimant, and Chaſsincourt to the King of Nauarre, willing him to do nothing againſt  the edict of peace: and that his pleaſure was, the ſayd edict to remayne irreuocable.
               About the ſame time the Leaguers perceiuing the iudgements of the King and of his Courts of Parliament pronounced agaynſt them, the executions done vppon the perſons of diuers their partakers, the declarations and detections of many Gentlemen by their writinges, their forme
                     •
                   cruelty vpon the Kinges ſubiectes, & miſdemeanors toward their Prince, might procure the hatred not onely of the people, but alſo of their owne fauorers, did ſet forth an Apologye, ſuch as it was, to waſh away their traiterous blemiſhes and ſpots, in the which they do labour to make men beleeue that they are honeſt men, and good Subiectes, and that they ſeeke nothing but the preſeruation and defence of the Romiſh Religion

agaynſt the heretikes, as they tearme them.
               Firſt, they ſay that they can not be attaynted, nor touched of treaſon, without condemning many Noble men with them, and that the former  Kinges wiſedome and ſufficiency of the Ca
                     •
                  dinall of Bourbon, were ſuch as could haue perceaued their driftes, if they had béen tending to any ſuch thing.
               Secondly, they do diſalow the déedes of Roſier, for drawing theyr genealogy from Charles the great.
               Thirdly, they reckon their kindred, and aliaunce with the houſe of Bourbon.
               
               Fourthly, ſua quae narrant facinora? quae oſtentant vnlnera?
               
               Fifthly, they do all that they do, leaſt that France ſhould bee reduced to that extremity that England is now in.
               Laſt of all, they counſaile the King to ioyne with them, becauſe (ſay they) they are armed with God his owne hand.
               Now let the Reader conſider, what neceſſary concluſion may be inferred out of the reaſons aboue rehearſed.
               The 9. day of Iune from Chalons a towne in Champagne ſituated vpon the riuer Marne, the Leaguers ſent a ſupplication to the King, in the  which they ſhew their laſt reſolution, to be that they will make him condeſcend to theſe articles folowing, whether he will or not.
               Firſt, that according to the ſupplication preſented by the ſtates, aſſembled at Bloys the yeare before, to wit, 1584. repreſenting the whole realme: he will forbid the exerciſe of the reformed religion, throughout the whole realme.
               Secondly, that all men be compelled to profeſſe the popiſh religion, and that ſuch as haue heretofore profeſſed the reformed religion, may bee enforced to abiure the ſame: and in caſe they will not, to be exiled out of the realme for euer.
               Thirdly, that all heretikes (for ſo they tearme them which will not conſent to their treaſons, or idolatrous ſuperſtition) bee declared vncapable of any office, dignity or publike charge.
               Fourthly, they require the townes geuen to them of the reformed religion, to be taken out of their handes.
               Fifthly, that the King ſhall geue ouer the protection of Geneua, againſt the Duke of Sauoye.
               
               Laſt of all, that the King ſhall ſweare before his court of Parliament of Paris: the contents of this their requeſt reduced into the forme of an edict, to be perpetually, and inuiolably obſerued: and likewiſe ſhall cauſe all the Princes, Peeres, officers of the Crowne, Senators, Gouernors & Magiſtrates, to ſweare to obſerue and defend the ſayd edict.
               To be ſhort, they aduertized the King that they haue refuſed all manner

of conference, except it bee vpon theſe conditions, and in caſe he will not do this, they will make him do it whether he will or not.
               But for the right vnderſtanding of this ſupplication, the Reader muſt  marke, that it is not Religion which they care for: for their driftes are onely to ſpoile the King of all authoritie and power, that they may at length robbe him of his royall eſtate: therefore theſe thinges following are to be obſerued.
               There were there in France thrée ſorts of men, who (as the Leaguers thought) would marre all the playe, to wit, the Princes, Nobilitie, and People. Of the firſt, they feared greatly the forces, the valour, authoritie and fidelitie, knowing very well that they were able both in power and credite, to miniſter them play long enough to weary them, and by their valour able to encounter with them euery where, and that through their fidelitie, they would neuer forſake the King in his néede, although that otherwiſe they were deuided in religion: conſidering alſo that they haue the chiefeſt intereſt to the Crowne.
               As for the Nobilitie, they conſidered that they were of thrée ſorts, Leaguers, Catholikes, and Proteſtants. The Nobles and the Commons which doo profeſſe the reformed religion, they knewe by long experience to bee ſo ſkilfull and experienced in warre, as thereby to bee inuincible, and that by all their fayre promiſes proffered vnto them, they could not bee remooued from their alleagance to their ſoueraigne King and Prince, whom God had ordayned ouer them. By this their ſupplication therefore, couered with the hypocriticall cloake of Catholikiſme, they would fayne to bée rid of the Princes and Nobilitie reformed, or els to deuide them a ſunder, that the more eaſily they might make them giue roume, or els roote them out.
               As for the common people reformed, they ſuppoſe that they being ſcattered into diuers popiſh Prouinces, could bee ſo vſed, as that they might not flocke together, but euery man in an imminent danger would bee carefull how to ſaue himſelfe in ſome place of ſafe exile. That is the cauſe that they crye out in their ſupplication, baniſhment and exile.
               As for the Catholikes both Noble and Common, they are in hope that ſuperſtition it ſelfe would win them on their ſide. But if the riddance of them of the reformed religion out of the Realme might not bee throughly done, yet the King and the Catholikes being bound with an oth to execute their demaunds, would at the pleaſure of the Leaguers nouriſh an immortall warre: by the which the King ſhould conſume his ſubiects, and the ſubiects their King with mutuall blowes, vntill the roume being either made voyde or weakened, & they hauing that thorne (which ſo ſore prickt them) out of theyr foote, might vprightly (without any halting) eyther ſet themſelues in place, or els eaſily ſhoulder him out who had right to it.
               
                  
The 10. of the ſayd moneth, the King of Nauarre being at Bergerack, a great Towne in Perigord, ſituated vpon the riuer of Dordonne, anſwereth  vnto ye firſt declaration of ye Leaguers which he ſent to the King, beſeeching him to reade the ſaid anſwer, and alſo to ſhew him ye fauour, as to commaund the ſame to bee read openly in the Parliament. Wherein firſt hée proteſteth, that hee holdeth the true Chriſtian Catholike and Apoſtolike religion contayned in the ſacred word of God, both of the olde and newe Teſtaments, and alſo doth embrace the ſymbols or abridgements of the Chriſtian doctrine: And that he is ready to beſtowe life and goods in the defence of the ſame. Abhorreth & holdeth accurſed any kind of doctrine, diuers or contrary to the ſame words.
               Secondly, he ſheweth that he was bred, borne, and brought vp in the ſame religion, which they call hereſie, and that he neuer learned, nor knew any other, and that he beléeueth in his heart to righteouſneſſe, and confeſſeth with his mouth to ſaluation, that the ſame doctrine which he doth profeſſe is the infallible trueth of God; yet he refuſeth not to be taught better, if better they can teach him out of Gods word in a generall or nationall Councell duely aſſembled.
               Thirdly, in that which he doth in repurging and ſweeping away the errors and abuſes brought in by long continuance of time, therein he followeth the examples of many Kings and Princes, of many godly & learned men, who for theſe fiue hundred yeares haue deſired and attempted the ſame.
               Fourthly, whereas his enemies doo charge him to be a perſecutor of the Catholike religion, he will bee iudged by all men voyde of paſſion, who hath greater cauſe to complayne in that behalfe, he or his enemies.
               Laſt of all, after a long conſideration of the miſeries which fall vpon the heads of men of all degrees, and the oppreſſion of the poore people, which infallibly will followe theſe attempts of the Leaguers, he doth wiſh (ſeeing the enemies haue made him partie) the quarrell which they haue to him might bee ended with a Combat. And debaſing himſelfe from that high degree of a King, in the which God hath placed him, for an abridgement of all miſeries, the ſparing of Chriſtian bloud, for the eaſe and quietnes of the poore people, doth proffer to his enemies to trie the matter by a Combat, betwéene him and the Duke of Guize, or two to two, ten to ten, or more to more in like proportion.
               It is reported how the Duke of Guize after the fight of this challenge, being vrged to accept it, excuſed his cowardize by the example of his father, which in like caſe excuſed himſelfe vpon the inequalitie of the perſons. To wit, that it was not lawfull for him to accept that challenge at the hands of one of the Princes, as being after the royall houſe in degree aboue all the reſt of the Nobilitie.
               
                  
But rather and more truely may it bee ſayde, that he (who being not a Prince, did reckon and write his name among the Princes, or rather preferred himſelfe before the Princes of the royall bloud) did refuſe this proffer,  not of any dutifull affection as he pretended, (whereof hee had broken before the bonds of lawe) but rather vpon baſe cowardize, for lacke of fortitude and courage, as euer caring not what he ſpent of other mens bloud, ſo that he might ſpare his owne.
               Theſe things paſſing to and fro, many exploytes of hoſtilitie were done and executed on euery ſide, rather to the loſſe than the aduauntage of the Leaguers, being croſſed euery way by the true ſubiects of the King. Wherevpon, conſidering that the worlde frowned vpon them, ſo that if they had not the King on their ſide to ſalue the ſore, they were like to haue a great fall: therefore they muſt followe ſome other courſe.
               Hetherto the Guizes haue couered themſelues vnder the Cardinals hat, hauing deriued all the hatred (ſo farre as they might) vpon that old man, whom they greatly abuſed. Now, when the Cardinals hat would not ſerue the turne, they doo put in practiſe the other part of their dilemma, as the Cardinall or the King muſt couer vs, or els we fall: but the Cardinall cannot, ergo the King muſt. And that the King may doo it, we muſt ſet Achitophel to work: therfore let him come vpon the ſtageto play his part.
               The Kings Counſellers were eyther ſeruants to the Guizes, or els alied or otherwiſe deuoted vnto him, except the Dukes Espernon and Ioyeuſe, whereof the laſt afterward was woon to the Leaguers ſide; Espernon remayned alwayes more faithfull to the King, than the King to himſelfe. For the which cauſe (by the meanes of a Curtizan in Paris, named Sainte Beufue) they hyred Villeroy (one of the Kings Secretaries) to haue murthered him, ſo to haue béen eaſed of that heauy burthen. Theſe Counſellers muſt play Achitophels part, they muſt helpe vp with the packe by the meanes which followe.
               They in the middeſt of theſe broyles, did of purpoſe attenuate the growing and forces of the League, as a thing weake of it ſelfe rather to bee deſpiſed than regarded, as not able to continue long, but that it would decay of it ſelfe, and that ſome certayne inconſiderate zeale of the Catholike Religion had made them ſomewhat paſſionate: and for to make him more ſecure on yt ſide, they deriued his thoughts from the Leaguers with a but.
               But if he would once ſhewe a token of diſpleaſure towards them of the reformed religion, or would onely fayne to intend warre againſt them, the Leaguers of themſelues would fall downe vpon their knees before him, therefore it were better to let them alone, for as much as they would bee ready to be with him whenſoeuer he would employ them.
               Alſo that it were better for him to warre againſt them of the reformed religion in Poytow, Guien, Gaſcoyne, Languedocke, and Daulphine, than againſt

them of his owne religion. For although the Proteſtants were dutifull and obedient enough, yet were it better to haue them for enemies, being the weaker ſide, than the Leaguers and Catholikes which were the  ſtronger part of his Realme. Beſide, that if he ſhould deuide the Catholikes with an vnſeazonable 
                     •
                  iſſention, they all would become a ſcorne and the pray of hereticks their common enemies.
               The King carried away by this counſell, and otherwiſe inclining to attempt againſt them of the reformed religion, ordayne
                     •
                   the Lord Ioyeuſe his Generall for Languedock. Espernon for Prouance, and he in his owne perſon would aſſault Poytow.
               
               Therfore the 18. day of Iune, partly for hatred which he bare to ye reformed  religion, partly already inclining to the League, partly not knowing what he did, for ye great dangers that he ſaw himſelf compaſſed in, by the perſwaſions of ſuch Counſellers as had blindfolded him, according to the ſaying, Si non ſua ſponte inſanit: instiga. For being in the Citie of Paris, he taketh order how to victuall his Armie in Poytow, for the which thing he appoynted certayne Townes in Poytow & Xainctonge, to wit, Chatelerault, S. Merxent, Niort, Fonteney, Towars, Engoleſme, Xainctes, and Coignack, there to haue alwaies in ſtore a certayne quantitie of Corne, Dates and Wine, as in ſtore houſes, which order he ſendeth to the ſayd Townes to be put in execution.
               The King being thus deluded by his Counſell, and buſying himſelfe about theſe matters of warre agaynſt them of the reformed religion (whether it were in earneſt or by diſſimulation, God knoweth, but at length it turned to earneſt) he giueth leaue and time to the Leaguers to grow greater in ſtrength and number, and forgoeth the occaſions and opportunitie to prouide for neceſſary remedies agaynſt them.
               Theſe Counſellers at length when they ſaw time, came once more vpon the ſtage. And on a ſudden they terrified the King agayne (as of a thing happened beſide their expectation) with the great ſtrength of the League, ſhewing what great danger might inſue, if he ſhould ſeeme to ſaile againſt that violent tempeſt. Conſidering that the reſolution of reſtoring the Catholike religion, and of the ſuppreſſing the reformed, had poſſeſſed generally the mindes of the people. So that if he ſhould ſeeme to withſtand the zeale of the Leaguers (for their treaſon was with them zeale of the popiſh religion) he would be commōly thought to be a fauourer of heretikes, and thereby an vniuerſall rebellion of his ſubiects might enſue, to the vtter vndoing of him and his eſtate. Therefore, that as a good Pilot he muſt obey the weather, and ſeeke for ſome reconciliation, and make peace with them as much to his aduantage, as the neceſſitie of the affayres may ſuffer him. And that in ſuch an extreame caſe hée muſt holde with the ſtrongeſt ſide.
               
                  
Theſe and many other conſiderations propounded vnto him, which had loſt his authoritie (and that by them which wholly ruled him) through a iuſt iudgement of God (for deſpiſing the voyce of him, and for perſecuting  him by whom he raigned, and from whom he had receiued all royall authoritie and ſoueraigne maieſtie) he began to wauer and hearken to ſome ſpéeches of vnion.
               Thus the King (through Gods iuſt iudgement, and the pernicious perſwaſions of his vnfaithfull Counſell) bewitched, doth determine to make peace with enemies as good cheape as he may: and for that thing he muſt ſeeke out ſome good chapman ſkilfull and practiſed in olde Italian trickes. Therefore he thought that his Mother was moſt fit, as moſt ſkilfull in ſuch markets.
               This accurſed woman, as ſhe had alwaies an ambitious and buſie ſoule, ſo ſhe had alſo a double mind, by the which ſhe ſtudied to haue great thanks for doing no good, and to kéepe her ſelfe in authoritie, and in the poſſeſſion of the gouernment, thought it ſhould coſt her the ſubuerſion of her owne houſe and children, and the vtter deſolation of the Realme. For the which cauſe ſhe thought to kéepe the King alwaies buſied & hampered in trouble, vexation and daunger, that ſhe might alwaies haue thankes for her bad ſeruice.
               The King as a naturall ſonne put her alwaies in great truſt, iudging of her naturalnes and loue towards him, as he did iudge of his towards her. The Leaguers on the other ſide were aſſured that ſhe would doo nothing for the Kings aduauntage and eaſe, for feare ſhe ſhould bee no more employed. Therefore ſhe was well liked on both ſides.
               Up then old Medea, you muſt ſhewe yet once againe ſome of your olde Italian trickes. Old Catie muſt bee the market woman, ſhe ſhall make the bargayne. But for as much as two eyes doo ſee more than one, ſhe ſhall haue ſome counſellers appoynted her in that negotiation, ſuch as would not ſuffer her to doo any good vnto the King and the Realme, if ſhe had béen willing ſo to doo; for they were al the Kings enemies, addicted to the Leaguers, and ſuch as would haue taught Italian trickes the buſ
                     •
                  eſt head of all Florence, yea ſuch as would haue ſent the great Prophet of Italy Machiuell, with all his diuelliſh Prophecies, to his Chriſtcroſſe.
               Now we will leaue the Q Mother with her counſell to doo their market as well as they can, whileſt wee diſcourſe of ſome other matters incident to the cauſe and the time.
               About the beginning of Iuly, the King of Nauarre hearing of the  Kings wauering, and what was like to paſſe betwéene the ſayd King and the League, writeth a letter to him from Nerat the 10. day of Iuly, in the which hee repeateth the Kings procéedings againſt the Leaguers, as the condemnation, proſcription and execution of ſome of their partakers; hée

aduiſeth the King that if hee make peace with the Leaguers, hee armeth rebells agaynſt himſelfe, his ſtate and Crowne: he doth lament the miſerable  ſtate of him and of his Realme; comforteth himſelfe in his integritie and innocencie; referreth all things to Gods diuine prouidence, repoſeth himſelfe in the Lord, and truſteth in God that he will aſſiſt him in his iuſt defence. But this good counſell of the King of Nauarre will not ſerue his turne; the King muſt followe the ſtreame, and will bee ſhortly promoted to a higher degrée. For he ſhall be one of the fellowes of the League who ſhall pay for all, and haue leaſt to doo in it.
               It is ſayd before, how the Papiſts and they of the reformed religion conſented ioyntly to keepe the Caſtle of Marans. Now, about the beginning of Iuly, the Lord S. Hermin had gathered together ſome thrée hundred men of the Leagued in Poytow, to bring them to the Lord S. Luke into Browage (as he ſayd): but indéede it was to ſeaze vpon the Caſtle of Marans and other Forts in the Iles. The ſayd S. Hermines with them would haue paſſed through Marans: but they of the religion withſtood his paſſage, and began to fortifie the Fort called Alowete, ſo that hée was enforced to take his iourney through Maillezais and Ronde, and in that iourney ſhortly after they were diſcomfited and ſlaine by them of S. Ihan d' Angely.
               
               The night following, the comming of S. Hermin nigh Marans, there was a great alarum in the Towne, and the Papiſts which were in the Caſtle to the number of fiue and twentie, ſuppoſing that S. Hermin and his companie had entered the Towne, began to reioyce, ſing and daunce at the ſound of a bag-pipe, which they cauſed to play the moſt part of that night, threatning them of the religion who were but foure in number. But theſe foure ſtanding on their warde, charged them not to make any innouation with them of the League; ſo that not onely they kept the Papiſts in feare, but alſo at length (with a certayne amazement of them) cauſed their pag-pipe to ceaſe.
               About the ſame time, the Prince of Conde vnderſtanding how things were like to paſſe betwéene the King and the Leaguers, departed from Rochel to repayre to the King of Nauarre, and leaueth the Lord Rohan in Poytow, to ouerlooke and withſtand the attempts of the Leaguers there.
               The ſayd Lord. Rohan about yt 12. of Iuly, departed from Rochel with foure ſcore horſes, and rode to Marauns, to aſſure thoſe Ilandes. The  Papiſtes had already ſeazed the fort called Brune where through the ſayd Lord ſhould paſſe: but their hartes ſo fayled them, that they durſt not reſiſt him. Entring therfore without any reſiſtance into the towne of Marans, hee called the inhabitantes of both religions, and told them, that hee had determined to place a gentleman within the Caſtell to kéepe the ſame in obedience to the King, vnder the gouernement of the King of Nauarre,
                  
gouernour of Guyen for the ſayd King, which thing if they would refuſe, hee would burne all their houſes into aſhes. And therefore bid them out of hand to chuſe a gentleman of his company, ſuch as they would themſelues,  there to commaund, to the which thing, ſome with a good will, and ſome vnwillingly, but yet all obayed.
               There was a certaine Notary, who had profeſſed the reformed religion after a ſort: hee the day before the Lord Rohan his comming, hauing intelligence thereof, went to the Papiſtes from houſe to houſe, warning them to ſtand to their defence agaynſt the ſayd Lord Rohan, and to enter into the Caſtle firſt, to let the ſaid Lord Rohan from the entring. By whoſe perſwaſions, a great number of Papiſtes, and of the moſt ſkilfull in warre with their Notary ſeazed on the Caſtell. But foure Gentlemen of the reformed religion, hauing gotten the tower of the gate, which commaunded ouer the court of the ſayd caſtell, did threaten to ſhoote againſt all ſuch, as would preſume to let the ſaid Lord Rohan enter in, or any other whom hee would place there.
               So the Papiſtes with their Notary began to ſpeake fayre, and to open the gate to the Lord Sowſaye of Beauregard, whom the inhabitantes had required there to commaund: he entred therein with the Lord Mortaygne his brother the 15. day of Iuly: and hauing receaued the oath of the inhabitants to be faythfull vnto the King, vnder the authority of the King, of  
                  Nauarre, gouernor for the King in Guyene departed, and left his brother the Lord Mortaygne there as his lieftenant.
               Whileſt theſe ſmall quarrelinges did ſo paſſe at Marans, we haue left the Q. Mother with her Counſellers, to make the bargayne, and to ſell to the Leaguers the crowne of France, the Kings authority and honor, for as litle as they may afoord it, that is, gratis, and for iuſt nothing.
               The affayres were handled with ſuch faithfulnes, that theſe Counſellers as ſoone as they came out of their chamber, went into another to ſit in counſell by them ſelues, to aduertiſe the Leaguers day by day of all which they had gone about, and with the Q. Mother: alſo, what was the diſpoſition from time to time, to aduiſe the Leaguers what they ſhould requeſt, and how farre they ſhould yeeld: at length, after long changing and chopping of wordes, ſaeuis inter ſe conuenit vrſis. Certaine Articles are concluded  at Chalons in Champaygne the twelfth day of Iuly, which do conſiſt of thrée principall pointes.
               Firſt, that the King ſhall make an edict, in the which hee ſhall graunt them all that they requeſted at Bloys the laſt yeare to wit 1584. in the aſſembly of the ſtates there.
               Alſo, all whatſoeuer they demaunded by their declaration, bearing date the laſt day of March: and all what was required of them in their laſt reſolution, dated the tenth day of Iune at Chalons: and that is as much as

they would for this tyme.
               Secondly, that leuying of armes, all actions of hoſtility committed  ſince by them, or by their partakers, or by the townes and cities of their aſſociation ſhall bee allowed, and declared good, lawfull, and done for the Kinges ſeruice, for the defence of holy Church, and aduauncing of Gods glory.
               Hereby the actions of hoſtility are comprehended, the murthers, ſpoils, robberies, ranſackinges, riflinges of publike or priuat thinges, all rapes, whoredoms, & villanyes committed by them of the League, which all the King muſt thinke, and publiſh by his authority, to bee done for his ſeruice, and the defence of the Popiſh Church. Here is a King but badly ſerued.
               Alſo that all iudiciall proceedinges, iudgementes, proſcriptions, condemnations, and executions paſſed agaynſt them of the League, ſhall bee reuoked and declared voyde, wrongfull and vniuſt.
               Thirdly, before his owne face, they enforced him to deuide his kingdome among them: and of a King of France (for to pleaſe the League) he hath made himſelfe one of the thrée kinges of Colen.
               
               Now followeth the good bargayne, which they when the King had ſent to make his market, had agreed on: whether it be to the kings aduantage and honor, let euery man iudge. Here is an other point of the Leaguers good ſeruice to theyr King.
               Firſt, the Cardinall of Bourbon, the new king of the Friers muſt bee prouided for, and let him be ſure that he ſhall haue the leaſt part. For beſides the places belonging to his Biſhopricke of Roan, he ſhall haue the old caſtell of Deepe, which no body elſe will haue.
               The Duke moreouer ſhall haue the gouernement of Britaine, and two of the ſtrongeſt places that he ſhall name in that Prouince, with the admiralty of the ſame.
               The Duke of Guyze ſhall haue the citadel of Mets, becauſe his gouernment of Champaigne hath no places good inough for him.
               The Duke de Mayn in his gouernment of Burgondie ſhall haue the caſtell of Dyjon, or the citadell of Chalons vpon Sawne.
               
               The Cardinall of Guyze ſhall haue Rhemes, and the countrie about ſo much as he will.
               The Duke Aumall ſhall haue the holdes of his gouernment of Picardie.
               
               Wee ſee how the great maſters be indifferently well prouided for: now theyr ſeruantes and partakes muſt haue part of the kinges ſpoyle, or elſe they will frowne and tell tales.
               Firſt, the Lord Antragues ſhall haue Orleance.
               
               The Lord D'ho ſhall haue Ca
                        •
                     n and Conſtances in baſe Norm
                        •
                     ndy.
               
               
                  
The Lord Briſſacke ſhall haue the gouernement of Anjou.
               
               The Lord Saultes ſhal haue the gouernment of Prouance in the abſence  of the graund Pryor.
               The Lord Chaſtre ſhall haue the gouernment of Bourges.
               
               The Lord Vailhac ſhall haue the Caſtell trompet in Bourdeaux.
               
               
                  Mandelot (Q. Mothers Scullion) ſhall haue Lyons, and the Citadel there.
               I pray you maſters hold your handes, you be well if you could conſider it: vſe him no worſe then his granfather Francis the firſt prophecied of you: lethim haue his doublet and his bréech to couer his ſhame.
               But how chaunce that in your partition you haue forgotten your ſelues? Is Poytow, Xainctonge, Engomoys, Limoſin, Perigord. Quercye, Rowarges, Viuarets, Auvergne, Gaſcoyn, Languedocke, & Daulphine nothing woorth with you? Be not theſe countries worth the hauing. If you be ſuch great Captaines as you would ſeeme to bee, there you may haue occaſion to make proofe of your valiantnes, if your ſtomacke ſerueth you: but you will ſay, it would coſt blowes, and that you loue not.
               Here gentle Reader, conſider the courſe which theſe luſtie buddes of Charlemayne do follow, they will roote the heretikes (as they ſay) out of France, they will exile them, and ridde the realme of France of them: yet they ſeaze vpon the kinges Cities and Dominions, and do enforce him to deuide his kingdome among them: but ſpecially they aſſure themſelues of thoſe prouinces, townes, cities and holdes, as had not in a maner one of the reformed religion left among them: but they either had béen murthered, or elſe ſo vexed and diſquieted by the continuall dangers, which euery day compaſſed them, that they had retyred moſt into thoſe prouinces in France, which were ſafer from the violence of the Leaguers, or into forreine Countries. So they warre agaynſt the heretikes by ſubduing the Catholikes to their deuotion. They warre againſt the heretikes, where none were to make them reſiſtance: and dare not looke on the prouinces where the heretikes (as they tearme them) were in great number. But to the matter. Although the vniuſt and inconſtant dealinges of the houſe of Valoys, had empayred greatly their honor and renowne: and that this king by his own actions, at the maſſacre of Saint Bartholemy had greatly ſtayned his garments with a ſpot that would neuer be waſhed: yet did hee alwayes retayne the authority and reputation of a Soueraygne Prince: vntill that for hatred of the Goſpell hee ſuffered the ambition of the houſe of Guyze to encroch too much vpon his royall authority and prerogatiue, vnder colour of Catholike zeale. Thus hee weakened his royall authority, by following the counſell of Italians, thruſted into his ſeruice by the cunning of the Guyzes for that intent. Theſe Italian ſcholemaſters did endeuour alwaies to rule him by the preceptes of Machiauell the

Italian prophet: ſo that after he came to the Crowne, the Guyzes with their adherents interrupted diuers times the peace made with them of the religion, made continuall monopols and ſecret practiſes and aſſociations  with his ſubiects, to the great empayring of his royall authoritie (as is afore ſayd) and ſtill vnder colour of Popiſh deuotion, ſo that at length hauing by the means aboueſayd ſeduced the harts of the Prieſtes & Monks, of many of the Nobillity and people, hauing ſpecially woon his Senators and Counſellers, and robbed him of the good will and loue of his ſubiects, in the end by this market they haue made themſelues equall to him, they haue ſet their ſeat as high as his: ſo that now the king is nothing which they are not, except onely that as yet they do not take vpon them the name of king, but ſuffer him for a while to enioy the ſame.
               So that the king now hauing not onely loſt part of his Princelike ſtrength, which conſiſted in his townes cities and holds, but alſo part of his authority, which lyeth in commaunding alone as a ſoueraygne, is become a fellow of the League. If you demaund why? the queſtion is ſoone anſwered, becauſe he ſet himſelfe agaynſt him, of whom he had receaued all power and authority, Hee which had giuen him, tooke it agayne for his vnthankfulneſſe.
               But now let vs returne to the League. Theſe articles called, the holy League being concluded to the kinges great diſaduantage and diſhonor, the edict muſt be made thereafter, which was publiſhed the 18. day of Iuly, and is commonly called the edict of vnion: wherein the king doth all  that it pleaſeth the Leaguers, to commaund him to do, as a good obedient fellow of that holy aſſociation.
               Fyrſt, hee forbiddeth the exerciſe of the reformed religion throughout all his Dominions, commaunding the miniſters of the Goſpell to depart the realme out of hand.
               Secondly, he commandeth all men to profeſſe the popiſh religion, and that the profeſſors of the Goſpell without any reſpect of perſons, either ſhall beleeue poperie, or elſe within ſixe moneths ſhall depart out of the Realme: with licence in the meane time to ſell their goods to their owne vſes.
               Thirdly, that as many as haue been infected with hereſie (for ſo hee calleth the Goſpell of trueth) or are knowne to fauour it, ſhall bee incapable to be are any office within the Realme.
               Fourthly, he dooth diſſolue the bipartit and tripartit chambers of iudgements, which were ordayned for the indifferent miniſtration of iuſtice, in reſpect of religion.
               Fifthly, that the townes graunted to the keeping of the King of Nauarre, at Saint Germane the yeare 1584. ſhall bee ſurrendred into the Kings hands.
               
                  
Sixtly, that all whatſoeuer offenſiue actions haue been committed by the Leaguers, their adherents, Townes, Cities, or comunalties of their  aſſociation, ſhall be hereafter iudged, as lawfull, good and acceptable ſeruice to the King: done for the defence of the holy Catholik Romain Religion. And that all declarations, proclamations, iudgements, preſcriptions, condemnations and executions, whatſoeuer againſt the Leaguers, or any of them for the ſaid offences pronounced, ſhall be voyd, as vniuſtly & wrongfully pronounced againſt them.
               Where note gentle reader, that the King is come to that bondage, that hee is perſwaded to alowe and approue all the murthers, exactions, ſpoylings, excorſions, treaſons, rapes whoredomes blaſphemies, and ſacriledges, as done for his ſeruice, the defence of the Church, and aduauncing of Gods honour. Will not the Lord reuenge this puſilanimitie, in ſuch a great Magiſtrate; with ſome notable example of his iuſtice, according vnto his threatnings: woe be to you which call euill good.
               Laſt of all, he commaundeth all manner of officers, and the Nobilitie, to ſweare the obſeruation of the ſaid edict, which he cauſed to be publiſhed and ſworne in the Parliament of Paris: hee himſelfe ſitting in iudgement the 18. day of Iuly.
               The King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, vnderſtanding the concluſion and publication of the edict of Iuly, appointed a certaine meeting with the Duke of Monmorency, at Saint Paule de cadioulx in the Prouince of Albigerys, to take aduiſe together what were to bee done in thoſe extremities.
               They therefore the tenth of Auguſt, concluded a certaine proteſtation:  in the which ſhewing what the intents, driftes and demeanours of the Leaguers haue been: alſo what the Kings iudgement was of them, not long ſince, what meanes the King of Nauarre hath ſought, and what hee hath proffered for the preſeruation of the ſtate.
               What his behauiour had been euer ſince the League did riſe, how hee hath kept himſelfe quiet, and vnarmed, to the extreame danger of his perſon when he had great occaſions to doo great exploites.
               At laſt, they proteſt that they are not the cauſe of al thoſe miſeries, which are like to enſue out of thoſe troubles, and ſeeing that no reaſon will take place, committing their innocencie and equitie of their cauſe vnto God, doo reſolue vpon the defenſiue.
               This reſolution being made, the King of Nauarre returned to Nerak, the Prince of Conde to Rochel, and Monmorency to Languedock, to view the attempts, and expect the euents of this new and ſtrange vnion.
               This vnion being concluded, the King conſidering that in ſome manner hee had been enforced to breake the edict of peace, and that it was not the proclayming onely, which would cauſe the edict of vnion to be obeyed, but

that a certaine cauell warre would enſue, and that there muſt be ſome ſ
                     •
                  
                  newes to holde it. Therefore hee turneth all his thoughts to make ſome preparation for the warre: for the which cauſe the 11. of Auguſt he calleth  to the bowre, which is the Kings houſe, the firſt and ſecond preſidents of his Parliament of Paris, the Prouoſt of Paris, the Deane of our Ladies Church, and prayed the Cardinall of Guize to be preſent. Who all being come in his preſence, hee made vnto them a ſhort declaration of his will: wherein he ſheweth himſelfe glad, that at the inſtant requeſt of his good and faithfull ſubiects, he hath reuoked the edict of purification, and yet cannot beleeue, that at this time it will bee eaſier to execute this laſt reſolution, then the former. Yet being incoraged and aſſiſted with ſo many and ſo good men of all degrees, he conceaueth ſome good hope which makes him enter into theſe actions. And firſt, to come to that which is expected of all men, he dooth intend to haue three mightie armies, the one for Guyen, the other by himſelfe, the third vpon the borders of Germanie, to let the paſſage of ſtrangers, which will amount to foure hundred thouſands crownes a moneth.
               Secondly, that hee dooth not meane to vndoo himſelfe alone, but ſeeing that he hath admitted other mens counſell againſt his owne, in breaking the edict of peace, they muſt help him in maintaining of the warre.
               Thirdly, for that the firſt preſident of Parliament was one of the chiefeſt, who procured the peace to be broaken, neither he nor his felowes may looke to be paied of their ſtipends during the warre.
               Fourthly, for that the people of Paris had ſhewed ſo great reioyſing at the breaking of the peace, he commaundeth the Prouoſt of the Marchants to leuie vpon the inhabitants of the ſaide Citie, the ſumme of two hundred thouſand crownes, for the charges of the warre.
               Fiftly, the King beholding the Cardinall of Guize, ſomewhat with a ſtearne countenance, he let him vnderſtand, that foraſmuch as the heads of the Cleargie had chiefely caſt him into this warre, for his part he is content to beare the charges the firſt moneth, but that the reſt ſhould be maintained at the coſts of the cleargie, and for that hee would neuer expect the Popes licenſe.
               When the King had ſtaied in ſilence to heare what they would ſay, they began to finde the matter ſtrange. Then the King with a token of indignation cried out, it had been better (ſaid hee) then to haue beleeued mee: I feare me, that when we goe about to put away the preaching, we will hazard the Maſſe. I were better then to make peace: and I know not whether they will accept it when wee will proffer it: ſo the meeting was ended.
               The Prieſts being well ſtoared (be like) prouided within few daies voluntarilie (yet more willing to haue paied nothing) one milion of frankes for their portion.
               
                  
Whileſt theſe things were a dooing, the King had ſent three Noble men to the King of Nauarre, to wit the Lords Leuoncourt, Poigny and the preſident Barlart, to trie their cunning, whether they might induce the ſaid  King of Nauarre, to ioyne with him both in forces and religion. Theſe Lords came to the King of Nauarre after his returne from S. Paul de Cadioulx to Nerak, greeting him in the Kings name: declared to him, how the King did hold him as his ſonne and heire of the crowne, in caſe he ſhould deceaſe without iſſue.
               And after they ſhewed the cauſes which moued the King to ioyne with the League, which was the diuiſion of the Catholiks, which would redound greatly to the preiudice of his eſtate, and the vnquietnes of his Realme.
               Thirdly, that for the loue hee bare to him, hee wiſheth him reunited to the Catholick faith, both for the good of his ſoule, and alſo that hee might the more eaſily, by the meanes of the Catholicks be eſtabliſhed in the kingdome, which otherwiſe would be hard for him to bring to paſſe.
               Fourthly, they goe about to perſwade him to cauſe the exerciſe of the reformed religion to ceaſe, during the tearme of ſixe moneths perfixed.
               Fiftly, they required him in the Kings name, to ſurrender the townes which he did hold for the King.
               The King of Nauarre with like courteſies anſwereth to the firſt, that if it had been his Maieſties pleaſure to haue vſed his ſeruice in the ſuppreſſing of the Leaguers, he would haue ſhewed a proofe of his duetifull obedience towards him.
               To the ſecond he anſwered, that from his cradle, he hath been brought vp in the reformed religion, in the which hee neuer knew any errour, and yet hath, and dooth proffer himſelfe to bee taught by the word of God, in a lawfull councell.
               To the third demaund hee anſwered, that the reformed religion, was eſtabliſhed by a ſolemne edict, confirmed by an oath, and that it was not in his power to let the exerciſe of the ſame: & therefore purpoſed to deale in that matter.
               To the fourth hee anſwered, that conſidering the mallice of his enemies towardes him he hath more neede to require others, then to ſurrender thoſe.
               Theſe Ambaſſadors alſo mooued the King of Nauarre, that if he would conferre with the Q. Mother, ſhe would aduance as farre as Champaigne in Toureyne. The King of Nauarre anſwered, that he would goe as farre as Bergerake in Perigord.
               
               Whileſt theſe things paſſed to and fro, many Nobles, Gentlemen, and others of both religions, euen of the Kings companies, retired from the Court home, and among others the Prince Monpenſier. But the raging of the League, and perſecutions which encreaſed daily, cauſed Henry de
                  
                  la tour, Vicount Turenne to aſſemble ſome Forces in Limoſine & Perigord, to whom many Captaynes repayred out of the Countreyes about Limoſine and Perigord and Quercye, as the Lord Meriake with his regiment.  The ſelfe ſame cauſes enforced many Noble men and Gentlemen about Paris, Niuernoys, and all the countries betweene Seyne and Loyre, many alſo out of Bourbonnoys and Berry, being at the South ſide of Loyre, accompanyed with many men of ſundrye qualities and degrees, to forſake their houſes and take armes and the field, and to repayre to theſe Prouinces, that were of ſure acceſſe vnto them. Theſe companies aſſygned the rendes vous in Berry, intending thence to ioyne to the king of Nauarre in Gaſcoyne. They were all Gentlemen & Hargebuſiers on Horſebacke, betweene two or three hundred. The men of Marke in theſe companies were the Lord of Pueilles, Fort, Laborde, Landes, Tauennes, and others. Theſe companies of France marching toward Gaſcoyne, ioyned with the Vicount Turenne about the end of Auguſt, who within a litle ſpace of time did encreaſe to the number of fiue or ſixe thouſand men.
               About the ſame time another company of Noble men and Gentlemen likewiſe retyred out of their houſes, accompanyed with great troupes of ſouldiers, and gaue the rendes vous in Berry, among them theſe were the chiefeſt of name: the Lords D'ouant, Royſdulie, Sauiere, Campoys, and diuers others which ioyned with the Prince of Conde being then at Pons in Xainctonge.
               
               The Lord Montgomery with his company went as farre as to the king of Nauarre into Gaſcoyn: his brother the Lord of Orges went to the Prince of Conde. Other companies out of Brie, Champaigne, Ʋermandoys, and other countries there bordering retyred to Sedan, the capitall towne of the principality of Boillon.
               
               Out of Burgondy, and the countries about, retyred to Geneua, and into the ſignory of Berna.
               
               The profeſſers of the reformed religion out of Normandy, low Britayn, and Picardie, paſſed ouer into England for their ſafety.
               Good Chriſtian Reader I beſeech thee to ſtay here a while, and learne both to feare and tremble at the dreadfull iudgementes of God, and alſo his mercie toward his Church, ſhewed at this time: which when I do conſider, it putteth me in remembrance of the like euent, which did happen a litle while afore the ſiege and deſtructions of Hieruſalem, by Veſpaſian and Titus his ſonne. That citie, which here on earth had borne the Image of the true heauenly Hieruſalem, hauing moſt wilfully reſiſted the ſonne of God, & ſtopped their eares at his voyce. When it had fulfilled the meaſure of her iniquity, and that God would make it a wonder, a hiſſyng and nodding of the head vnto all Nations of the world for her obſtinacie and vnthankefulnes: a litle before the ſiege, there was at midnight heard a voice

in the Temple thus, Migremns hinc: at the rumor thereof all men were greatly amazed, muſing what ſhould be ſignifyed by that warning. The Saints which were there, tooke that to be the voyce of God (who according  to the threatninges of the law of the Prophets, and of Chriſt againſt that City, would powre downe his wrath vpon that ſinfull City) directed vnto them, commaunding them to depart, and to geue place vnto hys wrath. So the Church that was there remoued to the City Pella, which was beyond Iordan, in the ancient inheritance of the Rubenites, where it was preſerued, and out of a place of ſafety, did behold the mighty ſtormes of Gods tempeſtes, which fel vpon that ſo noble and famous a City, which by Strabo was thought to be the greateſt and fayreſt of all the Eaſt. Euen as Abraham long before did behold the ſubuerſion of Sodom: ſo when the Lord had determined to powre the ſtormes of his anger vpon thoſe Nations which are betweene the Loyre and the Engliſh Seas, for their offences lyke vnto them of Hieruſalem: firſt hee taketh his Church, which was ſcattered among thoſe Nations, Townes, and Cities, and bringeth moſt of them beyond Loyre, ſome into England, ſome to Sedan, ſome to Geneua, ſome to Suiſſerland, ſome to Germany, leaſt the preſence of them who do call vpon his name ſhould hinder the execution of his wrath vpon his enemies, for the publication of the edict of vnion, commonly called the edict of Iuly, although that in another forme, was as it were the voyce of God heard out of the Temple, Migremus hinc. For thoſe nations lying on the North ſide of Loyre, who had conſpired to deſtroy the Goſpell of Chriſt, haue drawen the warre from the Prouinces which doe profeſſe the Goſpell, vpon their owne heads. For not onely haue they felt all the former oppreſſions and outrages of the Leaguers, but alſo by this edict, all the burthen of this laſt ciuill warre rayſed vp by the Leaguers hath fallen, vpon them, beſide the horrible murthers and ſeditions, which they haue committed among themſelues by the euill Angels, which the Lord in his wrath hath ſent among them: which alſo do continue ſtill with greater calamities then euer before, and is like to continue vntill that thoſe wicked Nations, polluted with idolatrie, blood of the ſayntes, and whoredome, be vtterly rooted out, that God may be auenged of his enemies: giuing in the meane tyme a litle reſt vnto the reformed churches beyond Loyre, and to make them thankful for his great mercyes, who hath rewarded his enemies with euil, which they had imagined agaynſt his people without a cauſe. So the Lord doth turne all thinges to good vnto his Sayntes.
               Now the Leaguers are maſters of all (for the king had deliuered his royall authority vnto them, and deuided his kingdome among them, reſeruing vnto himſelfe the name of a King) haue all the Countrey at theyr deuotion, and do repleniſh all France with armes, violence and boaſtings. Now they wil play S. George, they wil kil the Deuil, eyther on horſeback

or a foote, they will worke miracles, or elſe the Deuill ſhall fayle them.
               And for to begin theſe miracles, the Duke Mercure, brother in law to  the King, and by the laſt partition of the kingdome, a pety King of Britayne, 
                   was perſwaded by his Counſell, that now the publiſhing of the edict of vnion had of it ſelfe killed all the Hugonets in Poytow, and that eaſily hee might tame all the Countrey, and that b
                     •
                  ing in the field, not one Hugonet durſt lift vp his head: therefore ſuppoſing there to haue to fight with dead men, and making himſelfe ſure of the conqueſt, to make proofe of his valure, the 23 of Auguſt paſſed Loyre, at Nantes out of Britayn in Poytow, with two thouſand men, entending to roue and ranſake all, and hauing  ſacked many popiſh Churches, ſpoyled the Abbeys at Saint Florent, and Plainpied, by Saumure, & like an horrible tempeſt did march forward, ſparing neither holy nor prophane thinges, making hauocke of all thinges vntill he came as farre as Fontenay.
               
               The Prince of Conde, turned from Saint Paul Decadewalx to Saynt Ihan D' Angelye, hauing aſſembled ſome friends, as wel out of Xainctonge, Poytow, as other parts, within few dayes ſaw himſelfe to haue a luſty company as well of gentlemen as Harquebuſiers on horſebacke, and with that force expecting the reſt, tooke his iourney with as much diligence as hee could to meete with the ſayd Mercure.
               
               The Prince arriued at Chandeuier, a towne not farre from Niort, vnderſtoode  that the ſayd Mercure was about Fontenay, where he determined to giue him battaile. Mercure hearing that the Prince approched, with his companies, ſo ready and willing to fight, was amazed, conſidering that it fell out contrary to the counſell giuen him before: and that now be muſt fight with men aliue. This increaſed his feare ſo much the more, for that hee had not ſo ſoone heard of the Princes comming, but that preſently hee was certifyed that the ſaid Prince was in battell array. Whereupon he reſolued to retyre home: but being hardly preſſed by the ſayd prince he was fayne to retire to Fontenay. And becauſe the gouernor of the towne knowing not well how thinges had paſſed betweene the King and the Leaguers, would not ſuffer him nor his to enter the towne (yet otherwiſe ſhewing him ſuch fauors as he might:) therfore he with his troups betook themſelues to the Suburbe of Fontenay called the Loges.
               
               The Prince deſirous to ſee his enemy face to face, aduanced toward the  Suburbe in battaile aray, to prooue whether he might prouoke the enemy to ſkirmiſh. But the Duke would none of that play. But after the Prince had kept the Duke beſieged in the Loges for certaine dayes, the ſaid Duke fearing, eyther at length to be forced, or elſe that the Prince would cut his way in his returne to Nantes, by night ſecretly did ſteale away, and with the mayne galop, amaze and many alarms which he gaue to himſelf (feare making him to imagine thinges which were not) recouered to Nantes
                  
without any bayte, the fourth day of September, leauing behinde him his companies with great diſorder, and diſcontented mindes, ſome of his  troupes with deceſtation of his euill leading, curſed the houre that euer they knew him. Some of the Princes companies purſued the diſaray, and ſetting vpon the carriage tooke it, and many priſoners with it. Thus happily ſucceded the beginnings of the vnion, and the miracles of theſe great Captaines, whoſe heat was ſome what cooled, and their hornes beaten in with this blow.
               About the 5. day of September, the Prince returning from Fonteney, 
                   paſſed through Mele, where the Countrey of Rochefocault, which not long before had repayred to him, left him againe taking his iourney to his own houſe. And for as much, as the plague was very ſore at S. Iohn D'Angelye, the Prince tooke his way to Iarnak vpon Charante, where the Lorde Lauaughion, and other Gentlemen, left him to retyre to their houſes.
               Whilſt theſe Princes ſoiorned at Iarank, the Lord Laual a yong Noble man, in a little bodie, hauing a minde endued with notable godlines & vertue, with a ripe wit and couragious heart, which did make him no leſſe beloued and honorable vnto all honeſt vertuous, and peaceable men, then feared of all wicked and perturbers of the ſtate of France. This Lord accompanied with his three brethren, the Lords Rieulx, Taulay, and Saulye, 
                   the 8. of September departed from his houſe of 
                     Ʋitre in Batangue, with a 150. Rutters, and 300. Harquebuſiers on horſeback, and with that companie paſſed ouer Loyre, partly a forde, and partly with boates, at Manues, three Leagues about Nantes, by the help of the Lord Chargroys, who was afterward his Lieutenant. From thence he tooke his iourney through Poytow, to S. Iohn D'Angelye: where he entred not, becauſe of the peſtilence which was there, but paſſing through Tailborge, went to the Prince at Marennes, when the ſaid Prince beſieged Browage, about the 12. of September.
               About the 9. of September, from Iarnak, the Lord Saint Gelays, with the Lord D'Aubigny, and ſome other Gentlemen tooke their iourney toward Mele, for ſome great affaires. There they had knowledge, that certaine companies of the League were comming to compaſſe them about: which thing being found true, the Lord S. Gelays Marſhal of the Princes campe, ſendeth all night to the Lord Charboniere, who was two leagues of with his companie: hee ſendeth alſo to certaine Gentlemen there abouts, who were of the religion: which with great diligence came toward him all night, and at the breake of the day, ioyned with the ſaid Lord Saint Gelays.
               
               The Leagued companies were conducted by Captaine Saint Katarine, and others who perceauing themſelues on a ſuddaine, and beſide their expectation compaſſed about, without any further a doo required parley

with the Lord Saint Gelays: who after few words yeelded, and promiſed to forſake the League, and to cauſe their fellowes to doo the like: and alſo that they would neuer carrie armes againſt them of the reformed religion:  which agreement they quicklie ſealed and performed. Many of theſe companies went to the Prince, being then at Pons: they which would not, were ſent away without weapons. And this is the ſecond miracle which the Leaguers did in Poytow.
               
               About the ſame time, the Lord Saint Meſmes, Ranques and Orges, went toward Tonnecharante, at whoſe approaching the Lord Saint Luke, who was then at Soubize, with nigh two hundred Souldiours, with great terrour departed: and burning the bridge and gate of Soubize retired to Browage, leauing moſt of all his gariſons at the bourg of Moſes. Theſe Lords mought haue purſued & taken the Lord Saint Luke, but delaying the time, from Friday to Sunday, they loſt the occaſion.
               The 13. day, theſe Lords tooke the tower of Foncras, vpon Charante, which did holde for the League. About the ſame time, the Prince of Conde, 
                   leaſt he ſhould keepe his companies idle, with the Lord of Rohan and others with him from Pons, withall their companies tooke their way toward the Iles of Xainctonge, for to recouer Sonbiez and the caſtell Augle, which the Lord S. Luke had fortified with Gariſons of the League, and alſo to ſeaſe vpon the ſalt of the Iles, whereof great ſummes of money might be made.
               And for to bring to paſſe theſe things more eaſilie, to haue munition and meanes of artilerie and other neceſſarie things: in the meane whiles the Prince with a certaine number of horſemen, tooke his iourney to Rochell: notwithſtanding the plague was very great there, where hee obtained of the Citie, both munition, ſhips, and power of men to conduct all to Browage, Oleren, and other places there abouts. About the ſame time theſe Lords Douault, Boyſdaliz, Sanuere Campos, with many other Gentlemen, hauing giuen the rendes vous in Berry (as is aforeſaid) repayred to the Prince, then being at Pons in Xainctonge.
               
               About the 15. of September the Lords Saint Meſmes, Ranques, and Orges, after the taking of the Tower of Foncras vpon Charante, purſued  the Gariſon which had fled from Soubieze, and had ſtayed at the bourg of Moſes (as is ſaid) betweene Soubieze and Browage, and followed them to a place called Graund Gariſon, right againſt Browage on the north ſide of the riuer: where after they had ſkirmiſhed a while in the ſight of the towne, and of the Lord Saint Luk, who was on the other ſide of the water, on the key of Browage, and being reduced there at the low water, and hardly ſet on by them of the religion: through diſpayre of reſcue, caſt themſelues into the ooſe, where the moſt part were ſlaine: others that could not get out were drowned when the tide came.
               
                  
The Lord Saint Luk was in great agonie, to ſée the beſt of all his Gariſons ſo caſt away, without any remedie to ſaue one of them: certaine ſhot  of ordinance was diſcharged, but it was all in vaine.
               Among other priſoners were the Captaines Luchet Meanbourg and Sauage, with ſome other whom the Lord Orges ſent home without any ranſome, to the great diſcontentation of the Prince, becauſe they were they who did moſt ſeruice, in the defending of Browage, againſt the ſaide Prince.
               About the ſame time the Lord Clermont enterpriſed to paſſe ouer Loyre, with few with him, among whome was one Captaine Rochemorte, for to aſſemble them who could not dwell in their houſes, by reaſon of the publication of the edict of vnion.
               About the 16. of September, the prince hauing done his buſines in Rochel, 
                   aſſembled his forces at Saint Gennes, and ſo marched toward the ſiege of Browage, and from thence to Saint Iust. Here is to be noted, that in that part of Xainctonge, lying betweene the riuer of Browage and Garemme, commonly called Almert: there be foure townes, to wit Saint Iust, diſtant a mile and a halfe from Marennes, Hyers betweene Marennes and Browage, whereof this laſt lieth vpon the mouth of the riuer, hauing a hauen very ſafe for ſhips, to come to the ſalins to be laden with ſalt. This towne of Browage began to be builded about the yeare 1550. but increaſed and fructified to a great and ſtrong towne, during the ciuill warres, to moleſt Rochel, and hath changed the firſt name into Iacopolis. The Papiſts haue held in it, alwaies ſince the beginning of the ciuill warres a ſtrong Gariſon. This towne the Lorde Saint Luke kept for the League: it is diſtant from Marennes ſomewhat leſſe then two miles, from Hyers leſſe then a mile, it is ſtrong in ſituation, becauſe it lieth in the ſalins, and by reaſon of that, there is but one way to come to it.
               Betweene Marennes and Hyers, there is a little creeke to paſſe ouer, which cannot bee paſſed on foote but at lowe water, which is called le paſse d'hiers. The Lord of Saint Luk had fortified the ſame with a barricado, intending there to ſhut vp the paſſage to Hyers, and conſequently to Browage: there he placed three hundred ſhot, & a few horſes, he himſelfe ſtaying at Hyers, about halfe a mile diſtant from Browage, to let the approaching of the Prince.
               The 19. of September, the Prince being at Saint Just, a mile and a halfe from Marennes, ſet all things in order, for the ſiege of the ſaid Browage, and about three a clock being low water, hee marched toward Marennes, commanded his gardes and other Gentlemen, who marched a foote, to ſet vpon the barricado, which was made at the paſſe d'hiers, where they found ſome reſiſtance, there was wounded Bargnobet, Captaine of his garde, another Gentleman ſlaine.
               
                  
In the meane time the Lorde Boulay, commaunded to charge of another ſide, from Saint Iust tooke his way through the Salins, a way not vſed to trauaile through at all, and with his band of armed men: with a  maine force, ſet vpon the towne of Hiers: Saint Luk had him vpon his top ſooner then he had diſcouered him, and conſidering that he was feeble, and that if hee ſhould loſe that force which was with him, hee ſhould loſe the ſtrength and defence of Browage, retyred in haſt. They which were at the paſſe d'hiers, ſeeing their Captaine to flee, followed him, accompanied with terrour and dread. They were purſued nigh to the gates of Browage, though they were defenſed with ſhot of Ordinance from the townes, againſt them that purſued. So that within an houre and a halfe, both the paſſe and towne D'hiere came into the Princes power: the Prince lodged at Marinnes, diſtant from Hyers about a mile.
               Theſe eaſie and proſperous ſucceſſes and beginnings, made the Prince to conſider more touching the ſiege of that towne of Browage, conſidering alſo that there was not within great power of men, neither had they great ſtoare of victuals, candell, freſh water, neither medicins for them that were hurt.
               The 20. of September, there was continuall ſkirmiſhes before the  towne, in the which ſome of the Princes ſide were hurt, many of the beſieged ſlaine, one of the Captaines which the Lord Orges had ſent home before, a man much eſteemed by the Lorde Saint Luk, becauſe of his valour.
               The ſame day was taken the Tower of Mornake, where the Lord of S. Luke had put garriſon, which was beſieged by certayne Companyes whom the Prince had ſent thether. The garriſon withſtood for certayne dayes: but being without hope of helpe and in danger to be forced, yéelded themſelues by compoſition. There was taken the Captayne Iohn Peter, who was in great fauour with the Lord S. Luke.
               
               About that time arriued to the Prince at Marans, the Lord Lauall with his thrée brethren and all his forces.
               The 22. of September, the Lord Trimouille (who long before had entred  in communication with the Prince, to ioyne with him in this iuſt defence agaynſt the League) came to Marennes with a great number of Gentlemen. The Prince receaued theſe Noble men with great courteſie and reioyſing. There was a great contentation thereof in all them of the reformed religion, for the good hope which they had conceaued of that yong Lord that he would embrace the religion, as he did ſhortly after, hauing obtayned great reputation among all men for his valour and modeſtie.
               The ſame day arriued to the Prince certayne ſhips of warre from Rochel, ſo that by theſe meanes the ſea and the riuer of Browage were ſhut vp:

which thing doubled the feare of the beſieged. The Prince ſeeing his enterpriſe to ſuccéede better than he had hoped, began to enterpriſe further, and determined to preſſe the beſieged néerer, knowing that there was not  within aboue foure hundred Souldiers, whereof ſome were wounded, and therefore not able to doo any ſeruice: they which were taken reported alſo, that there was great ſcarcitie of victuals and freſh water; ſmall quantitie of wine, and that corrupt; ſome corne, but not great ſtore; becauſe thinking not vpon any ſiege, they had not prouided afore hand.
               The Lords S. Gelayſe and Boyſduly were lodged in the houſe called Blanchardier, out of the Towne of Hyers, there appoynted by the Prince to prouide for neceſſaries and inunition. They did what they could, but not what they would: wherevpon the Souldiers ſeeing that they were like to ſtay there ſome time at that ſiege, began to mutinie, and to aſke money to buy victuals, which were brought there to ſell out of the Countrey, and for lacke of money began to ſteale away, vntill that a certayne ſumme of money was gotten out of the Ilands, and ſome Gentlemen alſo did lend ſome: by which meanes the Prince muſtered, and the Souldiers taking pay tooke alſo courage, ſkirmiſhing daily in the Marſh out of the Towne.
               It is ſayd before how the Lord S. Meſmes, Ranques, and Orges, tooke S. Ihan d'Angely and Soubize, and diſcomfited the Popiſh gariſon in their flight right agaynſt Browage. From thence the ſayd Lords with their companies paſſed in certayne ſhips of Rochel into the Iland of Oleron.
               
               About the 24. of September, the Lord Ranques (who was beſt to commaund there) tooke vppon the Coaſts of the ſayd Iland the maſter of the field of the Lord Matignon gouernour of Bourdeaux, named Beaumont, accompanied with a certayne Captayne of Browage named Thiebert: there was in that ſhippe as well Gentlemen as other Souldiers, to the number of 22. they came from the Lord Matignon then reſident at Bourdeaux, about the ſuccour for Browage. They were in a ſhip of warre, and were ſet on by thrée little ſhippes of the ſayd Lord Ranques, who enforced them to flée, and at length they caſt themſelues into the Sea to recouer the Iland of Oleron, and ſo ſeazed vpon a houſe to defend themſelues. But being purſued and compaſſed about by the ſayd Lord Ranques, at length they yéelded themſelues. This Captaine Thiebert twas accompted a buſie fellowe and factious, who alſo had traffique with the Spanyard for the League, they were moſt part brought to Rochel to be ſafely kept.
               The 25. the Prince began to fortifie a houſe a little aboue the Waren  in the high way from Hyers to Browage.
               
               Wee haue ſayd how about the 15. of September the Lord Clermont departed from the Prince at Pons, and paſſed the riuer Loyre at a place called Roſiers, thence paſſing through a place la clouſiere des montils, to the intent

to paſſe vnknowne, did fayne himſelfe to be Secretary to the King of Nauarre: frō thence he taketh his way to Bange, where Rochemort departed from him. The ſayd Rochemort taketh his way to Beaufort, which is  ſituated betwéene Angers and the riuer Loyre, where he was borne, and ſoiorned there to ſee his brother and other friends, and alſo to gather as many men as he could in that countrey.
               
                  Beaufort is a little Towne betwéene Loyre and Angers, which is commaunded by a Caſtle of a reaſonable ſtrength, which did hold for the king, and was in the kéeping of Captayne Broke.
               
               
                  Rochemort arriued thether, and viſiting his friends, who were the chiefeſt of the Towne, and among them alſo Captayne Broke, by their ſpéeches he vnderſtood the ſtate of Angers, and the particularities there about the Caſtle. There was a Captayne named Halot, who had the kéeping of the ſayd Caſtle of Angers, whileſt the Lord Buſſy of Amboyſe liued, which had the gouernment of the Countrey, Citie and Caſtle, during the life of Monſieur the Kings brother. But after the death of the ſayd Buſſy, the Lord Briſſack had the gouernment, and had put out of the Caſtle the ſayd Halot, whereof by all meanes he ſought to bee reuenged, and to ſurprize the Caſtle. And to bring this thing to paſſe, he acquainted himſelfe with Captayne Freſne, who had commanded ouer a companie of Briſſack at the beginning of the League. This Briſſack was one of the chiefeſt of the League, and diſcharged the ſayd Freſne (after the edict of vnion was publiſhed) in Iuly before: for the which thing Freſne was greatly offended with Briſſack.
               
               Theſe two Captaynes conſented together to enterprize vpon the Caſtell, and repayred to Beaufort to Captayne Broke to haue of him ſome company of men, where they met with Rochemort: and after certayne ſpéeches, opened vnto him their enterprize; who promiſed to furniſh them with certayn men. Rochemort aduertized the Lord Clermont, praying him to ſend him men, which ſhortly after ſent him foure ſtout Souldiers.
               This their counſell was wonderfully diſguiſed, as alſo the euēts fel out to be ſtraunge and tragicall: for Halot (as he ſayd) would recouer the Caſtell for the King, of whom (ſayd he) he had letters to that effect, to recouer the ſayd Caſtle out of the hands of Briſſack, who was of the League, as is afore ſayd: but indéede he reſpected himſelfe, thinking thereby to get the Kings, or the King of Nauarre his fauour. Captayne Freſne was deſirous to be reuenged of Briſſack at any price whatſoeuer. Theſe two were ſure to haue men for the moſt part Papiſts. Rochemort was in good hope that if he could get in the Caſtle, he would finde the meanes to make it fall into the hands of the King of Nauarre. Halot & Freſne doo promiſe themſelues, that if Rochemort being the weakeſt and an Hugonet, ſhould attempt to innouate any thing, they could eaſily diſpatch him: ſo that vnder

the hope of one drift, euery man had his meaning vnknowne one to another. The enterprize is concluded, the day appoynted. The 26. of September ſome doo repayre at the time prefixed to the Suburbe of Preſſigny; 
                   ſome to the Suburbe called Liſſes. Captayne Freſne vſed to enter into the Caſtle eaſily, as well acquainted with the Souldiers of the garde. The day therefore prefixed, hee goeth to ſee Captayne Greeke his friend, who then commaunded in the Caſtle with ten or twelue Souldiers. The ſayd Captayne Greeke biddeth Freſne to dinner: Freſne excuſed himſelfe that he had company, with whom he had promiſed to dine that day. Captaine Greeke preſſeth him and prayeth him to bring his company with him. Freſne had afore hand woon ſome of the gard, whom he had made priuie to the enterprize; he prayeth them of the ſecond garde to let in them of his company, whom he aſſured to be of his acquaintance: but ſome of the ſouldiers miſtruſting, went about to ſhut the gate: Rochemort and his companie withſtoode them, and taking weapons in hand did kill ſome of the garde. Captaine Freſne went vp into the Captaines chamber, who hearing the fray would haue gone foorth; but being encountred by the ſayd Freſne was ſlaine.
               Captaine Halot ſeeing the tumult, in ſtead to enter into the Caſtle, ran into the Towne, and vpon the rumour of the ſurprizing of the Caſtle, biddeth the Citizens not to ſtirre, for he had (ſaith he) cauſed the Caſtle to be taken for the King: but incontinently he was taken priſoner by the Citizens.
               
                  Freſne and Rochemort being maſters of the Caſtell, the alarme was very hot in the towne: notice was giuen euery where in great dilligence. Rochemort forgetteth not to ſend to the Lord Clermont, to certify him, what was paſſed, deſiring him to ſend greater forces, & alſo to ſend word to the Prince.
               Whileſt theſe newes flye euery where, diuers euents happened, which deceaued both them and others. They of the towne greeued to haue that thorne in their heeles: ſleep not, but take armes, beſet the Caſtel, and within a whyle haue ſuccour of the Nobilitie of the countrey. In the euening the inhabitantes would fayne haue parley with Freſne, and vſed the means of Halot, for to draw him forth of the Caſtell, hauing placed in the darke of the night nigh the bridge 30. or 40. ſouldiers with Caliuers, either for to take him, or elſe to ſeaze vpon the drawing bridge, when he ſhould come forth.
               
                  Freſne vpon this parley going forth, and being yet vpon the bridge, one of ye ſouldiers haſting to ſhoot, Freſne would haue returned in, but Rochemort with his company ſeeing the perill, did draw the bridge. Freſne not able to recouer the drawing, held faſt at the chayns: they without, cut off his handes: ſo hee fell into the ditch, which was very deepe, and cut in a

rocke: his Cloke was left hanging on the draw bridge. There was a redde Deere in the ditch, which tore him with his hornes. They of the Towne by the licence of them of the Caſtell tooke him vp with a coard: But the coard breaking, hee fell downe agayne, and at length was taken  vp and buryed in a Chappell nigh the Caſtell.
               Captayne Halot within few dayes after by the towne was condemned and executed.
               Theſe two being dead, Rochemort a Hugonet remayned maſter of the Caſtell, whereof hee geueth notice to the Lord Clermont, who immediatly diſpatched a meſſenger to the Prince being at the ſiege of Browage.
               
               The inhabitants, who could haue borne it with ſome contentation (becauſe they knew Freſne to be a Papiſt, and that hee ſayd, he held it for the king) after his death aſked Rochemort, for whom he kept the caſtel. When he had anſwered, that it was for the king of Nauarre, they were greatly mooued, and immediatly began to make Trenches both to force the ſaid caſtel and alſo to let ſuccour from cōming in. Companyes do arriue from euery where. The Lord Bocage is ſent by the king with commaundement to defend the trenches without enterpriſing any thing, but onely to beſiege the caſtell vntill the Lord Ioyeuſe his comming, who ſhortly after came thither with the Lord Chaſtres. In meane time Rochemort and his companions rifled the cheſtes and treaſures of Briſſak, and other which had conueyed their goods into that fort. There was a great Bootie in plate and Iewels. Neither could it be knowen what he had done with the greate horne of Unicorne which was kept there of old.
               Certayne dayes being ſpent about the 29. of September in an after noone Rochemort leaning vpon one of the windowes of the Caſtell, and there ſlumbering, receaued two pellets of a gunne ſhot, whereof the one cut his throat, and the other his tongue, and ſo dyed ſhortly after without ſpeaking: ſo by his death the caſtel was left without a guyd. There were 9. Papiſtes, and 5. of the reformed Religion within which could neuer agree, but were ſtill in diſorder and confuſion: which cauſed that after the comming of the Lord Ioyeuſe, they within began to demaund parley, which continued for certayne dayes.
               Whileſt theſe thinges ſo paſſed at Angers, the Lord Clermont not knowing the death of Rochemort, who was the ground of his drift, had aſſembled in Normandie, and in the countrey of Perche, about ſixe hundred men, and ſendeth a meſſenger to the Prince at the ſiege of Browage, to aduer
                  
                     •
                  ize him how the affayres do goe.
               The 3. of October, newes were brought vnto the Prince by expreſſed meſſenger, of the taking of the Caſtell, and how the inhabitants had trenched and beſieged it with the forces of Briſſak, and of the countrey of. Suy, and after by the Lord Bocage ſent by the King. This newes cauſed the

Prince to leaue his footemen before Browage, and hee with his horſemen and certaine number of Harquebuſiers on horſeback, to paſſe ouer the riuer Loyre, to ſuccour them who were within the caſtell, and kept the ſame for  the King of Nauarre, being thereto encouraged by the appearance of the great aduauntage, which ſeemed to conſiſt in it, for the aduauncing of the affaires of them of the reformed religion, conſidering alſo that Briſſack who by the partition of the League, had obtained the gouernement of Aniow, 
                  
                     •
                  s is afore ſaide, was one of the buſieſt Leaguers: he waighed wel the dangers which might enſue, as to draw al the Kings forces vpon himſelf, and the difficulties of repaſſing the riuer Loyre: he conſidered alſo that the remnant of his armie leſt at Browage, might bee diſcomfited by the Marſhall Matignon & Bellegarde gouernour of Xainctonge, who might ioyne their forces together.
               But on the other ſide hee hoped, that being ſtrengthened by receauing the companies of the Lord Clermont, which hee had gathered (as is afore ſaid) to the number of ſixe hundred, he would be able to fight againſt whom ſoeuer.
               Alſo that by that new ſupplie of the Lord Clermont, and by the fauour of ſome Caſtles which fauored him vpon the Loyre, he might paſſe well enough, and ſo returne with greater forces to the ſiege of Browage.
               
               God had determined, that no conſideration nor counſell might diſſwade this Prince from this iourney, to the end that he might ſhew in the beginning of this perilous warre, how mightie his arme is in the preſeruing of his children, and how able hee is to weaken and diſſipate the ſtrength and arrogancie of his enemies, who fret and fume, take counſell and conſpire together againſt his anoynted ſonne. That by this example all the children of God may learne, not alwaies (euen in a good cauſe) to promiſe themſelues victorie, but to aſſure themſelues that God will defend the iuſt cauſe alwaies, and preſerue them that call on his name, whether they bee few or many.
               The ſame day ariued from Rochel before Browage ſixe pieces of batterie, conducted by Mounſer Perſonne, who followed the ſhippes of warre, which few daies before had ariued as is afore ſaid.
               About the 6. of October, there was a great ſtur in the campe before Browage by reaſon of the Princes departing to Angers. For in his abſence  there was no way to aſſure the Ilands, nor the remnant of the armie, which remayned there at that ſiege. For the inhabitantes ſaw a manifeſt danger to themſelues, which thing made many of them reſolue to giue ouer all, and to repayre to Rochell, whereby the ſouldiers (there appoynted to remayne) were greatly diſcouraged. At length the Lord Saint Meſmes gouernour of Saint Jhan. D'Angelye an aged man, famous, and of a long continued experience, a man of great authority and welbeloued of the

countrey, was requeſted to take the gouernement of the companies, appointed to continue the ſiege: which thing after many wiſe declarations of the dangerous euents which he did foreſee, might happen both to them that  went, and alſo to them that remained at the ſiege, yet hee did accept the charge, with the great contentation of all men. Monſer Perſonne, was made gouernour of the Nauie: the Lord Ranques remained gouernour of Oleron: Captaine Belon was appoynted to gather them of the Ilands, and to commaund ouer them. The chiefeſt regiments which remayned for t
                     •
                   continue that ſiege, were the companies of the Lord Orges, Saint Seuerin, and Boyſrond, with whome were many voluntarie Souldiers, beſide them of the Ilands, and two hundred Harquebuſiers, ſent by the towne of Rochel.
               
               On the 7. of October, ſome captaines ſhewed themſelues vnwilling to remaine, conſidering the euents and inconueniences, which might befall in  the abſence of the Prince: ſo that the affaires were in greater trouble, and the mindes in greater perplexitie, then before. But the Prince remedied all theſe things, as well as hee could, to ſtrengthen the ſiege: and ſent to the Uicount Turene, who was in perigord with great forces, praying him to draw neere, to fauour that ſiege. But hee could not doo it, hauing ſome occaſions in hand, and waiting for the comming of the King of Nauarre, out of Gaſcoyne, as it ſhall appeare hereafter.
               About the ſame time, the Senate of Paris, hauing conſidered vpon the Popes excommunication, giueth anſwer to the King, in the which they grieuouſly condemne the Leaguers, doo blame the King, for hauing broken the edict of peace, doo ſhew it to be impoſſible to bring to paſſe their enterpriſes, doo reprooue the Pope, for vſurping vpon Princes authorities, and the liberties of the Crowne of France, doo condemne the excomunication worthy to be burned, counſell the King to purſue them: who haue procured the ſame, and to execute iuſtice vpon them, as vpon traitors.
               About the ſame time, the King lead by his counſell, who for the moſt part weare of the League, and ſeruants to the Guyzes, by them was borne in hand, that they of the reformed religion had to great aduauntage, by the edict of Iulie: and that many, both of the religion and Catholikes, had flocked together to the King of Nauarre. Therefore, he ſetteth foorth a declaration of the edict of Iu
                     •
                  ie, by the which hee dooth admoniſh them, that haue borne armes againſt the League, of whatſoeuer religion they bee: either to lay them downe, or elſe to be taken for Rebells, and their goods to be ſould for the maintaining of the warre. Hee commaundeth them of the religion, which haue not borne armes, to doo with their goods what they will, and to depart the Realme within 15. dayes after the publication of the ſaid declaration, charging his officers to make diligent enquirie for the performing of the premiſes: by the ſaid declaration hee giueth libertie to

women and children, according to the former edict.
               It is ſayd before, how the Prince (notwithſtanding all counſell and aduiſe to the contrarie) determined to paſſe the riuer of Loyre, all difficulties  therfore ſet aſide, the eight of October the Prince departed out of his camp with his companies to Taillebourg, appointing the rendes vous, at a place nigh S. Ihan d'Angely. His forces did conſiſt of the companies of the Lord Rohan, who were aboue ſixe ſcore braue Gentlemen, the companies of the Lords Nemours, & Laual, who had much nobilitie with him. There were alſo the companies of the Lords Trimouille, and Boulay, & his own companie, which in number and nobilitie paſſed all others. The Harquebuſiers on horſeback were they of his garde; the Regiments of the Lord Aubigny, Ouſches, Campoyſe, Touche, & Fleſche, & others, with many Gentlemen of Xainctonge, and Poytow, who were ſent for by the Prince, and put themſelues vnder Noble men, as they would themſelues. The whole of his forces came to the number of eight hundred horſemen, and betweene one thouſand or twelue hundred Harquebuſiers on horſebacke. There was a great deale more carriage, than was expedient for a voyage to bee done with celeritie and diligence.
               The 9. day the Prince being at Taillebourg, the Artillerie which was ſent from Rochel to the ſtege of Browage, arriued in the riuer Charante, 
                   to be brought againe to Rochel by Captaine Bordeaulx. For the Prince at his departing from Marans, had taken order to retire the Artillerie, to auoyd what might enſue, not intending to occupie it at Browage, but onely to keepe the Towne blocked vntill his returne, which hee hoped to bee ſhortly.
               The ſame ſame day the Prince from Taillebourg went to lodge to Villeneufue la conteſſe, where he vnderſtood that the Ladie Trimouille was at S. Stephen, about a league from thence, where he went to ſalute her: and after many ſpéeches about his marriage with her daughter, the ſayd Ladie vſed many perſwaſions, to make her ſonne (the Lord Trimouille) to breake his reſolution, in the which ſhe ſawe him to embarke himſelfe on the ſide of the king of Nauarre, threatning him of her accurſe, if he procéeded further. But the ſayd yong Lord ſhewed her, with much ſubmiſſion and obeiſance, that if ſhe would weigh the reaſons, which mooued him ſo to doo, grounded vpon iuſtice and honour; and on the contrary ſide, the vniuſt cauſe of the League, he was aſſured that ſhe would turne her curſing into bleſſing: ſo that he remayned reſolute both to followe that part, and alſo not to forſake the Prince in that voyage.
               The tenth day of October all the companies tooke their way toward Niort, Baeſuiere, Argenton, Viers and Tence. There the Lord S. Gelayes Marſhall of the Princes campe, with the companie of the Lord Boulay, with a certaine number of Harquebuſiers on horſebacke, departed to goe

before to get the bancke of Loyre: and following the ſide of the riuer vpwarde, to ſearch ſome occaſion to paſſe the riuer, eyther by ſurprizing of boates or milles, met with a certaine companie of Gentlemen of the  League, very well appoynted with armour and horſes, going to the ſuccour of Angers, whom they tooke, and all their carriage.
               The 11. day the Lord Aubigny and Bouet tooke the ſtrong Abbey of  S. Maure vpon the riuer of Loyre, where was a garriſon of the League. There they did no violence to the Monkes, but licenſed them to depart whether they would. They tooke the Prior and ſent him to the Prince at S. Gemes, who courteouſly entertayned him in his owne houſe, and ſafely ſent him to Angers.
               
               The 14. day Captaine Fleſche being of that countrey, had aduaunced, and began to paſſe at the towne of Roſiers: for there were no companies of the enemies on all that coaſt. For as much as it was thought incredible, that without any other intelligences the Hugonets durſt paſſe ſo great a riuer, in a manner in the ſight of two great townes, to wit, San
                        ••
                     re aboue where they had retyred all the boates thereabouts, and Angers beneath, where they had forces both of footmen and horſemen greater than any the Prince had: ſo that many ſeeing ſuch ſilence, ſuſpected yt there was ſome lying in waite. And as for the Lord Clermont, whom we haue ſayd to haue left the Prince at Pons to paſſe ouer Loyre, to gather the forces of them of the reformed religion, ſcattered in thoſe popiſh countreys, there was no more newes of him, than if he had not béen in the world: and indeed then he was aboue thirtie leagues from them. But Captaine Fleſche had ſeazed vppon three boates laden with wine: which after he had cauſed to bée landed vpon the water ſide, he prepared them to carrie the armie ouer.
               The 15. of October he paſſed firſt, and lodged at Roſiers, and after him  paſſed the Lord Aubiguy with his Regiment: that day the Prince arriued at S. Gemes with his troupes, which lodged in the villages about. The ſame day alſo arriued the Lords Saint Gelayſe, and Boulay, to the Prince: they had been ſcouring the waſt of the riuer. For the right vnderſtanding of this voyage, the ſituation and places of the countrey is to be noted. In all this diſcourſe, we will make mention of three riuers, the Loyre, Lolion, and Loir. On the South ſide of Loyre there bee two townes, Samur and Pont de ſell: betwéene theſe two townes there be foure other litle townes, the Abbey of Planpierd, S. Gemes, the Abbey of S. Maure, and S. Mathurine. On the North ſide of the riuer, Loyre right againſt S. Gemes is the towne Roſiers, and betwéene theſe two townes in the riuer is an Iland: in this place paſſed ouer the Prince and his armie. The next riuer on the North ſide of Loyre is Lolion, a little riuer, but very déepe, and running ſlowly; it waſheth part of 
                     Ʋandomoys and Anjou, and falleth into the riuer of Loyre at Pont de ſel. On the North ſide of the riuer Lolion in the

middle way betweene the ſayd riuer and Angers, is ſituated the towne of Beaufort. 
                  
               
               The third riuer is Loire, falling from the countrey of Beauſe through Vandomoys & Anjou, receauing 2. other riuers comming from the countrey called Perche, which are Sarthre, and Huyne, and a little aboue Angers do fall into the riuer Loyre, and ſomewhat beneath Angers: theſe three riuers in one are receaued into the riuer Mayne, and ſo altogether in one about 2. miles beneath Angers, & 3. miles beneath Pont de Sell, do run into Loyre.
               
               Vpon this riuer of Loyre are ſituated theſe townes following, Fleſche, Lude, Lauerdine, Chaſtean de Loyre, Ʋendoſme & Chaſteaudine. Betwéene Chasteaudine, and Reiſgencye, which lyeth vpon Loyre, betweene Orleance, and Bloys, is the Towne Foreſt of Morcheſuoyr: in that Foreſt was the army of the Prince ſcattered (and as it were) became inuiſible, as ſhall be ſhewed in the diſcourſe following.
               The 16. of October, the whole army began to paſſe ouer with great diſcommodity. For from Saint Gemes they had but three meane boats,  wherwith they paſſed into the Iland which lyeth in the midle of the riuer. On the other ſide of the Iland to paſſe to the towne of Roſiers, they had but two boats, and few Ferry-men, who were Papiſtes, they did the woorſt they could, and ready at euery hand to ſteale away. Theſe diſcommodities cauſed great confuſion at the paſſage, which was encreaſed with a great number of cariages which followed the Campe.
               At this paſſage, euery man did preſage the euill ſucceſſe which afterward enſued. For although there was no want of corage, yet one might perceaue a certayne ſadnes vnaccuſtomed, which cauſed many to ſay, let vs goe and dye: for euery man was reſolued to vanquiſh or to dye. But the Lord diſpoſed otherwiſe: for a more meru
                     •
                  lous deliuerance hath not béen ſeene in our dayes. For neither did they vanquiſh, neither dyed, but euery one dranke a reaſonable draught of the cuppe of bitternes.
               At this paſſage did ariſe great diuerſity of opinions among the heads: for none of the Captaynes thought good, that the Prince ſhould paſſe ouer for the care which they had of his ſafety, & their reaſons were, that it was moſt like, that the enemie would not withſtand their paſſage, but would winke at it, that afterwardes they might bring all their forces together to ſtop their returne, thinking it an eaſy thing with many to ouercome few. For they had already newes that Ioyeuſe haſted to Angers, with all his forces, which were about three hundred Horſes, twelue hundred of Suiſſers, and ſome regiments of Frenchmen. They alleaged alſo, that there was nothing ſure at Angers, and that it was to be feared, that it would be ſurrendered before they could aryue thither, ſo that their paſſing ouer ſtood vpon no reaſon, but vpon an vncertaynty to venture ſuch an army with all the ſtate of their defeuce. There was alſo newes brought to them (though

falſe) that Briſſake had ſeazed vpon Beaufort, a towne betweene the riuer Lotion, and Angers, whither the Prince thought to haue gone to lodge that day. The 17 of October, notwithſtanding the reaſons aforeſayd,  the Prince paſſed ouer at the town Roſiers with ſome noble men and Captaynes, where he took about thirty gentlemen of the company of the Lord Boulaye, who was already paſſed, and certayne Harquebuſiers with him, commaunding them to lye in ambuſh in a wood nigh Beaufort, and commaunded the Lord Valiere, who was among the ſaid gentlemen, to make ſemblance towardes the gates of Beaufort, and to draw them who ſhould iſſue out into the aduantage of them which lay in ambuſh in the wood. But when they came to Beaufort, there they found none but the inhabitantes who did profer their Towne to the Prince, and aſſured that there came no man except the County Carauas, to whom they denyed entrance.
               Upon this report the Prince determined to paſſe the reſt of his army, grounded vpon many reaſons: but eſpecially vpon the newes which he had receaued of yt Lord Clermont, whom he had heard to be about Angers, with ſixe or ſeauen hundred men: who was not willing notwithſtanding that the Prince ſhould encloſe himſelfe in that ſleeue.
               All this while the Lord Rohan with his company made a road toward Saumur, and the Lord Laual downe the riuer toward Angers, for he paſſed laſt of all.
               The Prince alſo ſendeth a trompet vnder the colour of certayne priſonners, to know of Angers what hee might. But they of Angers would not ſuffer him to goe further then the Suburbs, who reported onely that they which kept the Trenches were reſolued to ſtand to their defence manfully.
               Few dayes the Prince Monpenſier had gone to Angers to profer his ſeruice: but within few dayes he went away diſcontented, becauſe they of the citie had preferred the Lord Bocage before him: which thing cauſed ſome to thinke, that the ſayd Prince Monpenſier would ioyne with the Prince of Conde, conſidering that this warre was agaynſt the League: and for the ſame cauſe the Lord Auantignie was ſent to him from the Prince: but all was in vayne.
               The 18. the reſt of the companies paſſed all ouer Loyre with leaſure, but with much diſcommodity, by reaſon of the great continuall rayne. 
               
               The Prince left Captaine Serpent with a ſtronge garriſon at the Abbey of Saint Maure, to fortify the paſſage, and to fauour their repaſſing at their returne.
               The 19. they departed from Roſiers, to paſſe the riuer Lotion, which lyeth betweene Loyre, and the towne Beaufort, a riuer narrow, but very déep,  then ſpecially, which for the great aboundant rayne, was ouer the bankes. There the paſſage was more troubleſome then at Loyre, becauſe the countrey

all about is coppſes and Mariſhes daungerous for the horſemen.
               They of Beaufort being ſo mened to open the gates to the Prince, did it without any delay, and taking away their Gard, receaued ſuch as were  placed in their ſtead. Thether the Prince arryued the ſame day at euening with his army, and left the Lord Laual for the ſafety of theyr paſſage of Lotion, who came to the Prince the next day after.
               The ſame day about noone, the Lord Clermont came to the Prince at Beaufort with thirty horſes: his horſemen were about nine hundred, & lodged in the villages betwéene Beaufort and Angers.
               
               The twentéeth day being the Lordes day, they ſoiorned at Beaufort, and the night following they began to march toward Angers, and appoynted  the rendes vous at a certayne place within a league of Angers.
               
               The Lord Ioyeuſe vnderſtanding the Prince of Conde to bee at hand, (fearing leaſt hee might enterprize vpon the Caſtell, by the helpe of thoſe few men, being onely 16. in all) by reaſon that he thought them to bee of the religion, or otherwiſe to fauour the Prince, and that thence he might moleſt the League, and hold the whole countrey in ſubiection, he thought that it were not good to delay the regayning of the ſayd Caſtel: but to recouer it at any price whatſoeuer. Therefore he conditioned with them who were within, that the Papiſtes which were there nine in number, might there remayne, if they thought it good. They of the religion 7. in number ſhould be ſafely conducted to yt Princes camp, and that they ſhould not bee ſearched. Alſo that they might carry away what they would.
               Furthermore, that at their going away out of the Caſtell, they of the League ſhould all retyre away.
               Laſt of all, that euery one ſhould haue one thouſand crownes in money, and a good Horſe, with a pardon from the king, and ſecurity, that they ſhould neuer be called to any accompt, all theſe Promiſes were faythfully kept to them.
               At their comming foorth they deuided amongeſt their friendes the mouable goods of Briſſak, as Plate, Aras, and other ſuch thinges as they could not cary, and loded themſelues with the beſt iewels, as much as they could carry away.
               The 21. of October, the Princes companies began to march from the campe, where the rendes vous was giuen through a narrow way, toward the place of execution, nigh the Suburbes. There by the forrunners were three ſouldiours taken, not ſuppoſing the enemie to haue been ſo nigh: who reported that the Trenches were very ſtrong, and would be ſtoutely defended. They alſo tooke certaine peaſants; who reported Rochemort to be dead, and the caſtell to be ſurrendered for a great ſomme of money: but they were not belieued.
               The ſame day the Prince ſent certaine Harquebuſiers to Pontdeſel
                  
which is a towne ſituated vpon the fall of Lolion into Loyre, where is a bridge to paſſeouer the riuer, where they of Angers had put a ſtrong gariſon, to keepe the bridge. 
               
               At the diſcouering of the approache of the Princes power, both the towne, and alſo the caſtell gaue a hot alarum, and ſounded the Toxin in all the pariſh Churches of the Citie, and alſo at the high church, called Saint Maurice.
               
               This was a maruelous thing, that in ſo great and populous a Citie, wherein were more men of warre ſtrangers, then the Prince had in all his armie, yet no ſallie out was made, no more then if there had beene no man; conſidering alſo that the place where the Prince was in battell aray, did fauour greatly them of the towne: for there was but a broad way where the horſemen onely ſtoode, and on both ſides were vineyards and copſes. In that broad way, were ſet in battell aray all the Harquebuſiers: where the Miniſter of the church, L. Blanchardiere pronounced a forme of praier before the army. And vpon this preparation, were receaued certaine newes of the rendering of the Caſtel the day before: which thing made all men beleeue it, becauſe that at the ariuing of the armie, there was no taken from thence (notwithſtāding the alarum, & pieces of ſhot giuē out.) Others that were againſt that opinion alleaged, that it was no maruaile if they did not diſcharge the canon out of the Caſtell, becauſe they were ſo few, that they were not able to remoue it. They added alſo, that the fire which they of the towne had ſet to an houſe, betweene the armie and the Caſtell, which continued all the day by the ſmoake, was to let them of the Caſtell, to ſee the troupes which came to ſuccour them. Vpon theſe coniectures, the captaines (according to the commandements receaued) ſet vpon the ſubburbs of Paſſiguie, and Magdalen, and forced the ſame, euen to the Bari
                     •
                  ados, which they of the towne had made out of the gates, within the ſubburbes, which were forſaken. There the Captaine Fleſche was wounded with a ſhot, who dyed within few dayes after; he had proteſted before, that either he would dye, or elſe he would enter the Trenches, paſſing not for death, ſeeing that it was in, and for his countrey: both hapened vnto him. Hee was borne at a towne named Fleſche, ſituated vpon the Riuer Loyre, flowing from Vendoſme, to Angers, a gentleman borne of good parentage. All that day paſſed away in ſkirmiſhes, for the armie of the Prince had alſo trenched themſelues, in the ſubburb of Preſſiguy. The horſemen were al that day in battel aray, vntil nigh at the end of the ſubburbs, while the Harquebuſiers wonne by little and little, the Trenches of the enemie, pearcing the houſes, to aduaunce to the gate.
               That day, the Prince ſendeth his Troumpet into a medow, vnder the Caſtell, in the ſight of them that were within, to giue them token with the ſound of the Troumpet: but ſeeing no token out of the Caſtell, they began

to ſuſpect in deede, that the Caſtell was ſurrendered. At euening it was thought good to retyre, and that the Souldiours ſhould giue ouer their  Trenches in the ſubburb and houſes which they had gotten, for feare that they within the towne in the aduauntage of the night, ſhould iſſue vpon them, being many againſt few, the towne being able to bring forth foure thouſand ſtrangers onely, beſide the forces of the towne, with the aduauntage of their ordinance. The Lordes Trimouille, Boulay, and Auantignie, with their companies, were appointed to make the retire, which was no further then the houſes next to the ſubburb of Preſſigny. The horſemen lodged that night in the neareſt pariſhes about the Prince with his company, and the Lord Rohan dis lodge at the Pont of Sorges, not without great confuſion, by reaſon that there was but few lodgings. In the night, they of the towne iſſued foorth, ouerthrew and burned the Trenches and Barricadoes, which were made the day before, and lodged within certaine houſes in the ſubburb, euen in the hoſpitall of the leapers, ſo that they could not bee diſplaced thence the nextday.
               The 22. about eight a clock, the Lords Trimouille, Auantigny & Saint Gelayſe, with their companies reſorted to the croſſe way, nigh the place of execution, where all companies were commaunded to appeare. Then they of the towne ſhewed a countenance, as though they would haue iſſued foorth, and certaine demilances appeared within the ſubburb of Preſſigny. There was a great alarum, which haſted the companies from their lodgings, to put themſelues in battell aray, where they did the day before. Then were the footemen commaunded to ſet on the ſubburbs, but they went not to it with that courage as they had done the day before: for many had not refreſhed themſelues: ſome the day before had loſt their horſes, when they left them to fight at the Trenches: ſome did ſteale away and returned to Beaufort. The Captaines were diſcontented, that they had been enforced to giue ouer the aduantage, which they had the day before within the ſubburbs: which they could not recouer without great loſſes. The armie was ſcattered here and there, the high waies were couered with bagage, cariage, charets, horſes, mules, ſeruants, which wandered al night, not knowing whether to retire. To be ſhort, all things went farre otherwiſe then the day before, yet they recouered within the ſubburb as much as they could, not without hazard and difficultie.
               The Prince arryued from Pont Forges, and got him within the Suburbe of Preſsigni, where he perceaued the countenance and courage of his men chaunged and amazed: but on the contrary, them of the towne to haue taken hart. Then euery one alleaging what might haue happened to them in the Caſtel: ſome obſtinately affirmed, that they had ſhot in the night: other ſayd the contrary.
               The Prince aſſembled the Nobles and Captaynes at the croſſe way,

nigh the place of execution (ſaue them which were aſſaulting yt Suburbs) on horſebacke, their helmets on: they conſulted whether they ſhould ſet on  the Trenches, yea or us. Some perſwaded to giue the attempt, ſaying that it would be a ſhame, to haue come ſo farre and ſo nigh execution without blowes giuing, and that they could doo no leſſe then to ſee the enemie in the face, and ſeeing that they woulde not come foorth, they ſhould goe to finde them out: they ſaid further, that they of the Caſtell could not ſee their ſuccour, if they preſented not themſelues at the Trenches.
               Others reaſoned to the contrarie, and among others, the Lord Rohan withſtoode ſtrongly that aduiſe, aleaging many euident reaſons. And firſt, that it was too plaine, that they of the Caſtel had yeelded to the enemie, hauing not giuen one token to th
                     •
                   contrarie, that it was no reaſon to ſay, that they had no knowledge of their comming, conſidering ſo many ſignes giuen them for the ſpace well neere of two daies.
               Secondly, that it were a raſhenes to hazard ſo great and braue forces, and ſuch a notable companie of Nobilitie, to ſo imminent danger vpon vncertainties, and that they were to be reſerued to a better opportunitie. For the enemie was as ſtrong within as they were without, and that it was as eaſie to take the citie as the Trenches ſo well fortified, and that there was no hope of any to ſhew them any fauour: much leſſe out of the caſtel which was already ſurrendered, or elſe diſſembled with them, to intrap them and to caſt them away headlong.
               Thirdly, they ought to conſider that they were in a ſtrange land, in the enemies countrey, incloſed betweene two daungerous riuers which they muſt repaſſe, in a countrey couered with woods, enemie to the horſemen, whereof conſiſted all their forces.
               Finally, that there was no doubt, but that the King on the one ſide, and the League on the other were not idle, but did their endeuour to gather their forces on euery ſide, to ſeaze vpon the paſſages, and fortifie the banck of Loyre, to ſtop their repaſſing. That the forces of Angers were on their backes, which were equall in ſtrength to them, and all the countrey was fauourable to the enemie. Therefore they concluded to retyre, and that delay might bring them great hurt: and that the Lord Laual, who was at Beaufort to make the rereward, ſhould goe backe to repaſſe the Loyre. The greateſt part followed this aduiſe.
               It gréeued greatly the Prince to retyre, and (as hee ſayd to the Lord Clermont) to vnbit. But ouercome with reaſon, he concluded that the Lord Trimouille, Auantigny, and Boulay, ſhould retyre the Harquebuſiers from the ſuburbs, ſo that about two of the clocke in the afternoone they marched toward Beaufort.
               
               In retyring, they firſt met with ye Lord Laual with two hundred gentlemen

galloping toward Angers, who being aduertized of the retyre, went neuertheleſſe forward to the Prince. In the retyring there was confuſion  at Beaufort, for it was two houres within night afore they arriued there, & many had but a ſhort ſupper. The ſame day the companie of Captayne Freſche (whom we haue ſayd to haue béen killed at the aſſault giuen in the ſuburbe of Preſſigny the day before) guided by his Lieftenant, was ſent to get boates for the repaſſing of Lotion.
               
               The 22. day the Prince with all the troupes ſoiourned at Beaufort, to take aduiſe how to repaſſe Loyre. There the Lord Pleſſis gete was appoynted to ſearch out boates and men to conduct them, to auoyde the diſorder which they had the firſt paſſing, and to that intent money was deliuered him.
               The ſame day the Lord Campoyſe was ſent with his company of light horſemen, to ſeaze vpon certayne houſes vpon the banck of Loyre, right agaynſt the Abbey of S. Maure.
               
               The ſame day, whileſt the Prince with the Nobles ſoiourned at Beaufort, came to the Lord Clermont the foure men which he had ſent to Rochemort, who were entered into the Caſtle of Angers, and there remayned vntill the day of the rendring thereof, conducted by the Lord Suze: There they ſhewed to the armie what was paſſed in the Caſtle of Angers: one of them ſhewed a Croſſe (which he had for his part) made of pure gold, hauing two and thirtie great Diamonds, and a great Saphir which made the head of the Crucifixe: the ladder and all other things accuſtomed to be paynted in the paſſion (as they call it) was all of Diamonds, no leſſe artificially, than coſtly wrought: he was proffered for the ſame fifteene hundred Crownes.
               The 24. of October, whileſt the Prince with many Noble men ſoiourned at Beaufort, to pacifie a quarrell riſen among certayne Gentlemen, the Lord Laual in the afternoone paſſed ouer Loyre, his mē of armes and light horſes, to defend S. Maure, and to fauour the paſſage of the reſt.
               This day ſoiourning at Beaufort, was the cauſe of the diſorder which followed after, and many marueiling at ſo long abode there, foreſaw what would enſue, knowing that Ioyeuſe had ſet certayne boates in a readines with ſmall peeces at Saumur, to let them downe the riuer to ſtop the paſſage. If they had paſſed that day and night, all things had gone well and ſafe: but God had otherwiſe determined. The ſame day the Lords Ioyeuſe, and Chaſtre, went vp the riuer Loyre on the South ſide of the ſayd riuer from Angers to Saumur with 150. horſes.
               The Lord Laual being paſſed ouer, and vnderſtanding that the ſayd Lords had paſſed on that coaſt toward Saumur, early in the morning made a roade toward Saumur, and tooke the Mules and rich carriage of Ioyeuſe. The Lords Trimouille and Boyſeuly paſſed the Lotion, & encamped themſelues

in a Common vpon the bancke of Loyre, whileſt the Prince and the reſt paſſed Lotion. There was at that paſſage of Lotion aboue fiue hundred  horſes, and two boates onely: for that cauſe the confuſion was ſo great, that one being ouerladen ſunke, though without any loſſe of men, becauſe it was nigh the bancke.
               The ſame day about nine of the clocke in the morning, was heard on a ſudden a peale of Ordinance, with ſome ſmall ſhot, which put the Armie in great rumour. Some ſayd that it was at Angers, in token of ioye for the rendring of the Caſtle. But within a while after were ſeene two great boates furniſhed with Ordinance and men of warre, who caſt anker a little beneath the Abbey of S. Maure, in the place where the paſſage ouer was appoynted to be, and immediatly began to ſhoote on both ſides of the riuer, both agaynſt them who had paſſed, and agaynſt them that were about to paſſe.
               The newes of the ſayd boates were brought to the Prince incontinently, with amplification of the impoſſibilitie to repaſſe: and it was indeede ſo, for lacke of two field péeces to haue ſhot from the banke agaynſt the boates, which by theſe meanes could haue béen eaſily ſunke: but they had carried none, although they had once determined ſo to doo.
               Theſe newes ſo amazed the whole Armie, as though a ſtroake of a Thunderboult had ſmitten them from heauen, and that ſo much the more, becauſe the enemies forces did flocke together from euery ſide.
               The army then was ſcattered in ſundry places, without hope to bee able to ſuccour one another: for the Lord Laual had paſſed ouer the Riuer the day before, and the Lord Borlay had ventured to paſſe that day at S. Mathurin, not without great danger, yet without loſſe. The one part of the armie was betweene the Loyre, and the Lotion, an vnfit place for horſemen, by reaſon of woods and mariſhes. The troupes of the Lord Clermont, with the reſt of the armie and carriage, were yet at Beaufort, beetweene Angers and Lotion: ſo that if the enemy in ſuch diſaduantage had charged them, it would haue gone hard with them: but the enemy had no good ſpials.
               The Lord Auantigny in that diſorder hauing paſſed Lotion, retyred to the Lord Campoyſe, who had ſeazed on ſome houſes right againſt ye Abbey Saint Maure, and had made a baricado vpon the banke. In the meane time they ſent the Lord Cheſue to the Prince, who cauſed the Prince to paſſe his army backe ouer Lotion, to make a ready reſolution to paſſe in fighting, or elſe to take his way at aduenture ouer the countrey of Beauſe. For if he ſhould make any delay, without doubt hee ſhould be diſcomfited, hauing the enemy within a litle league both aboue and beneath, who reenforced themſelues euery howre, and that there were other armed Boats diſcouered, which followed the former. Therefore to take readily aduiſe,

and to informe them thereof, and that if neede be the Lord Laual might repaſſe to them although not without danger.
               The Prince vnderſtanding theſe newes, aſſembled all the heads and  Captaynes in the wood, which is on the banke of Lorion, nigh the place of the paſſage: where they reaſoned more then two howres, what was expedient to be done in this extremity. Some gaue counſell to take their way toward Beauſe, and to get to the Loyre aboue Orleans, for that they had forces ſufficient ynough to paſſe all hazardes, and to fight if neede were.
               Others were agaynſt that, and alleaged, that the army was weake by paſſing ouer of the forces of the Lords Laual, and Burlay, and therefore did aduiſe to deſcend into Britayne, where ſhips might bee had out of Rochel, & ſo it were eaſy to paſſe beneath Nantes: and by theſe meanes to ſaue their men with the loſſe of their horſes.
               In this diuerſity of opinions they could conclude nothing: but ſeeing the night approched, they returned to Beaufort, their to take reſolution of their affayres.
               There was a Noble man, one Lord D'ouault, an old warrier, who not long afore the paſſage ouer Loyre, put him ſelf willingly in the company of the Lord Laual. This Noble man vnderſtanding that the Prince could not repaſſe, and that he was determined to take his way ouer the countrey of Beauſe, which could not bee done without great hazard, did Ieaue the Lord Laual his company (who was about to retyre from the banke of Loyre to Poytow) & did venture to repaſſe Loyre, notwithſtāding the great danger, proteſting that he would die with the Prince if occaſion ſhould require it: and ſo with great danger repaſſing the riuer, ouertooke the Prince at Beaufort.
               
               The reſolution to repaſſe the Lorion, cauſed the Prince and the Lordes who were with him to reſolue themſelues agaynſt whom ſo euer. Notwithſtanding euery one did looke vpon his fellow, as commonly is done in ſuch ineuitable dangers, where is ſeene no remedy. Some ſayd, ſaltem olim ſi meminiſſe iuuaret: others ſayd, vnaſalus victis nullam ſperare ſalutem. Few thought, that theſe blowes came from Heauen for the puniſhment of their vices: and ſpecially for ſwearing and blaſpheming, which were not puniſhed in that armie, where were many of the League, who induced others to their wickednes and licentious life.
               All that day there was a great diſorder for them that had paſſed to repaſſe agayne ouer Lorion, hauing but one boate which could not receaue aboue ten horſes at once, and that cauſed the diſorder, for that euery one would bee firſt and no man laſt.
               This was to bee noted in the Prince, that he chaunged not his countenance, but as hee did at the paſſage of Loyre: ſo now he anſwered to them yt repreſented him the danger, ſaying, we will fight. And becauſe the confuſion

encreaſed at the paſſage of Lorion, ſending ſufficient number of horſemen to euery place, where the enemy might come vppon them, hee lyghted of his horſe, and cauſed men, horſes, and cariage to paſſe: and when  it was more then one hower in the night hee paſſed himſelfe: notwithſtanding many remayned all night in the marſhes, who paſſed the next day following in the morning.
               The night following the 25. day of October, it was concluded by the Prince & Nobles with him, to take ouer ye countrey, which lyeth betwene the Lorion, and Loiz, which is a Riuer comming from Vendoſme to Angers, to the end to recouer Beauſe, and ſo to paſſe Loyre at Bogeancye, Bloys, or Sancerre: or if the worſt came, with long iourneyes to attayne to the head of Loyre, with reſolution to fight agaynſt whomſoeuer.
               All that night there was hot ſkirmiſhing betweene them that came down from Samur in the boats, and the garriſon, which the Prince had left at the Abbay of Saynt Maure, vnder Captayne Serpant, where was alſo the Lord Laual and Boulay, who as is afore ſayd, had repaſſed the Loyre.
               
               The Lord Auantigny, who remayned all that night in the houſe called Menetriere, not farre from the banke of Loyre to make the retyre, paſſed the Lorion, with all the reſidue very early, & arryued at Beaufort with the Prince about eight a clocke in the morning, the 26. and the ſame day was the paſſage of Saint Mathurine beneath Saynt Maure, ſtopped with boats, furniſhed with ordinance and garriſon.
               The 26. the Lords Laual and Boulay, with the garriſon which was at Saint Maur, vnderſtanding that the Prince was returned beyond Lorion, with determination to croſſe ouer the countrey of Beauſe, and that the paſſage of Saynt Mathurine was ſtopped, thought neceſſarye to retyre into Xainctonge, with all diligence, and with ſuch forces as they had, to oppoſe themſelues againſt the attemptes of ye enemies which might ryſe there, to aſſemble the nobility and other ſouldiers which were left there, & alſo to afſiſt the troupes which were left at the ſiege of Browage, and to make the places ſure in Poytow and Xainctonge: and in very deede, God did worke al the ſayd euentes, by their preſence there.
               The King aduertiſed what was paſſed at Angers, putteth foorth his forces out of all partes, to ſet vpon the Prince.
               It is ſayd before, how the King intended to make ciuill warre in Guyenne, & firſt of all to beginne in Poitow & Xainctonge, as being next neighbours to him of all the Prouinces which do profeſſe the Gaſpell: for the which cauſe he had ordayned aforehand prouiſions of corue, and wine to be ſet vp in certayne townes and cities: & among others the Duke de Mayne was appoynted, to that warre, not as one who was thought fit for that charge, but for the cauſes which do follow.
               As the Guyzes, to wit, the Dukes, Guyze, Mame & Cardinal, bretheren &

                  Aumale coſin vnto them, did conſent in theſe three points, to wit in altering the ſtate by tranſporting the crowne from the true owners, and haires into their familie, in killing, degrading, or at leaſt diſinheriting the houſe  of Bourbon, and deſtroying the auncient nobilitie whom they knew, would reſiſt their atempts, and beare vnpacientlie their vſurped tiranny. The Prieſts were the fire brands to kindle this ambitious rage, and by their money to aduaunce the ſame.
               So they all did prouide to bring this treaſon to effect, that of all things the kings forces ſhould not fall into any other hands then in to their own, or of their partakers: but ſpecially that none of the Princes of the bloud ſhould by any meanes be armed with the guiding of the Kings power. Wee ſee then how they all did agree, to vndoe the King with his owne forces.
               But herein they did vary, for euery one had particular fetches and drifts, which did ſwim in their braynes, whereby they went about to aduaunce their particular affaires, by the Kings forces: for the Duke of Guize did determine to ſtay nigh the Kings perſon, and not to goe farre from Paris and Belgike, where he had gotten great fauours and many partakers, there expecting either fit oportunitie to ſtrike the blowe which he had long afore hand purpoſed, or elſe at the leaſt, hee bearing the ſway about the Kinges perſon and counſell, might both ſpy and preuent the Kings driftes and policie, if he ſhould ſeeme to wauer neuer ſo little, and keepe of the Princes of the bloud and Nobilitie, from entring into fauour with the King, whereby they might diſapoint his driftes.
               He alſo imagined, that whatſoeuer might happen, Paris and the Belgike being at his deuotion, either were able to defend him againſtthe Kings attempts, or elſe if the King might be cut off by any miſfortune, the ſaide citie and countrey would be able to lift him vp into that roome, whereon he did ſo greatly deſire to ſit; euen againſt the conſent of the reſt of the realme, and againſt his owne brother the Duke De Maine, whoſe emulation hee not onely alwaies ſuſpected and deſired to preuent, but alſo endeuored to ſend him farre from the ſaid King, citie and countrey: beſide that, he knew to be a fit inſtrument, by ſkilfull entiſing and policie to ſeduce their great and populous cities of Poytiers, Limoges, Perigueux, Bourdeaulx, & others where he ſhould come, regarding not at whoſe deuotion thoſe cities might bee, ſo that they were not in the power and fidelitie of the King, or of the King of Nauarre, that by ſo much they might be weakened.
               The Duke De Mayne being appointed for Guienne, not to ſubdue it, but to haue the Kings forces, in the hands and at the deuotion of the League, and farre from him, if at a pinch he ſhould haue neede of them, was very vnwilling to depart from Paris to his iourney: aleaging alwaies ſome excuſe. The cauſes of his vnwillingnes were loue, ambition, and feare, the

obiects of theſe affections were Maſters Saint Beuſue, and other Courteſans in the towne of Paris, where he walowed himſelfe in filthie pleaſures  and whoredome, as the Boare in the myre: his owne brother whome hee would haue preuented, what occaſion might haue happened by keeping Paris ouer his head: for he was acquainted with the intents and driftes of the League, as one of the chiefeſt of them yet vncertaine of the euents, and what in his abſence being ſo farre from Paris, might happen vnto the King: he would faine haue kept Paris ſtill in poſſeſſion, ſo that if either nature or violence ſhould bereaue the King of his life, 
                     •
                  e might haue that capitall, mightie, rich, and factious citie in his owne poſſeſſion, by whoſe helpe hee ſuppoſed to ataine to his long wiſhed deſires, and become his eldeſt brothers maſter.
               The third cauſe was feare, and the obiect thereof, the King of Nauarre, for knowing that the ſaid King of Nauarre was priuie to their driftes, not onely by his deepe and princelike prudencie, many euident tokens: and their own too manifeſt attempts, but ſpeciallie by their inticing him, and them of the reformed Religion, to their conſpiracie and faction, knowing him alſo to be a Prince moſt faithfull to the ſtate, Crowne and Realme of France, a Prince of great valour, and implacable to traitors: thus hauing a conſcience (which is more then a thouſand witneſſes guiltie) feare made him continually to enter into ſuch apprehenſions, that he thought certainly to goe into Guienne, was to goe to a moſt aſſured death.
               Thus theſe two bretheren aſpiring both to the crowne, yet did varie in thoughts, as the auncient ſaying is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . For the Duke De Mayne would faine to keepe the poſſeſſion of Paris, and therefore maketh many excuſes, hauing not ſometime money enough, another time hauing to weake forces, ſometime aleaging health, ſometime the vnſeaſonable weather. The Duke of Guize was greatly deſirous to haue him out of Paris, ſuppoſing that there his ſhadowe did infect the citie: and therefore to take away all excuſe, leaſt he ſhould aleage his forces, not to be ſufficient to march with the King of Nauarre, he cauſed the King to adde vnto him the regiments of Swiſſers. So the Duke De Mayne hauing eight thouſand Swiſſers, twelue regiment of French footemen, twelue hundred horſemen French: Forces ſufficient for a good Captaine to ſubdue the whole countrey, receaued eight and twentie thouſand Crownes, which the treaſorer of the Cleargie deliuered him: and ſhortlie after eyght and twentie thouſand more, and not long after his departing ſent him foure and fiftie thouſand more. Yet the King could by no meanes perſwade him to take his iourney (for the Kings commaundements he regarded not) vntill the newes came to the King, that the Prince of Conde had paſſed Loyre out of Poytow into Anjou, ſo that at length with great importunacie, being perſwaded by his brother, that in the abſence of the Prince (being as if it were

incloſed in) he might eaſily ſubdue all that countrey, and that it was neede with his armie all by one voyage to goe to the other ſide of Loyre, to let the  repaſſing of the Prince, if he ſhould atempt it, about the 23. of October, weeping and wayling as a child, he went out of Paris, aſſured of ſtripes, if he ſhould come within the reach of the ſaid King of Nauarre. And wher, as at his departing, he had opened his timerouſnes to euiuently, he thought good to couer it with the cloake of vanitie for want of a better, in breathing bloud, ſlaughter, and fire, in words and bragges: which at length were turned into a blaſt of colde winde, yet fully reſolued not to come within the reach of the King of Nauarre, for feare of the Baſtonado, or Strapado, or ſome ſuch like thing: being in good hope in the meane time, that in walking and taking his pleaſures in Guyenne at the Prieſtes coſts, he might make his part ſtrong with ſeducing the forenamed Cities and other, from the Kings obedience, to his deuotion: but he was as far deceaued in that, as in eſcaping the Baſtonado.
               But now to returne to our purpoſe, the Duke Ioyeuſe was at the back of the Prince of Conde, the Duke De Mayne paſſing through Orleans, ouer the riuer of Loyre was at his right hand, and as farre as Bloyſe, ſtopped all the paſſages, leaſt the ſaide Prince might paſſe ouer. The King had ſent Biron with forces into Beauſe, which marched right againſt his face, leaſt hee ſhould eſcape that way, on the left hand the way to the ſea through Britaine and Normandie, was long difficulte and dangerous, by reaſon of many townes and Gariſons therein placed.
               The Prince being thus compaſſed about with al theſe forces of enemies was in leſſe daunger, becauſe that they knew not what, and how things paſſed in his armie, and ſuppoſing the ſame to be farre cloſer and ſtronger then it was in deede, did greatlie feare to aboard it: whereby he and all his Captaines had opportunitie to beguile them, and to ſteale away from them.
               Now, to knowe well the reſt of this voyage, vntill the diſſolution of the armie, it is neceſſarie to know the ſituation of the country. There is on the north ſide of Lorion, a riuer called Loire, waſhing the townes of Chaſteau dune, Vendoſme, Chasteaudeloy, Lude, Fleſche, and Luche, which méeting with the riuer Sartre at Angers, falleth into Loyre, beneath Pont de ſel. The Prince at his departing from Beaufort, folowed this riuer almoſt as far as Chasteau dune.
               
               The 26. of October, the Princes armie diſlodged from Beaufort, intending to lodge at the towne of Luche in Anjou, belonging to the Lord Clermong, there purpoſing to paſſe ouer ye ſayd Loyre vpon the bridge, into the countrey which lyeth betweene the ſayd riuer Loyre and Sartre, called Vaudeloyre: but the riuer was ſo ouerflowen, (as though the foure Elements had ſet themſelues agaynſt that army) that it did couer halfe of the ſayd

bridge: and the Lord Clermont (which is Lord of the place) ſounding the  foord himſelfe, thought it were not paſſable: whereupon they determined that day to goe to Lude.
               
               There happened vnto them other things which increaſed greatly the amaze. For newes came that the Duke Ioyeuſe, with greater forces than theirs, purſued with great haſt after them, and that not long after the departing of the Prince, he had ſeazed vpon Beaufort. On the other ſide, the countrey (which before trembled for feare of them) began to riſe vpon them: for they of the Fleſche the ſelfeſame day iſſued out, and intercepted ſome ſouldiers and carriage. That day according to the determination they lodged at Lude.
               
               The 27. of October they would haue paſſed ouer Loyre vpon the bridge of Lude, but it was ſo highly ouerflowen, that although it was eaſie to paſſe the bridge, yet at the further ſide of the ſaid bridge there was another great riuer, which they muſt néedes paſſe ouer by a foord, for there was but a little boate which would ſcarſe carrie three men without daunger. The horſemen paſſed and ſet themſelues in battell aray, vntill all had paſſed: there a great many gaue ouer their carriage, & they which had friends in the countrey gaue them their ſtuffe. That day from Lude they ſent the Lords Boyſduly, and Aubiguy, towards Boyſgency, Mere, and S. Die, to finde ſome paſſage, and that the morrowe after they ſhould all méete at Orges, or the Chappell S. Martine. Whileſt they ſtayed in that playne in battell aray, for the ſafe paſſage of all the companies, there happened a thing which would haue wrapped a ſuperſtitious ſoule into ſundrie and fearefull thoughts: for not farre thence beyond them was a Hare ſtarted by the enemies, betwéene the Loyre and Lotion, with a great crye after, which gaue them the alarum, and all prepared themſelues to receaue the enemie couragiouſly: but at length the Hare was ſeene with more than two hundred horſes with fewe dogges. That poore Hare paſſed and repaſſed among the horſes feete with many ſtripes, and yet was not taken, but ſaued her ſelf though ſhe was purſued more than halfe a mile. Some tooke this for an euill, and ſome a good preſage; ſaying, that if God had care to preſerue that poore feeble and fearefull beaſt, much more would hee haue care of that little flocke amazed: which howſoeuer it was hollowed and purſued by all the forces of France, notwithſtanding would eſcape ſafe and ſound, in receiuing but feare without great hurt: which thing alſo happened.
               From Lude they at length arriued at Prillay two houres in the night: this is a great towne belonging to the Prince County, the Prince of Conde his yonger brother. At their comming thither, there was ſuch a confuſion and preſſe in the ſtreates, that they could neither goe forward nor backward for the ſpace of an houre, not the Prince himſelf, vntil that the doores

of ſome houſes broaken gaue ſome roome.
               The 29. day they marched through Vandeloyre, and at night came to  S. Arnol, and the villages about not farre from Lauerdine, but the ſayd S. Arnol was a poore little village, where was ſmall ſtore of lodgings; ſo that the further they went, the néerer they approached to their miſeries. There alſo newes came that the enemies followed after them as couragiouſly and with ſuch haſt, as they went about to goe from them with great iourneys. The Lords Eſpernon and Byron, and moſt of the Nobilitie of the Court, were at Bonaual in Beauſe to méete with this terrified armie. The Duke de Mayn on the other ſide with a great armie, was on the other ſide of the riuer of Loyre neere Bloys, to cut them off by the way, if by chaunce they ſhould repaſſe. The Townes betwéene Bloys and Orleans were all be ſet with ſtrong garriſons. The Lord Chaſtre had ſent into Soloigne to kéepe the riuer of Loyre, and to retire the boates and milles into the townes. The Commons were ſet to watch, readie to riſe vpon them at the firſt ſound of the Toxine.
               The companies of the Prince were as wearie, as their enemies were luſtie, and as men may bee wearie with courſes and watches, ſo horſes much more with galloping night and day without reſting. The meanes to paſſe betweene Bloys and Amboyſe fayled them: all theſe things being knowne of all, made them to haue little hope of their affayres. Yet there is no doubt that if the enemie had appeared, the neceſſitie had much increaſed their courage. But it ſeemed that by a ſingular prouidence of God, the enemies ſtood in ſuch feare of theſe companies, that he would haue them defeated through wearines, that it might appeare to be Gods owne hand, and his proper work to ſcatter them, and that his enemies ſhould not haue the praiſe, nor triumph ouer them. For afterward it was confeſſed by the enemies which were in the armie of Ioyeuſe and the League, that this handfull of men, wearied, ſcattered, amazed, and alreadie ouercome, was to all thoſe troopes (who would haue ſwallowed them vp) ſuch a terrour, that if they had offered to ſet vpon them, they might happely haue found them eaſie to bee dealt withall. For the enemies were perſwaded that the Prince would neuer haue enterprized ſuch a iourney, vnleſſe he had béen able to beate downe all that had come before him.
               All that night in the which they lodged at S. Arnol, there was great reaſoning among them of the Counſell, what was expedient to bee done. The Lord Rohan (with many Gentlemen of his company) ſayd, that the further they ſhould goe that way, the déeper they ſhould ſinke in daunger; that the beſt part of their forces had paſſed ouer Loyre with the Lord Laual, and that the armie did ſlide away daily: they that had friends in Vandomoys, Beauſe, Mayne & Perche, did ſteale away; the enemie being freſh and ſtrong did approach on them on euery ſide; and that the further they

went vpward, the néerer they did drawe to their miſfortune. Let him carrie his head to Paris who would (ſaid he) for I will carrie mine into Britaine, 
                   and fight with him that will let me. So vppon theſe ſpéeches (ſeeing not the contrary reaſons of any force) tooke his leaue from the Prince, & his iorney toward Britaine, whether he came through many difficulties and dangers, and in time (notwithſtanding the endeuour of the Duke Mercure) with ſafetie he paſſed the riuer of Loyre beneath Nants, and repayred to Rochel, with great ioy and contentation of all men for his ſafe returne.
               This ſeparation was as a ſecond thunderboult from heauen vpon this armie, which is no more to bee called an armie, but a ſmall companie: for there was no more but the companies of the Prince, and of the Lord Trimouille, whereof ſome had forſaken him, There were alſo left ſome companies of the Harquebuſiers on horſeback of the Lord Clermont, of whom many had alreadie retired to their houſes: then they began to looke euery one vppon his fellowe, ſhrugging with their ſhoulders, euery one did beleeue that if there were any ſafetie, it muſt miraculouſly come from heauen, and many which before in matters of prayer and conſcience had giuen themſelues to great licentiouſnes, began to enter into conſideration, and to reforme themſelues.
               The Prince remayning ſo with theſe few companyes, had a number of carryage, wherewith he was ſo hampered that he could not rid himſelfe of it. He ſent the Lord Saint Gelays, with ſome gentlemen of Poytow, to the number of 30. horſes to ryde toward Vendoſme, and ſome where to take loginges commodious for the companies which followed. But in the way they heard newes, that the Lord Lauerdine with ſome number of men had entred into 
                     Ʋendoſme, to cut that way from the Prince: and that the night before ſome Souldiers of the company of the Lord Clermont tooke priſonners ſome of the company of the Lord Benhare gouernor of Vendoſme, who brought ſome ſtore of armor to theyr maſter.
               The 30. of October, the reſt of the companies arryued at Saint Anne, nigh Vendoſme, where they thought to haue departed logings, but for the pouerty of the place they ſtayed not there.
               In this wandering through the countrey of Beauſe, ſome of the company of Captayne Bonet, tooke the Lord Roſins, who comming from Paris with a Paſport from the King (which he ſhewed them, not ſuppoſing they had béen of the religion) was going to the King of Nauarre. This Lord had foure notable great horſes. The Dragons (for ſo were called the Harquebuziers on horſebacke) weary of their tyred horſes, chaunged with the great horſes of the fayd Lord Roſins, and with great ioy carryed him away with them. But he being knowen by the Lord Saint Gelays, hee cauſed them to reſtore him his horſes, and to take their tyred horſes agayne.
               The ſayd Lord Roſins, was conducted to the Prince, and ſhewed him the

rage wherewith his enemies prepared themſelues to compaſſe him about: and beſides, hee told him many thinges ſufficient to make him take ſome  reſolution.
               But it was nothing to the aduertiſements ſent him from diuers places, as that he was incloſed on euery ſide, and that ſhortly he ſhould haue the enemy to come vpon him with forces farre vnequall to his: and that it was high time to handle his affayres wiſely without delaying, till tomorrow.
               On the other ſide, he was aduertyzed that the meanes to repaſſe Loyre toward Bloys, were cut off, by reaſon that the enemies nigh at hand had preuented it. The Prince arryuing at the towne of Salowme, a league beyond Saynt Anne, gathered his counſell, and all reaſons wayghed on euery ſide, he was earneſtly requeſted by all them that were preſent, to prouide for the ſafety of his perſon: the which being conducted in a ſafe place, the reſt by Gods helpe would in time find out ſome way of deliuerance.
               The reaſons whereby hee was perſwaded to take ſome reſolution, were theſe.
               Firſt, that his retire would be more honorable to him, and more ſhameful to the enemy, then to hazard (as if it were through diſpayre) vpon a battell, whereof the iſſue could not bee but very perilous both to his perſon, & to the whole eſtate of the reformed religion.
               Secondly, that in ſuch extremity and diſfauour, there was gotten honor ynough, by a ſingular grace of God, to haue auoyded the rage of ſo great forces of his enemies, who did hold him as if hee were encloſed and compaſſed round about: and to ſnatch from them the glory which they had promiſed to themſelues already of his death, before that euer they durſt looke him in the face: and that the valoure of noble courage was ſhewed as well in auoyding an euident danger, as in the exploits of battell.
               Thirdly, that the paſſages were not ſo cloſed vp, but that there was meanes to eſcape to ſome ſafe place. It was hard to make him condiſcend to theſe reaſons, yet at length conuicted by the way of intreaty and neceſſity, hee concluded to retire.
               But afore he would depart, that night with his conſtancye accuſtomed, hee tooke order for the parting of his companies, euen of his owne houſehold. The Lord Saynt Gelayes with ſome of the companies, and part of his Gards ſhould goe toward Loyre, to ioyne with the Lords Aubiguy, and Briſduly, who were gone to ſearch paſſage towardes Loyre: and ſuch of his houſhould ſeruantes as would not, or could not follow the Lord Saynt Gelays, he directed them to retyre to ſome friendes of his in the countrey. Furthermore, that the Lord Clermont ſhould retyre ſome where with his companies. This being done, about 11. of the clocke at night he departed with a ſmal company, with the Lords Trimouille, and

Auantigny, and other gentlemen with few of his chiefeſt houſhold ſeruants. The waies which he tooke, the courſes which he ranne, the dangers which  hee paſſed through to get to the Ilandes of Gernſey, lying in the narrow Seas betweene England & France, what courteſies and Princelike intertaynment he receaued of that great Elizabeth Queene of England, & how with a great number of Nobility and ſhips of war he returned to Rochel: alſo with great reioycing of all men he was receaued by them of Rochell, is the argument of an other booke, which the tyme ſhall produce.
               But here be three thinges worthy to be noted. Firſt, how God doth lay heauy croſſes vpon his children, and do compaſſe them with ineuitable dangers (after mans wiſedom) both to make them ſee with the eye how weakly man is ſtayed, which truſteth in the arme of fleſh, and worldly power.
               Secondly, to make them vnderſtand, how nigh he is vnto them that repoſe themſelues in him, and how ſafe that man is, who reſteth vnder the ſhadow of his wings, by an aſſured truſt and confidence in his promiſes.
               Thirdly, to ſhew how many wayes hee hath to deliuer his children out of thoſe dangers, which in mans reaſon cannot bee auoyded: as this was to that end to make them taſt how ſweete his deliuerances bee, to warne them thereby to amend their liues, and to walke more circumſpectly in his wayes, and to bee more watchfull in the inuocation of his name, and thankſgiuing.
               Of all ancient hiſtories, this hath a ſimilitude and liknes of the returning of the Greeks from Perſia, brought into their countrey by that noble Philoſopher and Captayne Xenophon, reported by himſelfe in expedition, Ciri minoris. But to returne to the matter.
               By this tyme, are the Lords Laual, Boulay, Rohan, the Prince of Conde, the Lords Trimouille and Auantigny, by Gods ſpecial fauour deliuered, and brought (as if it were) by the hand into certayne places of ſafety.
               Now there remayned the Lordes Saint Gelayſe, Clermont, and others with them, left in the clawes of the Lyon and a pray to the enemy, to trye the ſelfe ſame preſence of God, and to be led by ye hands of his Angel out of all danger into a hauen of ſafety. The head being gone, the reſt within a while vaniſhed away as duſt blowen in the ayre, & that which is marueilous, without the loſſe of any one man of account, or any other that euer could be knowen, euery one had his life for ſpoyle: which hath made ridiculous the lying pamphlets ſpread. b
                     •
                  oad in Paris, of the terrible & dreadful ouerthrow of the Prince of Conde. But this ſhort diſcourſe doth repreſent all thinges paſſed in that army.
               For the diſcipation of that armye is not to be attributed, neyther to the King, neither to the Duke Ioyeuſe, much leſſe to the Duke de Mayne, or to any ather of that ſide. For none of them al approched nigh to the Prince of Conde, ſince his departure from Lude, not by fiue or ſixe leages, neyther

did they euer draw Swoord agaynſt him.
               Wheras that night reſolution was taken, that ye day folowing, the Lord  Saint Gelays ſhould take his iourney toward Meare, a towne vpon the riuer of Loyre, betweene Boyſgencie and Bloys: in ſo dooing, he diſappoynted greatly the enemies, and gaue great aduauntage to the Prince to auoyde their hands, for the ſcape of the enemies was his perſon, more then all the reſt: for they cared not for any thing elſe, ſo that they might haue him dead or a liue; ſo eagerly were they bent againſt him. But the companies being deuided, ſome tooke their iourney toward Orleans, others toward Normandie, ſome toward the Mayne, by which meanes the enemies knew not which of them the Prince was in, and ſo the chiefeſt power of the enemie was in doubt ſtill, which way to take to folow after him: and in the meane while, he and his little companie did ſlide into Bri
                        •
                     ayn, and from thence ouer the ſea into England.
               
               The Lorde S. Gelays (to ſaue the remnant of the armie) expoſed himſelfe as a pray to the enemie that could catch him, notwithſtanding without the loſſe of any one man: but he eſcaped with his companie which was with him, with incredible labours and loſſe of the
                     ••
                   carriage and ſtuffe.
               That night therefore, about twelue a clock, one houre after the departing of the Prince, with the gardes of the ſaid Prince, who were about threeſhore Harquebuſiers, he tooke his way to Vilelniſant, where the reſt of the companies were lodged, to take their iourney to the Chapell Saint Martin, and from thence diſlodging together, came to the ſaide Chapel one houre afore day. There were about 500. horſes of all ſorts, but not aboue 200. fit to fight, and yet of them, who might haue fought, many ſhould haue been faine to fight on foote, for their horſes were readie to fall vpon their noſes, and the men but a little more worth.
               The 31. of October, they ariued at the Chapell Saint Martin verie eaſilie, and becauſe they needed to baite their horſes, and refreſh themſelues, the inhabitants ſaw their doores broken afore they were called vp. In that vilage the Lord Saint Gelaiſe learned, that the euening before there were two men on horſeback, which ſaide, that if there ſhould ariue any men of warre, they ſhould not ſtay there, but paſſe further to Orges. And as the day began to appeare, the Lorde Saint Gelaiſe receaued letters from the Lord Aubigny, wherein hee willed them to take the direct way to Ralſy, where he ſhould meete him. And when they came thether, the ſaid Lorde Aubigny reported that there were no boates, nor any hope to repaſſe Loyre: for there was 800. Swartrutters of the League, who had lodged at Saint Die, a walled towne, three Leagues aboue Bloys, vpon the high way to Orleans, where they thought to haue found paſſage. There were alſo all along the riuer at Mir de Nonain, Saint Laurence, & other vilages about the riuer, three or foure regiments of footemen: ſeeming therefore to them

an vnpoſſible thing to paſſe Loyre that way: the Lord Saint Gelays conſulted with the Lorde Tiffardiere and others, who concluded to goe  to Orges, and to ſome vilages thereabouts, with commaundement to ſoiourne there, not aboue an houre and a halfe.
               There was in the Caſtell of Orges, an olde Gentleman Papiſt, who hearing that the Lord Saint Gelaies was in that companie, deſired to ſee him, and to ſpeake with him, and knowing that his companie was wearie and weake, and weather beaten, aſked him whether he went, and what he meant to doo with his companie, and ſwearing with a great oath, told him that hee was vndone, and that if hee had three times as many men as hee had, within an houre (if he ſoiorned there) he and his would bee cut in pieces.
               This Gentleman was very ſtout, becauſe of the Kings & the Leaguers forces, which hee knew to bee thereabout: hee ſhewed him that there was great companies, as well on the ſide of the riuer, as on the ſide of Beauſe, not diſtant from him aboue halfe a League nigh the Forreſt of Marchenoyre, with this intent to charge that remnant of the armie, which was with him: how all the commons had the watch word, and looked to haue ſome warning to begin. There was no hope to eſcape being few (and they wearie and weatherbeaten) without any hope of ſuccour.
               The Lord Boyſduly met nigh Talſy two Gentlemen papiſts of his acquaintance, who ſhewed him the ſelfeſame daungers aboueſayd: and yet more, that neither hee, neither they who were with him were farre from ſpoyle. The Lord Boyſduly perceiuing, that a Gentleman called la Mot, (in whom he had much confidence) knew very well the amaze of that companie, after aſſurance of amitie for himſelfe, and the Lord S. Gelays, hée certified them that they were in a worſer caſe than they knew: and that the Prince perceiuing that hee had ſo great forces agaynſt him, had diſſolued his armie, and that his perſon was alreadie in place of ſafetie, and almoſt all his armie: and that there remayned no more but that which hee ſawe with the Lord Saint Gelays, who at all aduenture had vndertaken to ſaue the reſt.
               
                  La Mot then offered him friendſhip, & his houſes for to retire with ſuch of his friends as hee would, but his houſe was diſtant from thence eight leagues: which his courteſie the Lord Boyſduly accepted.
               In theſe terrors, all the troupe (being on horſebacke) marched at large in a plaine field, not farre from the Caſtle Orges of one ſide, and neere the Forreſt of Marchenoire on the other ſide: no man knewe which way to turne himſelfe too, nor what to followe; for a preſent daunger was on euery ſide. The Lord S. Gelays, and other Captaynes with him, were long before they could conclude of their way. The enemies did approach and held that ſmall companie in ſight: of which being aduertized, they marched

within the Forreſt of Marchenoire: and being ſomewhat entered within the ſayd Forreſt, in the high way to Chasteaudune, the Lord S. Gelays ſhewed them the ineuitable danger whereunto they were fallen: he ſhewed  them that the enemie was to be beguiled, and for that intent it was expedient and neceſſarie to deuide themſelues into ſmall companyes, and to followe diuers waies: and that the Lord would conduct the parts aſwell as the whole, whereſoeuer it ſhould pleaſe him.
               The Lord Aubigny vndertooke to conduct one troupe one way, Captaine Ryeux went another way: ſome tooke the way to Orleans; others drawed towards Paris. A Gen
                     •
                  leman Papiſt which was with the Lord la Mot, tooke with him the Lord Tifardiere, and the other Gentlemen of Poytow, to whom he ſhewed great courteſies.
               The Lords S. Gelays, Boyſduly, Campoys, Cheſmi, and others, to the number of ten or twelue, went vnder the aſſurance of the Lord Mot, the way to Chasteaudune in Beauſſe. As it was a ſtraunge thing to ſee the diſſipation of that armie without blowes, bloudſhed, or loſſe of any man by the fight of the enemie: ſo it was a pitifull ſight to ſee the ſeparation of the Souldiers from their Captaines; of the ſeruants from their maſters: the ſeruants did caſt away the things which they had gréedily gathered, to ſaue themſelues vppon their horſes. The waies were full of good ſtuffe, armes, baſkets, males, apparell, and other things of value: euery one did caſt away the things which they had taken from others more willingly, than when they tooke it. God did then require an accompt of many diſordered perſons, in whoſe hands Manna did rot, which they had greedily gathered: And it is to be confeſſed, that God teſtified from heauen, that he will haue his worke aduanced by other meanes than by ſuch armes: for a great companie of this armie were not accompanied with pietie and Chriſtian modeſtie. On the other ſide, God tooke away all matter of boaſting and glorying from the enemies: for it was a ſtraunge thing, that conſidering the ſmall diſtance of places, where theſe companies of the enemie were, the great multitude of luſtie, freſh, and well furniſhed companies which they had, the Countreys and Townes thrée or foure ſcore leagues round about all fauourable to them, hauing compaſſed the others round about, yet not one after this ſeparation appeared to fight, nor to aſſault theſe vanquiſhed few men, as he which durſt not come nigh the ſkinne of a dead Lyon.
               The Lord Saint Gelays, with them of his companie, had ſcarſe gone a League in Beauſe, when he diſcouered three cornets of Launcers of Italians, and Albanoyces, who were from Chasteaudune marched in good order, and came trotting forward at the end of the Forreſt, where the ſeparation was made. The Lord Mot (who lead the Lord Saint Gelais and his companie) did feare, and felt himſelfe in great daunger (as he ſaide) with

ſuch companie of Hugonets after him: and faining to diſcouer, he forſooke his gueſts, and got to a village farre before them. 
               
               The Lord S. Gelays and his companie, beléeued certainly that thoſe troupes came vpon them, and thought themſelues as good as dead. But behold, the eyes of theſe armed men were ſo blinded by the power of him which blinded Bilham the ſonne of Beor, and Elimas the Sorcerer, that without perceiuing him, or any of his companie, they paſſed by within the diſtance of fiftie paces from them: there was onely a barne of a Farme betwixt them, and the Lord S. Gelays ſtood ſtill in the high way before the barne. It was a wonder that this companie was ſo carried away inuiſible out of ſight of that multitude, as if it were in a clowde: and that none of the enemies went through the high way, whereby they might haue béen diſcouered. Theſe companies of Italians and Albaneſes went into a village not farre of, where they perceiued ſome horſes and Harquebuſiers: they ſet vpon the houſe where the Lord Aubigny was, with others, who neuertheleſſe tooke their horſes & ſaued themſelues without any domage. Theſe horſemen found much ſpoile by the way without any man to claime it. The Lord S. Gelays riding along in the champiane countrie of Beauſſe toward Chartres, with the Lord Mot, without kéeping any high way, the night being rainie and darke, began to enter in ſuſpition of the ſayd Mot, being a Papiſt. So the Lord Mot returned backe with this opinion, that the Lord S. Gelays with his companie, would goe to Cheuroles toward Orleans: but he tooke his iourney to Ianuile lying betwéene Chartres and Orleans: and there croſſing the high way from Paris to Orleans, paſſed through many companies of armed men, who were lodged in Beauſſe, and ſo recouered vpon him the Forreſt of Orleans▪
                  
               
               The returning backe of the Lord Mot (as is aboue ſayd) was to play a popiſh tricke with the Lord Saint Gelays: for perceiuing that he was not ſtrong enough, he went in the night to gather companie to haue ſet vppon them at Cheuroles, and ſo to haue taken them priſoners to his aduantage, as he did not diſſemble afterward to ſpeake openly. So that his profeſſing of amitie, was an allurement to drawe them into his ſnare: for afterward he followed them as farre as Ianuile with thirtie horſes in a companie.
               The firſt day of Nouember, with much payne all the day long ranging and galloping through the Forreſt, at length they got the banck of Loyre, not farre from the towne of Guyen, about midnight.
               The Lord Mot for his paynes had many horſes, but ſpecially one, for the which was refuſed foure hundred Crownes. And ſeeing himſelfe diſappoynted of his intent, afterward he could not diſſemble to ſay, that he hoped to haue had fiftéene thouſand Crownes of raunſome for the Lord S. Gelays onely, which was the cauſe (ſayd he) that he left the following of other Hugonets, whereby he might haue made himſelfe rich.
               
                  
The Lord Boyſduly was in hope to haue paſſed the riuer, by fauour of ſome friends which he had in that countrey: but hee was diſappoynted of his hope: which thing put them in diſpayre both of repaſſing, and of their  liues alſo: for the riuer was beſet with companies of armed men euery where; for at Seuilly was a great garriſon, which Antragues (gouernour of Orleans) had ſent thether. All the boates either were retired to the townes, or to the other ſide of the riuer, and the ſelfeſame day commandement was giuen to all Water-men and Fiſhers, vppon payne of death either to ſinke their boates, or to let them downe to Seuilly. The Lord Chaſtre (gouernour of Berry) had commaunded to doo the like at Sancerre. The Prouoſt of Borbonnoys and Berry, with companies of Souldiers, did gallop along the riuer ſeeking ſome Hugonets ſtragling. The horſes of this ſmall number could go no more but a ſoft pace, and did fall downe for wearines: all things ſeemed contrary to them, ſo that in that diſpayre they determined to haue followed the way of Gien, or Briare, townes ſituated vpon the bankes of Loyre aboue Orleans, where doubtles they had béen all ſlaine or taken; for all was full of men of warre going downe the riuer to Orleans. But on a ſudden a little boye comming, conducted them to a towne called Omiroer, they went into an Iune where they ſayd they would baite, ſaying that they went toward the Lord Antragues, and that they purſued ſome Hugonets who had paſſed ouer the water. A peaſant vpon theſe words, (deſirous that they ſhould doo ſome good exployt that way) being there ſayd, There was yeſterday a litle boat beyond the water, which to morrow muſt goe downe to Seuilly: there it is yet, (this was about midnight) if it could be had you might paſſe quickly. They enquiring how to come by it, it was found very hard, the riuer was broade, the owner of the boate was in bed, the winde was great, and to call him were in vaine. But there was yeſterday (ſayd the peaſant) a quarter of a league off a boate mill, which draweth a little boate; if you could get that you might (ſaid he) two or thrée of you paſſe ouer to get the great boate. Without further delay they forſooke the baite, the peaſant was their guide, the ſmall boate was at land, wherewith fewe paſſed to the mill, which was farre in the water. The Miller was ſurprized, who at the firſt reſiſted; for he ſhould bee hanged (ſayd he) if hee ayded them: at length hee paſſed ouer fiue of them in his ſmall boate, with their ſwords and piſtols in hand, thinking they ſhould be reſiſted: for it was ſayd that ſome Souldiers were on the other ſide to keepe the boate. They tooke the boate and the boatman, who withſtood them much; for it might coſt him his life (as he ſayd): notwithſtanding being enforced, he went to fetch the reſt of the companie which ſtayed on the other ſide. This paſſage ſo vnlooked for, reuiued both men and horſes, for neither of them were any more wearie: ſo that without any ſtaying, they rode two leagues ouerthwart the fields in Soleigne, where they found

a Farme, wherein they ſoiourned the reſt of that night.
               The 2. of Nouember they aduaunced toward Bourges, and ſeparated  themſelues, euery one retiring where he thought good. The Lorde Saint Gelais ſoiourned for a while in Berry, and after paſſing the riuers Creuſe, Vienne, Cher and Cline, ariued at Saint Ihan D' Angely, and Rochel, about the ſame time that the Prince returned out of England, where hee met the ſaid Prince, with the Lords Rohan, Clermont, Laual, Boulay, & other Nobles and Captaines, without the loſſe of one man. Conſidering how theſe noble men (but eſpecially the ſmall companie of the Lord Saint Gelays) were purſued through Beauſe, ye Forreſt of Orleans, along the riuer of Loyre, it is a wonder how they did eſcape without leauing a hare behinde, for the hare at Lude was neuer ſo hardly hunted, as this ſmall companie was.
               Here we haue to marke well the worke of God in this Hiſtorie of deliuerance: firſt, how the Lord ſet his Angell betweene his Children and his enemies, ſo that the companies of Chasteaudune paſſed hard by them, intending to charge them, and yet being within 50. paces, they could neither ſee nor heare them, but as if they had been couered with a cloude, were paſſed ouer.
               Secondly, heere is to bee conſidered, that the Lorde turned thoſe things (by the which they had prouoked God to anger) to their good. For while the greedie enemies were a gathering the ſtuffe which was caſt away, this little weake and 
                     ••
                  red companie had time to ſlide off the hand of that enemie, which is moſt inſolent, filthie, craftie, and prophane, as is the Italian.
               Thirdly, how the Lord did delude the diſſimulation of the Lord la Mot, who vnder colour of amity, would haue ſnared them, either to the ſlaughter, or otherwiſe to their vndooing.
               Fourthly, how when they were cleane gone out of hope of their liues, and that it was time the Lord ſhould pull them out of the deepe mire with his owne hand, he ſendeth a boy, or rather an Angell, I meane a meſſenger to direct them, where the meanes of their deliuerance ſhould be ſhewed vnto them.
               Laſt of all, the Lord did vſe the verie malice of the enemie, to wit, of the poyſon which he did beare to them of the religion, to be the meane and the guide how to paſſe the riuer, and to deliuer them out of ſo many ineuitable daungers, and intollerabe labours, to bring them to a place of ſafetie and reſt.
               This is alſo a marueilous thing, that the other Souldiours and companies ſcattered, as duſt blowne in the ayre, repaſſed the riuer Loyre, vpon the bridges of Orleans, Bloys, Amboyſe, Tours, Saumur, and others, euen with their armour, making any excuſe to ſerue their turne, as they would

themſelues, when the ſaid briges were narowly kept.
               Now hauing ſet the Prince his Nobles, and all his ſcattered armie in ſafetie, who wil returne back againe, and ſee what courſe the Lords Laual 
                   and Boulay tooke.
               It is ſaide before, how that the 24. of October, the Lord Laual was ſent by the Prince to repaſſe the riuer Loyre, which thing hee did very eaſilie without daunger or let, and how the morrow after the paſſage ouer was ſtopped by the boates which came downe from Saumur.
               
               The 25. of October, the Lord Boulay alſo and his companie paſſed at Saint Maturine beneath Saint Maures Abbey, but that paſſage alſo was ſtopped the next day after with boates, which deſcended thether.
               The 26. day, Captaine Serpent ſkirmiſhed all the day long, as hee had done all night before, out of the Abbey Saint Maure with the enemies, who were in the boates.
               The Papiſts of high and low Poytow, vnderſtanding how the Prince of Conde was compaſſed on euery ſide beyond Loyre, and ſuppoſing that hee was alreadie made ſure, enterpriſed to doo the like of the Lord Laual, and theſe few companies which were with him. Whereupon Captaine Serpent, ſeeing that the Prince did not repaſſe, and that the enemie was armed vpon the riuer, being out of hope of his returne that way, diſlodged out of S. Maure Abbey, where the enemie ſoone after lodged, and ioyned himſelfe with the Lord Laual the 17. day. The Lord Laual notwithſtanding, yt day earlie in the morning, marched toward the paſſage, for to vnderſtand newes of the Prince, but conſidering the impoſſibilitie of repaſſing, and foreſeeing that he would take ouer the Countrey, and that if he ſhould ſtay there any time, he was like to be hemmed in by the troupes of high and lowe Poytow, which haſted to ſet vpon him: hee therefore with Captaine Serpent tooke his iourney to Saint Ihan D' Angely. The ſame day the Lord Boulay (ſeeing as much as is aforeſaid) folowed after the L. Laual, and ouertooke him two Leagues from the riuer. Theſe two companies ioyned together, made about 150. horſe, and about 300. Harquebuſiers on horſeback, for many of their companies had not paſſed, and ſome had retired where they thought to bee in ſecuritie. They marched with reaſonable iourneys, paſſing aboue Niort to Saint Ihan D' Angely without any reſiſtance.
               The 29. of October, they came to Saint Maſſure about Niort, where they found the bridge which they muſt needes paſſe ouer broaken: for the raine was ſo great and continuall, that it had made little ſmall brookes great riuers, and hauing none other way to paſſe, there they made a bridge with cartes, and other ſuch things as were at hand.
               The 30. of October, the Lord Laual lodged at Fors, and his companies in the vilages thereabouts.
               
                  
The 31. of October in the morning, parting thence as they tooke their horſes to goe on their iourney, there apeared vnto them ſome Launcieres of  the enemie, conducted (as it was afterward knowne) by Captaine Mercer Albaneſe, who iſſued out of Niort. The Lord Laual marched alway in battell aray, the way to Saint Jhan, onely hee ſent ſome to view him, which thing Captaine Mercure perceauing, retired without bickering.
               The ſecond day of Nouember the Lord Laual aryued at Saynt Ihan where yt company of the Lord Boulay retyred euery one where he thought  good. 
               
               A thing happened worthy of remembrance, the peſtilence being very hot in Saynt Ihan D'Angelye, when the Lord Laual arryued there, yet afterward there dyed not ſo much as one of his companyes, nor of the inhabitantes of the towne.
               As all thinges are gouerned by the prouidence of God, diſpoſing of the counſelles and actions of men after his owne will: ſo he turned all thinges to the benefite of his children, and the preſeruation of his Church. For the Prince, as is aboue ſayd, hauing ſent the ſaid Lord Laual to paſſe to Loyre before, to fauour the paſſage of the reſt of the army, delaying his owne returne, and in the meane time the riuer being beſet by the enemy, ſo it fell out, that the ſayd Lordes Laual, and Bowlay, could not repaſſe to the Prince agayne. This great good therefore the Lord did draw out of this diſiunction of the army.
               Firſt, here appeareth euidently the gracious loue & fauour, which God beareth to his children. For the power of man which was ſo great, the rancor and hatred ſo hot, the ſtomacke ſo eger, the enemy ſpread ſo thicke euery where round about, lying in wayt for them, and making their full account to haue them as in a net, yet could they not take away one hayre of their heads, whom God had taken vnder his protection.
               Secondly, the ſame Lord was diſioyned from the Prince by a certayne counſell of God, to confirme the townes and ſtrong places in Poytow, and Xainctonge, and to let them from reuolting to the enemy, to reſemble the companies ſcattered and beaten, with the breaking of that army, to hold the enemy in awe: ſo that in ſuch great diſmay and feare of all the countrey, the enemy durſt enterprize but very litle, or nothing at all. For euen the Duke de Mayne with his ſtrong and puiſſant army paſſing nigh the gates of Saynt Ihan D'Angelye durſt neuer ſtay there: although he knew well that the towne was not well prouided, and his army being for Guyenne, there hee might haue begun to do ſome more honorable exployt by winning Saynt Ihan, then by Castilon. By the which euents it appeareth, that the preſence of the ſayd Lord, and other of his company did greatly bridle the rage of the enemy there.
               Now hauing placed the Prince, his Nobles, and all his ſcattered army

in ſafety and reſt from the great dangers and labours which they ſuſtayned during the moneth of October, we will returne backe to ſee what in the  meane time is done at the ſiege of Browage, and tell you the true report thereof
               The tenth day of October the Lord Saint Meſmes, who was left there to continue the ſiege by the appoyntment of the Prince, receaued intelligence how that the gouernor of Xainctes, Coignak, Engoleſme, and other forces of the countrey, did flocke together to ſet vppon them who were at Hyers, where they continued the ſiege of Browage: and ſuppoſing himſelfe not ſtrong ynough, to reſiſt ſuchforces as he expected, ſpecially for lacke of horſemen, forſooke Hyers, & with all his regiments lodged at Marennes. Which thing amazed greatly the Countrey: hee ſent alſo the Lord la Hay at Saynt Iuſt to aduauncethe retyre.
               The ſame day about foure a clocke in the euening aryuing at Saynt Juſt the Lord Saynt Diſan, and Captayne Bordeaux, with their companies of footmen: who ſeeing the inhabitantes of the countrey runne away and knowing what had happened, went to Hiers, and they there arryued about midnight, where they found many ſouldiers of Saynt Luke, who iſſued out of Browage, had ſet the fire on ſome houſes, and were buſie in rifling, and ranſacking the others: they were ſo heauily charged by the Souldiers of Saint Diſan, and Bordeaux, that they were all eyther ſlaine or taken priſonners.
               The Lord Saynt Meſmes aduertized what had paſſed at Hyers, and of the new ſupply come to him, returned with the companies to Hyers, and continued the ſiege twenty dayes longer, during the which tyme were geuen many ſkirmiſhes, and many on both ſides ſlayne and taken. But at length the ſayd Lord Saynt Meſmes knowing that the Prince had paſſed Loyre, and looking not for any ſuccour, and that many reportes going abroad of his ill ſucceſſe, and that many Souldiours did dayly depart and other waxed faynte, & that aduertiſementes came of the ſuccor, which the gouernours of the aboueſayd Townes would geue to Browage, and that they intended to encloſe him and his companies, in the Iles (as it had béen an eaſy thing to do) with the aduiſe of his Captaynes, determined to raiſe the ſiege.
               Hee ſent alſo to the Lord Ranques, who was left to commaund in the Ile of Oleron, to aduertize him, that hee was preſſed to retyre, willing him to repayre to him, that they might retyre in a ſtronge company to preuent further milfortune. So the 2. day of Nouember, he rhyſed the ſiege, and tooke his iourney towards Charuaut. At the paſſage whereof was great diſorder, which cauſed that at a place called Loupin, part of the carriage was taken by the enemyes, and many Souldiers lead away priſonners, the reſidue retyred ſome to Rochel, & ſome to Saint Ihan D'angelye.
               
               
                  
The Lord Ranques, notwithſtanding remayned in Oleron with the Nauall army vntill the tenth of Nouember: during the which time hee ſent  to Rochell to haue ſuccour, as wel for yt ſafety of the Nauy, as of the Iland. But when hee could obtayne nothing, the inhabitantes alſo ſuppoſing that all had béen loſt (for the diſcomfiture of the Prince was bruted wich great amplifications by the Lord Saint Luke) ſhewed vnto Ranques that theyr cuſtome was to giue place to the ſtranger, which cauſed the ſayd Lord to determine vpon the retyring of his fleete.
               This alſo made him the more willing, becauſe he had diſcouered one Countie, and a Franciſcane Fryer, who had béen alwaies during the ſiege hidden in the Iland, who were ſent to the Lord Saynt Luke, to practize with him agaynſt the ſayd Lord Ranques, whom when he would haue puniſhed, they of the Iland withſtood him, ſo that fearing the worſt he retyred to Rochel not without danger of his life.
               We haue ſhewed how the Dragon had ſp
                     •
                  ed floods of waters to drown that vertuous and godly Prince, his Nobles, and his litle company, and how they fledde into the wildernes, where God had prepared vnto them a place of ſafe refuge and reſt for a time, and how the army before Browage is brought to Saint Ihan D'Angelye and Rochel. Now while theſe ſcattered companies are at reſt, and preparing agayne to meet together, wee will ſee what exployts were done in diuers places of the Realme.
               It is ſayd, how the Lord Saint Meſmes (at the departing of the Prince of Conde) had the charge of the ſiege of Browage. Now the Lord Matignon who cōmaunded for the King in Guyenne, vnderſtanding that Saint Luke was hardly preſſed, and that the Prince taking his iourney to Angers, had left a ſmall company to continue the ſiege of Browage, determined to oppreſſe them: and about the latter end of October from Bourdeaux tooke eight hundred horſemen, foure thouſand footmen, with foure double Canons, and arryued in Xainctonge about the third of Nouember: which vnderſtanding that they of Hiers had rayſed vp the ſiege, and had reretyred to Rochell, and S. Ihan D'Angelye ſoiorned neuertheles in Xainctonge, ſeeking and watching the opportunity to do ſome peece of ſeruice, making ordinary courſes toward S. Ihan A' Angely and Tailkebourg.
               
               The Lord Laual about the eight of Nouember, aduertized that the Lord Matignon was in the field (not farre from the town) with all his horſemen and ſome footemen, iſſued out of S. Ihan about two leagues from the towne: he encountered the ſayd Matignon: they ſaw one another ſo nigh, that the Lord Chargoys (who did leade the light horſes of the ſayd Lord Laual)▪
                   was about to charge the enemy, when hee was warned, that hee ſhould haue to do with all the forces of the enemy, which were ſixe tymes as many as all that the Lord Laual had. That inequality of forces cauſed him to draw backe towards Saint Ihan with all his companyes in ſuch an

order, as the enemy durſt neuer ſet on him, though he purſued him within a quarter of a league of the towne. 
               
               It is ſayd before, how that the Prince in his iourney to Angers, paſſing through Taillebourg (which is a towne ſituated vpon the fall of the Riuer Botonne into Charante) left there in the Caſtell much plate and iewels, with ſome peeces of Artillery, and much ſtuf
                     •
                  e and carriage of the Lordes, who accompanied him in his iourney. That Caſtel is ſtrong by ſituation, and on diuers ſides inacceſſible ſituated vpon a rocke, compaſſed with the towne, otherwiſe not ſtrong. The houſes for the moſt part are builded at the foote of the rocke. The ſaid Caſtell is fortifyed with platformes by nature, and do commaund on euery ſyde as well ouer the Towne as ouer the fieldes. Charante of one ſide doth waſh the foot of that rocke. There is a fayre and commodious bridge to paſſe ouer the riuer. All theſe circumſtances, with the diſfauour of the time, gaue Matygnon great deſire to poſſeſſe that place. Yet the ſpeciall commaundement which hee had from the King to ſeaze vpon the Mother and the Daughter, vrged him the more to attempt vppon that Caſtell, that ſo he might ſtop the mariage begun.
               It happened about the thirtéenth of Nouember, that the Lord Matygnon was commaunded to retyre toward Garonne, to méete the Counſels of the Vicount Turenne, who with ſix thouſand Souldiers was in Limoſin, and had taken the City of Triles: or for ſome other occaſiō, hauing concluded with the Duke de Maine to meete with all their forces in Agenoys, to ſtop the paſſages of Garonne to the King of Nauarre.
               
               But afore his departure out of Xainctonge, he tooke order for to ſurpriſe the ſayd Caſtell: for hee placed in the Towne the Captayne Beaumont, with foure companyes of ſouldiers, vnder colour of keeping of the bridge, he promiſed to the ſayd Ladie Trimouille all fauour and ſafety, but it was without any effect. For they that were left there did firſt worke all ſubtill meanes which they could deuiſe to get the poſſeſſion of the Caſtell: and when truſt would not preuaile, they turned to force. For they planted a Barricado before the gate, and there placed a ſtrong Gard, blocked the entreyes into the ſayd Caſtell, ſuppoſing by theſe meanes to feare the ſai
                     •
                   Lady, and ſo to enforce her to yeeld her ſelfe and the place, conſidering that there was but few men within to aſſiſt her. The enemies not diſſembling any longer, ſhot with their Péeces continually agaynſt them that were within the Caſtell: and to do it more ſafely on theyr part, lodged themſelues in the neereſt houſes to the Caſtell, which they pearced, and made them to ſerue for trenches.
               They within the Caſtell reſiſted this force with ſhot of ordinance, & did rowle great heauy ſtones vpon the howſes, to beate them downe. The ſkirmiſhes did dure fiue dayes.
               The lady Trimouille in that neceſſity found meanes to aduertize of this

force done to her: the Lord Laual, who was at Saynt Ihan, and prayed him to ſend her ſuccour. The inuention by the ſubtilty of the ſaid ladie was, that ſhee fayned to driue out of the Caſtell certayne pages of the Prince,  which the Lord Fredericke his chamberlayne had there with him. They gaue aduertifement to the lord Lauall what had paſſed at Tilleburge, alſo of the meanes how to enter into the Caſtell.
               The 20. day at night, captaine Pickard came out of Xainctes, with 120. with him into the towne for ſuccour.
               The 21. the Lord Laual with the Lords Saint Meſmes, gouernour of Saint Jhan and Bonlay, and others determined to reſcue the ſaid Lady, and taking about one hundred armed men, and foure hundred Harquebuſiers, after dinner tooke their iourney toward Tailebourg, and about twenty men of armes did alight downe on the ſide of the waren, and entred into the ditch, which is betweene the towne and the Caſtell, (folowed with a certaine number of ſhot) and furiouſly charged the enemie in diuers places. In the beginning, the enemies defended themſelues ſtoutely, as well out of the houſes as out of the Trenches, which they had planted at the gate of the Caſtell. They of the Caſtell (perceauing that ſuccour was come to them) leaueled their artilerie, partlie againſt the Trenches, partly againſt the houſes, among whom, the houſe of one Bordet was cleane beatē down. The diuers charges began to amaze the enemies, which without long reſiſtance, began to looke how to ſaue themſelues, and their liues by flight or otherwiſe. There were found dead ofye enemies ſide, about 4. ſcore men, of our ſide onely ſixe: many were taken, the other were put to flight, wherof the night couered the ſhame, ye marſhes & the riuer ſaued many: the woūded and priſoners were courteouſly intreated, many were ſent away without ranſome, and eſpecially the Captaine Beau Mont, and Roke and others, which were of commaundement, during the ſkirmiſh within the towne, the Lord Laual remained without the towne in battaile aray, vpon the high way to Xainctes, and from thence diſcouered ſome of the enemies, who were iſſued out of the gates of Tailebourg, with their colours, and ſought to ſaue themſelues. The ſaid Lord commaunded his brother, the Lorde Ryeulx to charge them: who with twelue horſes ſet on them, whereof many were killed, ſome wounded, and ſome taken with foure enſignes.
               The enemies being thus beaten, the Lady Trimouil gratified the ſaid Lord Laual with the other Noble men, who had accompanied him, for the aſſiſtance giuen her in ſuch a conuenient time. And although that before, ſhe would not ſuffer any further forces then ſhe had to enter into the caſtell, yet ſhe admitted them in now: and ſo they aduiſed before their departure, of the meanes how to preuent like inconueniences, and that it was better, that this place ſhould be kept by them of the reformed religion, to the which the ſaid Lady had no great fantaſie. Notwithſtanding, Captaiee Bouſier
                  
Leutenant of the Princes gardes, with certaine Harquebuſiers was apoynted to keepe the ſaid Caſtell, and afterward there was ioyned to him  the Lord Boulay.
               
               It is ſaide before, how the King vnderſtanding of the Princes going to Angers, with much adoo ſent the Duke De Mayne out of Paris for Guyenne, with a mightie armie, that all with one voyage hee migh
                     •
                   helpe to incloſe vp the Prince, and alſo in his abſence to inuade Poytow and Xainctonge prouinces of Guienne, for which he was apoynted. Who taking his iourney from Bloys (after the Princes armie was deſſolued at Salonne) to Poitiers, vnder the colour of the lying in of his Wife, ſoiorned there three weekes, to ſeduce that great and populous Citie to his faction, and at length when he could not obtaine his purpoſe, by diuers expreſſe commaundements from the King, hee departed about the fifteenth of Nouember. And boaſting, that within three moneths, hee would roote all the Hugonets out of Guyenne and Gaſcoyne, hauing that mightie armie as we haue ſaide before: in his way, he tooke by ſurrender Luſignen and Mele, and paſſing by Saint Ihan, hee ſent a few horſemen beyond the bridge Saint Iulion, in the ſight of the towne, intending by that ſmall number, to draw the Lord Laual to fight, who (he thought) would haue iſſued out and purſued thoſe forerunners: he thought alſo, that the ſaid Lord Laual would haue paſſed the bridge Saint Iulion, and to haue taken him in ambuſhes with the whole companie of his horſemen, who did lie in a wood and a dingle on the other ſide of the bridge, which the ſaid Lorde Laual could not haue repaſſed without hazard there to haue been diſcomfited. The Lord Laual diſcouering the light horſes iſſued out of the towne, but not after the minde of the Duke. For hauing put a good garde vpon the bridge, he ſent a few light horſes onely to view the enemie, and ordered the reſt of his men of armes, and Harquebuſiers in battell aray, vpon the banke of the riuer, in the view of the enemie, which ſeeing that he ventured not raſhlie, retyred without attempting any thing.
               About the 28. the Duke De Mayne with his armie lodged about the towne of Saint Ihan. The Lord Chaſſegay, enſigne bearer of the Lord Laual, accompanied with the Lord Orges, and fiue and twenty horſes more with him, iſſued out to ſkirmiſh with the armie of the Duke. They met nigh Varezes a little towne not farre diſtant, twentie Launciers of the enemie, folowed at hand, by two hundered men of warre, French, and Jtalians. The ſaide Chaſſegay was charged with theſe troupes, and purſued to the bridge, where hee ſtayed in the face of the enemie, to fauour the retraite of his men, but there he was beaten downe, and taken priſoner with ſome others: they which ſaued themſelues, gaue the alarum in the towne, the forces whereof iſſued out, but the enemie had retired.
               About the latter end of December, the Duke méeting with the Marſhal

                  Matignon about Coignake, at length parted a ſunder, and the ſayd Matignon went to Bourdeaux: but the Duke being rid of the companie of Matignon, who would bée but a let vnto him to bring to paſſe his intents,  tooke his iourney to ſport himſelfe through Perigord, Limoſin, Quercy, and Agennoys, at the charges of the Prieſts, and expences of the holy Rood, hauing a great deale of money, euen ſo much as the Sacraficers could ſpare, to recreate himſelfe, when hée ſhould finde himſelfe wearie of winning of Cities and ſtrong Holds in thoſe countreys.
               It is ſayd before, how that after the publication of the Edict in Iuly, the Vicount Turenne had aſſembled ſome forces, partly out of his owne land in Limoſin and Perigord, and partly many Noble men and Captaines of the countreys about had repayred vnto him. For the perſecutions had inforced many, as well Gentlemen as others, to forſake their houſes to take armes, and to repayre to ſuch Prouinces as were of ſure acceſſe vnto them. This was the cauſe that Noble men and Gentlemen from about Paris, Gastinoys, Niuernoys, countries betwéene the riuers of Loyre and Seyne, (which purpoſed to repayre to the King of Nauarre) ioyned themſelues with the Lord Turenne, who within a ſhort ſpace grew to the number of ſixe thouſand.
               With this power the Vicount Turenne kept the field in Limoſin & Perigord: and about the time that the Prince departed from Browage to his iourney to Angers, letters came vnto him from the Prince, by the which he willed him to drawe néere Browage to fauour the ſiege thereof. Vppon the receipt of theſe letters, the Lord Turenne called his counſell together, to knowe what was to be done. There was then reaſoned among them of the neceſſitie of his preſence at that ſiege. On the other ſide, aduertiſement was giuen that the armie of the League (vnder the conduct of the Duke de Mayne) was drawing nigh toward Guyenne, (although it was not yet ſcarſe out of Paris) and that the ſame was beaten with diuers diſſeaſes, (and among others the Swiſſers) which made them conclude, that occaſion might be giuen to worke ſome good exployt vpon that armie; and if not diſcomfited, yet greatly it might be moleſted. Agayne, he had receaued letters of the King of Nauarre, who aduertized him, that he was at the poynt to depart out of Bearne to Bergerake ward in Perigord, and therfore warned him to be in a readines, that (if néede ſhould be) he might ioyne with his Maieſtie. So that conſidering all theſe waightie occaſions, hée could not ſuccour the ſiegr of Browage, ſtaying for the Duke de Mayne, and expecting the King of Nauarre his comming. He had many good occaſions to enterprize vpon certaine Townes in Limoſin, as vpon the Citie of Trile, Brune la galiarde, and others in thoſe quarters. Trile is a Citie in Limoſin, a Biſhops ſeate, ſituated in a valley, compaſſed about with high hilles, which doo commaund the Towne: It hath thrée fayre Suburbs about

it, and there is a little riuer named 
                     Ʋeſtere, which waſhing the walls paſſeth by the Suburb, which is greater than the citie. Therein is a Frierie  of the Franciſcans, which is incloſed about with a ſtrong wall, and for that cauſe the inhabitants had retyred and committed their goods to the Friers keeping: which thing fell out very ill for them. The high ſuburbe is like the firſt in greatnes: the third is leſſer than the other twaine.
               The 8. day of Nouember the Lord Choupes, with a great number of Gentlemen and Souldiers, ſet on the lowe Suburbe. The Lord Turenne (who commaunded ouer the Harquebuſiers which came out of France) ſtaying at the Franciſcans houſe, which is ſituated at the ende of the Suburbe, ſet the gate on a fire, and vppon occaſion entered further euen to the Trenches, which they of the Towne had made: and after long ſkirmiſhing and killing of ſome of both parts, wonne the ſame.
               The high Suburbe at the ſame time, by other companies (as they were appoynted) was alſo aſſaulted, which they of the Suburbe did reſiſt at the Trenches: but at length enforced, did retyre within the Towne. They of the Towne being beſieged all round about, defended themſelues vpon the walls (without iſſuing out at all) for the ſpace of ſixe daies.
               The 13. day of Nouember were applied two péeces at the gate, which made ſome way to enter in: but they of the Towne did their endeuour to defend the breach; which being not aſſaultable, the aſſault was giuen ouer. The ſiege continuing, many of the Towne were ſlaine: which cauſed the reſt (fearing to bee forced) not to refuſe the perſwaſions of Amaury, who counſelled them to capitulate. Hoſtages being giuen of both ſides, the Kings Lieutenant (with ſome of the chiefeſt Citizens) came foorth to the Lord Turenne, who was lodged at the gray Friers; the agréement was long debated, and at length concluded.
               The 16. day of Nouember, they of the Towne conſented to redéeme the Towne, and the ranſaking of their houſes, with a certaine ſumme of money. Furthermore, it was agréed that a Captaine ſtranger, with ſuch as were left of his companie (for moſt of them had béen ſlaine) ſhould goe foorth out of their Towne, and they ſhould receiue Captaine Amaury. This Captaine Amaury was he of all the armie whom they feared moſt, and yet did they requeſted to haue him, whom they receaued for their gouernour: and there he remayned in that charge vntill the comming of the Duke de Mayne.
               
               About the 10. of December (conſidering that the place was not ſufficient to reſiſt ſuch an armie) he gaue ouer the Towne into the hands of the Citizens, and within fewe dayes after was ſlaine, as followeth. Within a while after the taking of this Citie, the Lord Turenne retired his companies in garriſons in places of greater importance.
               The 25. of December, Amaury was aduertized that the Lord Sacramore
                  
of Birague, (this is that Sacramore whom after the Duke de Mayne killed in his anger with his owne hand) one of the Leaguers, was not farr  from Turenne with a companie of Harquebuſiers, to lay in ambuſh: and as he aduaunced himſelfe, one of his owne Souldiers (too haſtie to ſhoote) with his péece hit him by miſfortune and killed him, and after they retyred to Turenne.
               
               The Duke de Mayne ſporting himſelfe, made good théere at ye Prieſts coſts, (but it was no matter, for holy Roode did pay for all) and doth conquer Kingdomes in Perigord and Limoſin: and about the 27. of December tooke Montignake le conte, an olde Towne and ruinous Caſtle belonging to the King of Nauarre. He tooke alſo Beaulieu, ſuch a Fort as no man (which hath any ſkill in warlike affayres) would make any accompt of. And ten daies after, the inhabitants (who were al of the reformed religion) redeemed their Towne with one thouſand Crownes, which were payed to Antefort.
               
               About the 17. of December the Duke de Mayne recouered Trile, which the Lord Turenne had cauſed Amaury to ſurrender into the hands of the inhabitants about ten daies before, becauſe that place was not defenſable. The D. de Mayne at length perceiuing yt his practiſes againſt the Cities and Townes of Limoſin & Perigord would not frame, determined to paſſe the riuer Dordonne at Souliake into Quercy, leauing behind him Monfort, a ſtrong place, and many other Townes and Holds, becauſe hee could not carrie them away with him.
               It is ſayd before, how that the King of Nauarre in Auguſt laſt, went into Languedock to S. Paul de Cadeioux, where he met with the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Monmorency, to aduertiſe them of their defence. The ſayd King remayned afterward in Bearne, in great ſilence and quietnes, viewing how farre all this league and vnion would proceede, expecting the producing of ſome lamentable euents, and (as if it were out of his watch) would become of the thrée great armies prepared for Guyenne, Languedock and Daulphine: and (being hidden vnder the wing of the moſt high) muſed what would bee the end of the fierie threatnings and bragges of his enemies, bearing patiently their inſolencie, euen to the danger of his owne perſon.
               It is alſo ſayd, how that the Leaguers had procured an excommunication from Frier Sixtus vicar of Rome, againſt the King of Nauarre, & the Prince of Conde, therewithall (and with the ſedicious inuaighing of the Ieſuits and Friers) to make them odious vnto the people, whoſe liues they could not touch, neither by violence, nor by any haynous act. It is ſayd alſo, how the Senat of Paris gaue their iudgement (by the way of admonition) to the King againſt the ſayd excommunication, the Pope himſelfe, and the procurers of the ſame.
               
                  
The ſixt day of Nouember, the King of Nauarre anſwereth to the ſaid excommunication of that beggerly Frier Sixtus, and cauſed the ſame anſwere to bee ſet and fixed vpon the corners of the ſtreates in Rome, where  publique writings are wont to be ſet.
               Firſt, he doth hold the ſayd excommunication falſe, wrongfull, & voyd, and doth appeale from him as no Iudge, vnto the Senat of the Péeres of France, whereof he is the firſt.
               Secondly, whereas the ſayd franticke Sixtus dooth lay hereſie to his charge, and preſumptuouſly calleth him hereticke, the ſayd King in one word doth anſwere, that he maliciouſly and moſt impudently (with reuetence of his gooſe cap be it ſpoken) doth lye.
               Thirdly, the ſayd King doth charge the beggerly Frier Sixtus to be an hereticke himſelfe, and doth proffer to prooue him ſo in a generall Counſell lawfully aſſembled.
               Fourthly, he doth declare him Antichriſt, and as vnto ſuch a one he doth denounce a perpetuall and irreconciliable warre, vntill that the miurie done to the houſe of France be ſatiſfied.
               Fiftly, he aſſureth himſelfe in God, that (as he hath aſſiſted his predeceſſors, and made them able to chaſtize ſuch ſawcie companions, as he is, when they haue forgotten their duetie, and paſſed the bounds of their vocation, confounding the eccleſiaſticall power with the ciuill): So he truſteth in God, that being nothing inferiour vnto them, God will make him able to reuenge the iniurie offered to the King, Crowne, State, and Parliaments of France.
               
               Laſt of all, hee dooth implore all Chriſtian Kings and Potentates, all States, alied and confederated with the Crowne of France, to aſſiſt him, to repreſſe the raging tyrannie and damnable vſurpation of the ſayd Frier Sixtus, and of all Leaguers, and conſpirators agaynſt the Crowne of France. So much alſo doth proteſt Henry of Bourbon Prince of Conde.
               
               This anſwere of the King of Nauarre being fixed (as is ſayd in the ordinary places of Rome, where ſuch writinges are wont to be ſet) did not moue Frier Sixtus to repentance: but as being 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , did caſt him into feare ſo deeply, that he ſendeth not long after a Coriero to the Duke 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     is one that putteth me together by the cares, & then runneth his way.
                   
                  Momorencye to excuſe the matter, and to remoue the fault from himſelfe, and to lay it vpon the Leaguers, who (as he ſayth) had deceitfully induced him to do what hee had done, praying him to ſmooth the matter with the King of Nauarre, and to pacify his diſpleaſure.
               About the 11. of Nouember, the King ſendeth forth an iniunction to all his officers, to ſeaze vpon the perſons and goods of al them that haue born armes with the Prince of Conde: who after the breaking of the army at Saloune, had returned to theyr houſes, or returned to their friends: and to proceede agaynſt them according to the edict of Iulye, and the declaration

thereof vearing date the 6. of October.
               Alſo, that ſuch as will be reduced to Popery, he is willing to pardon &  to giue them his patents for the ſame, conditionally that they ſhal be without armes and horſe: and alſo, that they ſhall put in good ſuretyes to perſiſt in the profeſſion of Popery.
               The 19. of Nouember, the Shauelinges, Cardinals, and Biſhops, made a long exhortation to the King by Sir Emare Henekin Biſhop of Saynt Bryen, a citye in Britayne. In the ſame long and tedious oration, Sir Henekin firſt did ſhew him the duty of Kinges toward the holy Church, to wit, to magnify it to the vttermoſt of his power.
               Marke this Chriſtian Reader, that by the name of Church, he meaneth 
                     Note.
                   the ſhauelings; and by the duty of Kings toward the Church, he (although in other wordes) goeth about to perſwade the King to yeeld himſelfe priſoner to their willes and affections: and to make it ſhort, to let them haue what they would haue, and to approoue whatſoeuer they would doe.
               Secondly, he teacheth the King that it is the holy Ghoſt, who hath inſpired him to make the edict of vnion.
               To make the edict of vnion, was to repleniſh his kingdome with bloud, 
                     Note.
                   murther, and deſolation, and to yeeld his authority into the handes of traiterous conſpiratours of the League: this is a worke of inſpiration of the holy ghoſt, by Sir Henekyn his diuinity. Well ſayd Sir Henekyn, goe too, this is good ſtuffe.
               Thirdly, hee blameth the King, that heretofore he hath not ſhewed cruelty ynough agaynſt them of the reformed, but hath ſuffered them to haue the liberty of theyr religion, by his edictes of peace: but now he truſteth, (that hauing reuoked the edict of peace) he would play Pyrgopolynices in Plautus.
               
               Here Sir Henekyn ſheweth whoſe ſonne hee is, breathing nothing 
                     Note.
                   but murther, and whoſe ſcholler, to wit, Antichriſt of Rome, which is the trompeter of all miſchieues in Chriſtendome.
               Fourthly, after breach of the edict of peace, Henekyn hopeth that the King will play the man, and that all thinges ſhall goe well.
               Here Sir Henekyn dooth ſuppoſe, that all thinges ſhall goe well, 
                     Note.
                   when the King hath throwen himſelfe, his Nobility, his Kingdome, and Subiectes into a heape of miſeryes, and hath opened the dore to deſolation and deſperation moſt miſerable: this is to haue a new heauen and earth to Sir Henekyn.
               
               Fifthly, he aſſureth the King, that he ſhall haue power ynough to breake the forces of the Heretikes.
               Here Sir Henekyn knowing not, that there is neither counſell, 
                     Note.
                   nor power againſt God, to reſiſt his will, warranteth the King (like a good diuine) that he ſhall performe what Sir Henekyn wiſheth.
               
                  
Sixtly, hee willeth the King to vſe ſuch diſcipline among his Souldiers, as that the Prieſtes be not moleſted by them. 
               
               Here Sir Henekyn, foreſeeing what euilles the breach of the edict of peace would breede, is well content that other men periſh, ſo that hee 
                     Note.
                   and his fellowes may liue in all pleaſures and voluptuouſnes, without any moleſtation. Sir Henekyn is a good, reaſonable, and kindly fellow.
               Seuenthly, hee willeth the King to publiſh the counſell of Trente, and to reforme the Prieſtes, and to cauſe them to be good and vertuous.
               The King hath reſigned into the handes of the Leaguers a great part of his roiall authority. Now Sir Henekyn will haue him to publiſh 
                     Note.
                   the counſell of Trente, that is, to reſigne the reſt of his royall authority to Fryer Sixtus. I thinke that his minde is in plaine tearmes, the King to become a begging Frier: and to goe to Fryer Sixtus to haue a diſpenſation to forſake his wife, and to enter into a Fryery. But if the king would follow good counſell, he ſhould keepe himſelfe as he is.
               For the eight point, he praieth the king to geue ouer the preferring and placing of Abbots and Biſhops to their liuings, but to referre that to the Prieſtes themſelues, to the Chapters of Canons, and Monkes: and to leaue the diſpoſition of Biſhoprickes and Abbeyes to their elections and diſcretions.
               Here Sir Henekyn is very carefull for the king: he willeth him to forbeare to ſwallow ſuch big morſels, as Biſhopricks and Abbeyes, for the 
                     Note.
                   daunger which may enſue, which is choaking: but to leaue ſuch fat morſels to them that haue throats big ynough to ſwallow down whole Stéeples.
               The king hath reſigned part of his royall authority to the Leaguers: now to do well he ſhall reſigne another part to Frier Syxtus, and the third to the Prieſtes: and then let him walke careleſſe.
               Ninthly, he prayeth the king, to take ſome good order, that the Prieſts may be honoured, renerenced, and capped: and that their iuriſdiction may be reſtored to them, and not interrupted hereafter. Dixi.
               
               Here is the fourth part of the kinges authority, which Sir Henekyn 
                  
                     Note.
                   would fayne to wreſt out of his hand, that the Prieſtes may execute an infernall tyranny, ouer the ſoules and bodies of men.
               And to conclude his chattering, hee doth promiſe to the king great bleſſinges here vppon earth, and afterward the kingdome of heauen, ſo that he will roote out, and deſtroy them, whom hee calleth heretikes.
               Note here, that Sir Henekyn doth call them heretikes, who doth diſtroy their vngodly lewd liues, and filthy pleaſures, as dronkennes, glottony, whoredome, and worſe then that.
               Alſo he would haue the King to roote out, that is, to kill all whom theſe ghoſtly fathers ſhall appoint him.
               
                  
Laſt of all, to play the Turke, to make hauock of all things, to fill the earth with bloud, is the way to aſcend vp to Heauen, quoth Sir Henekin: well ſaid ſir Henekin, by Saint Mary, you haue ſaid as well as euer  I heard any of your occupation.
               About the 30. of Nouember, the King of Nauarre being at Bergerak, and vnderſtanding that his pa
                     •
                  iencie had kindled the rage of his enemies, and his moderatenes had increaſed the inſolencie of the Leaguers, and that after the diſpearſing of the Princes armie, the crueltie of the edict of vnion, and declaration thereof, the 7. of October was euery where executed, with proſcriptions, murthers, loſſes of goods, dignities and honours, dooth make an edict throughout his gouernement of Guienne, to be executed: wherein hee ſheweth, that whereas his ſilent patience and moderatenes had ſerued nothing, but to increaſe the outragious exceſſes and cruelties of the ſeditions and rebells, he is inforced to folow the courſe and order folowing.
               Firſt, that all the goods, lands, rents, fruites, debts, actions, and accounts of all the inhabitants of thoſe townes and places, where the edict of Iulie, and declaration thereof hath been publiſhed and executed, and alſo of all Gentlemen or others, bearing armes with the Leaguers, and their partakers: alſo of all Eccleſiaſticall perſons whereſoeuer, who are contrarie vnto his part, and of all whatſoeuer, who are contributaries vnto his enemies, within the Gouernement of Guienne, to bee ſeazed vpon, ſtayed and put in the hands of his commiſſioners, to bee ſould or farmed to him that will giue moſt.
               Secondly, forbiddeth all manner of perſons, who are indebted vnto ſuch, to pay them or their aſſignes or partakers, any debt, but commaundeth them to repayre vnto his Lieutenants generall, or officers of his receites, to declare and reueale al debts vpon paine of death, and to pay fourefold: that the ſaid goods may be employed to the vſe of warre, & al graines and fruites to be put in ſuch places for ſtore houſes, as ſhall be appoynted by his officers.
               Thirdly, he commaundeth the like to be executed vpon them, who ſhall refuſe to pay the contributions, or the worke men at the fortifications, and alſo, that ſhal refuſe to be contributaries in the deuiding of their fruites, for the prouiſion of ſtoare houſes, which ſhall be conueniently made, for the ſuſtaining of the warre.
               Fourthly, the like intertainement to be done vnto the aboue ſaid, as the enemies ſhall intreate them of the reformed religion, or Catholicks who haue ioyned themſelues to him in that iuſt cauſe, and neceſſarie defence, charging all officers, both to publiſh and execute the ſame edict without delay.
               About the 25. of December, the King as a man that ſtudied nothing

elſe, but onely how to vexe, moleſt, trouble, torment, and vtterly (euen with the loſſe of his realme and eſtate) to roote out them of the reformed religion,  ſetteth forth an order of perſecution, which he commaundeth to be publiſhed at euerie court, and in euery market, wherein to help the memorie of perſecutors: he commaundeth then to haue books deuided in fiue chapters.
               The firſt of them, that hauing borne armes, haue retired back, and meant to be conuerted to poperie.
               The ſecond of them, who haue or doo beare armes.
               The third of them, that according to the edict, haue departed out of the realme.
               The fourth of them, that haue not departed out of their houſes, but are returned to poperie.
               The fift of them, that haue remained in their houſes, and doo perſiſt in the reformed religion, which he calleth hereſie.
               All the penaltie came to this, that they ſhall bee perſecuted all to death, except they will abiure, and all their goods ſeazed vpon, and imployed to the vſe of warre.
               Furthermore, he dooth promiſe a certaine forme of abiuration to bee ſent into the countrey, and willeth the Biſhops to appoint in townes of their dioces, their vickars generals, to receaue their abiuration, and to giue them abſolution.
               About the ſame time, one Sir William Ruſe, Biſhop of Angers did ſet foorth in his dioces, vnto al Prieſts, a forme of abiuration, which the ſaid Prieſts ſhould enforce vpon them, that had profeſſed the true religion, and had obeyed, or would obey the Kings edict. Wherein firſt, hee dooth propound vnto them the Nicen ſimbole. Secondly, they ſhall allowe all the traditions of the Apoſtles, and of the holy Mother Church of Rome.
               
               By the traditions of the Apoſtles and holy Church, hee vnderſtandeth 
                     Note.
                   all the intuſiaſmes, and dronken dreames, all the ſottiſh and heatheniſh deviſes of the phantaſticall frantick, & dronken Popes, Cardinalls, Biſhops, Monkes and Friers, which wee muſt needes to holde for articles of the faith: becauſe ſir William hath ſaid ſo.
               Thirdly, they ſhall beleeue, that there is ſeauen Sacraments.
               And why ſhall we not beleeue ſeauen thouſand, as well as ſeauen, ſeeing 
                     Note.
                   that the ſeauen thouſand, are as well proued by the worde of God, as the ſeauen.
               Fourthly, that all rites and ceremonies, vſed in the miniſtration of the ſaid ſeauen ſacraments, are good.
               Al the croſſings, charmings, duckings, kiſſings, howlings, chauntings, 
                     Note.
                   mumblings, iuglings, coniurings, blowings, ſlomberings, gaddings, turnings, moppings, &c. Are either articles of faith, or elſe as good as the articles of our beliefe.
               
                  
Fiftly, they ſhall beleeue, that in the tranſubſ
                     •
                  antiation, the bread and  Wine are chaunged into the bodie, bloud, ſoule, and deitie of Chriſt.
               Sir William Ruze, either is an aſſe, who knoweth not what he ſaith, or elſe a falſe Prophet, which leadeth men to a ſtrange God: for ſuch a paradoxe 
                     Note.
                   was yet neuer heard in Chriſts Church, that the Bread and Wine was changed into Chriſts deitie.
               Sixtly, he ſaith, that wee muſt beleeue the Maſſe, to be a ſacrifice propiciatorie for the ſinnes of the quick and the dead.
               What proofes hath Sir William Ruze, to ſhew out of Gods word, that the Maſſe is a propiciatorie ſacrifice for ſinne, more then the ſacrifices of 
                     Note.
                   the heathens?
               Laſt of all, the fire of purgatorie: the hauing and worſhipping of their Images, the adoring of Reliques and praying vnto them: and alſo that the counſell of Trent is to be receaued, as good Catholick, and an article of the faith of the Church of Rome.
               
               All theſe things are articles of faith, which they that will goe to the diuell muſt needes beleeue; but cleane contrarie vnto the faith of the true 
                     Note.
                   Catholick and Apoſtolick Church. The perſecutions, impriſonments, ſeazing of goods, and abiurations, had begun and went forward in diuers places, but eſpeciallie in ſuch as were addicted to the League long before, and had receaued the laſt edict ſet forth by the King. And among other places, there is a towne in Poytow, called Niort, great and rich, where the faires and martes of the countrey beyond Loyre are kept. This towne had béen ſeduced of long time, and of all townes in France moſt earneſtly adicted to the League: there of all places, and in the townes there abouts, they began moſt cruelly to perſecute the Church, which was aſſembled at Saint Gelays, in the which perſecution, many bowed downe the knee to Baall. Therefore, about the 20. of December, Lewis Blachiere, Paſtor of that Church, hauing retired to Rochel, and vnderſtanding the fall of many in that heate of perſecution, writeth a letter to raiſe them that are fallen, and to binde that which was broken.
               In the which, firſt hee ſheweth the vſe of perſecution, that is, to diſcerne the true Diſciples of Chriſt, from falſe bretheren and hypocrits, who yeeld and turne after euery winde of doctrine.
               Secondly, hee dooth terrifie them that are fallen, by the threatnings of Chriſt againſt them, that ſhall denie him before men.
               Thirdly, he detecteth the ſubtiltie of the enemie, in the forme of his abiuration, in that he hath made a doore of golde, to enter into a priuy or dongeon full of filth, ſtinking and poyſoned ayre, placing in the beginning the Nicen ſimbole, afterward patcheth to it all the filthie abominations of Antichriſt.
               Fourthly, hee ſheweth to them that are fallen, the gate of mercie to remaine

alwaies open to them which ſeeke the right meanes to enter in, and that repentance is neuer too late. 
               
               Laſt of all, them who doo ſtand, he doth encourage to preferre the confeſſion of the ſon of God, wherein doth conſiſt eternall life before this preſent life, or the commodities and pleaſures thereof.
               Thus wee will make an end of this ſecond Booke of this Tragicall Hiſtorie, raiſed vp in the Kingdome of France, by the Leaguers.
               The end of the ſecond Booke.
            
            
               THE THIRD BOOKE.
               
                  IT is ſhewed in the former Booke, how the Leaguers, after hauing long vnder hand, practiſed the ſupplanting of the houſe of 
                     Ʋaloys, at length did burſt out into a manifeſt rebellion. I haue ſhewed what pretence, coulour, and buckler they tooke, to wit, religion, iuſtice, & the Cardinall of Bourbon.
               
               Thou haſt ſeene gentle reader, how the King tooke them for enemies, rebels and traitors, and ſome of their partakers were condemned and executed for ſuch.
               Alſo, by what meanes, practiſes, and wicked counſell, the King was drawne to ioyne friendſhip and armour, and to deuide his kingdome with them whome hee a little before, had declared rebels and traitors.
               What edicts, declarations, iniunctions, the King afterward ſet out in fauour of them, againſt the reformed religion.
               The atemptes of Merceur, in the Lowe Poytow, the exploytes done by the Prince of Conde in Xainctonge, Poytow, and his voyage beyond Loyre, to Angers, and the ſucceſſe of that voyage: the exployces done by the Vicount Turenne; the comming of the Duke De Mayne, with his armie, and all his conqueſt in Perigord, and Limoſin.
               
               Now will we begin the third Booke with the beginning of Ianuarie. The firſt day of Ianuarie, the King of Nauarre being at Montoban, a  citie in Quercie, wrote letters vnto all the ſtates of France, and firſt of all vnto the ſacrificing Prieſts, commonlie called the Cleargie, in the which he proteſteth, firſt of his moderatenes which he hath vſed toward all men, euen

in the middle of warre, and that hee hath often times remitted ſundrie and great iniuries done to him, in reſpect of the publick peace. 
               
               Secondly, he complaineth of them, that they doo aſſiſt with their power and meanes them, who making their ambition, a zeale to holy Church, and the reuenging of their priuat diſcontentments with a publick warre, haue ſet the whole realme in a miſerable cumbuſtion.
               Thirdly, hee letteth them vnderſtand, that he feareth neither their money, their names, nor the armes of his enemies, but pittyeth the ſtate of the poore people, who doth ſuffer all the oppreſſions and miſeries which will enſue theſe enterprizes of his enemies.
               Fourthly, he threatneth them, that they who ſhould be the vpholders of peace, and the ſupport of the poore people, ſhall anſwere before God, for all the bloodſhed, confuſions, vices, and miſeryes which the warre caryeth with it, for entertayning with their meanes, and noriſhing with their goods, this vniuſt and damnable warre, with the diſorders which inſue thereof.
               Fiftly, hee proteſteth that hee hath proffered himſelfe to be tryed by a conference and diſtentation in a free counſel, but they haue preferred war, fire and ſword before theſe good, lawdable, and ordinary meanes of conference, which is moſt worthy of man.
               Laſt of all, he ſheweth them that this warre is moſt vnworthy of Chriſtians, but ſpecially of ſuch as do pretend to bee teachers and Doctors of the Goſpell, and committing his innocency and iuſt cauſe to God, warneth them, that the dangers of warre are common as well to them as to him and his: ſo maketh an end with them.
               Vnto the Nobility hee rehearſeth the ſumme of all thinges paſſed euer ſince the raiſing vp of the League.
               Firſt, how that in the middeſt of peace, theſe ſturres are bred and borne.
               Secondly, he reciteth with what patience he hath borne all the iniuries proffered vnto him by the Leaguers, who haue made him the ſubiect and ſcope of their warre.
               Thirdly, he putteth them in remembrance of all the Kings actions before the edict of vnion, how the King declared them rebels, and perſwaded them, as ſuch in all his courtes of Parliament. And how they, to wit, the Nobility, haue béen armed agaynſt the Leaguers, and that all theſe actions of the king did proceed out of a good and ſound iudgement & free wil, without any compulſion.
               He willeth them to remember alſo, how on a ſudden all theſe thinges haue béen chaunged, and the kinges will not chaunge, but partly enforced, and partly by the craft of the enemies, with ill counſell induced to contrary actions.
               Fourthly, he complayneth of the iniuries done to them of the reformed

religion, who heretofore had béene ſuffered with liberty of the free exerciſe of the ſame, without any offence by them geuen, and armed by the kinges  authority againſt the Leaguers, now to be condemned in reſpect of their religion, as guilty of capitol cryme.
               Fiftly, hee declareth how for the auoyding the calamities incident to warre to ſatiſfy vnto the Leaguers, he hath debaſed himſelfe ſo farre vnder his degree, as to proffer to the heads of the League, the combat to be performed by himſelf in perſon, or by more, number to number, as by the aduerſary it ſhould bee accepted.
               Sixtly, he letteth them vnderſtand, that hee feareth not their armes, whereof he hath had the experience ſo long time, whereby he knoweth well what they are able to do.
               Laſt of all, hee cannot but lament their bloud which they haue, and do ſpill againſt him, for whoſe ſeruice they ſhould haue reſerued it in ſtoare.
               But ſpecially this doth greeue him, that in the lot of the battell he may not diſcerne them whom in mind hee diſcerneth from his enemies.
               Vnto the third eſtate he writeth to the ſame purpoſe, as he hath done to the Nobility, and beſides ſheweth vnto them firſt the horrible miſeries which they haue ſuſtained by the ciuill warre, and what confuſions are like to enſue of theſe troubles. He ſheweth alſo how the end of all the former wars hath béene a peace.
               Secondly, whereas they (meaning the Leaguers) do pretend to eaſe the people of taxes and charges, hee aduertyzeth them, that by this warre the taxes, impoſt, and ſubſidies muſt needs to double, and that their ryſing in armes hath done already terrible hauocke and waſt. He warneth them alſo to conſider how that the reformation of impoſt, taxes & ſubſidies, they haue turned to their priuat commodity, hauing done nothing, but enforce the king to deuide his realme among them, and to weaken his authority, without making mention not one word of the eaſing of the people. Hee writeth the ſame effect to the inhabitantes of Paris: but ſurdis narrat fabulam. The contempt of the Goſpel, the innocent blood of the Saintes which they haue ſpilled like water muſt be better reuenged. The wrath of God muſt walke now beyond Loyre, to execute his iudgements vpon theſe nations, that lye betweene the low countrey and Loyre, becauſe they haue not repented at the former ſcourges, but haue hardened their hartes, and haue blaſphemed the God who liueth for euermore.
               The diſperſing of the Princes armie, and declaration of the edict of vnion dated the ſeauenth day of October, did caſt a marueilous amaze and dread vppon all them of the religion generally: but ſpecially vppon them who were left through the Popiſh countreys in France, hoping for a better time.
               There were alſo many of the contrary religion, who being louers of

the State, and wiſhing well to the houſe of Bourbon, and to the right of the cauſe, began to wauer and to alter their minds according to the vnablenes  of fortune, and the nature of the euents.
               There followed after in December, the bloudie procéedings of Ruze Biſhop of Angers, and the Kings Iniunction to his officers to execute his edict, with the allowing of ye abiuration penned by rauening Ruze. Theſe things made a great diſſipation in the families of them of the religion. For by theſe meanes the rage of the Papiſts encreaſed agaynſt the reformed religion, and emboldened to attempt any violence and iniurie agaynſt them. For the enemies ſuppoſing that the Prince had béen loſt, (for it was very long time afore it was knowne what was become of him) they iudged alſo that the faith and hope of them of the reformed religion had béen buried with him.
               The inconſtancie of many of them who had remayned in France, after the declaration of the edict of Iuly, did appeare. For many eſtéemed more the commodities of their houſes, and the pleaſures of their countrey, than the quietnes of their conſciences, and the keeping of thoſe good precepts which they had learned in the ſchoole of Chriſt, which is rather to dye vnder the Croſſe, than to liue in committing Idolatrie.
               The Papiſts on the contrary ſide, forgat no meanes to throwe downe them that ſtoode on ſlipperie places: for beſide the rigour of the edict which had abridged the time of anoydance to fifteene daies, with dreadful threatnings, the Ieſuites, Friers, Maſſing and pariſh Prieſts, and other firebrands of the Romiſh route, thundered agaynſt them, whom they tearmed hereticks in their bloudie and ſedicious ſermons. And if they could not diſſwade them from their religion, then they ſtirred vp the people to murther them, or els purſued them before the Magiſtrates, who were eagerly ſet againſt them, being for the moſt part of the League.
               They who had béen of the religion, or had béen ſuſpected to haue fauoured the ſame, perſecuted them who remayned conſtant, thereby to terrifie that they had neuer béen of them.
               Their friends on the other ſide had no ſmall power to trie the conſtancie of thoſe ſimple ſoules, who before had faſtened too much the a
                     •
                  cker of their ſafetie in the forces of man.
               There were alſo which did great pleaſure to their friends and kindred, in obtayning to them prorogation of time to giue order to their affayres, and after to retyre ſome where.
               Many remayning conſtant in the trueth, eſtéeming more their faith to God, than worldly goods, (foreſeeing alſo a more ſtormie tempeſt than that which was paſt, would enſue) without any further bargaining left al, and retyred ſome to the principalitie of Sedan; ſome into Germany; great number to Geneua; great multitudes to Saint Ihan d'Angely, Rochel, and

                  England. It was a lamentable thing to ſee the wofull vaniſhments and diſſipation of ſo many families, without any ſuccour or comfort. 
               
               They which were touched with a greater zeale, would not leaue their children behinde them, in daunger to bee throwne into the myre of Idolatrie, which they deteſted, eſteeming of the conſcience of their children as of their owne, knowing that they ſhould anſwere before God for the ſame. This cauſed many of them to carrie their children vppon their ſhoulders, for lacke of other meanes.
               God ſhewed in ſuch a ſtormie tempeſt, that he hath hauens of ſafetie alwaies in ſtore for them who (being toſſed and tormoyled vnder the heauines of the Croſſe) doo caſt (as children vpon their fathers) their eyes vpon him. For this is a wonderfull worke of GOD, that for the ſpace of thrée whole yeares the peſtilence had ſo afflicted Rochel, that there was no part free of the ſame. Saint Ihan d'Angely alſo (when this perſecution waxed ſo violent) was ſo beaten with it, that the towne was almoſt deſtitute of inhabitants and Souldiers. Notwithſtanding, neither the Gouernour, the Lord S. Meſmes, nor the Miniſters, would at any time forſake the remainant of that Church which was there. All the fields about were full of Tents and Cabbins repleniſhed with men infected of the plague: the villages all round about were in the ſame caſe.
               The faithfull exiled out of their owne countreys and houſes, flowing from euery ſide of France, & flying from the contagious peſtilence of their ſoules, eſtéemed leſſe than nothing the plague: and ſickneſſe of the bodie (rather than ſhould caſt away their ſoules in denying the ſonne of God) was to bée wiſhed for of them. But God (according to his trueth) kept to them both the one and the other: for euen then the peſtilence vaniſhed away from all thoſe places, as if God had commanded the ſickneſſe to make roome for them who were exiled for his name: for after that there was no more ſickneſſe ſeene.
               In this auoydance there was a number murthered, but ſpecially in thoſe Prouinces where the gouenours were moſt paſſionate and addicted to the League, by whoſe permiſſion the common people tooke much libertie to commit cruell murthers vpon them of the religion. They who had not the meanes to recouer ſome place of refuge, and continued in the purenes of religion, and eſcaped the ſlaughter, did lye ſouſing in priſons and dongeons, where they ſuſtayned many combats, looking euery day when they ſhould be had away to death.
               Many of them who forſooke the confeſſion of the trueth went to Maſſe, and ſo were ſent to their houſes agayne: but (by a certaine iudgement of God) they for the moſt part dyed euery where through ſorrowe, or by the peſtilence.
               Some of them who had charge in the Church, died of notable kindnes

of death. For ſome going into the Countrey about theyr buſineſſe, fell of their horſes, and brake their neckes, and ſome dyed otherwiſe, verifying  the ſaying of Chriſt: he which will ſaue his life ſhall looſe it.
               It is ſayd, how the Duke de Mayne powred his fu
                     •
                  y vppon the olde walles of the vilages of Montigne le Conte, & Beaulrien, and how he tooke Trile, which no man will keepe. In the latter end of Ianuary, the ſayd Duke drawing into the furtheſt part of Perigord, ſet vppon Gaignak, a poore little vilage belonging to the Vicount Turenne, a place voyde of all fortifications, ſaue that at the endes of the ſtreetes, there remayned yet few old walles, which did ſhew that there had béen a gate: the inhabitants being poore huſbandmen, firſt ſuſtayned an aſſault, ſuppoſing to haue to doo with companyes of robbers, for ſo they tooke them. But at length being not able to withſtand ſuch a multitude, they fledde another way, and ſaued themſelues, except onely foure, who either for age or woundes could not auoyd: them this great Duke cauſed to be hanged, to powre his gall vpon thoſe poore ſimple countrey men.
               Thus this great Emperour, weary to conquer vilages in Perigord, and ſeeing that his practiſes agaynſt the great and populous Cities of Limoges and Perigueux, would not frame, he turned ſhort Southward towards Quercy: and paſſing ouer the riuer Dordonne at Soilak, left at his left hand the townes of the vicount Turenne, Saynt Cere, and Turenne in Perigord, and coaſted Figeak, Cadenak, and Cayak in Quercye, whom hee knew to bee well furniſhed with garriſons. Hee coaſted alſo the houſes of the Vicount Gourdine, and Montfort, a ſtrong place vpon Dordonne, which hee ſent to view.
               This Duke ſoiorned long in Quercy, ſent commaundement to the marchantes of Tholouze, and Bourdeaux, and others which do tra
                     •
                  fike vppon Garonne, that vppon payne of death they ſhould not agree with the townes which did hold for the king of Nauarre, and ſituated vppon that riuer, did ſtoppe the commerce thereof, promiſing that ſhortly hee would ſet all that riuer at liberty, yea that he would.
               Whileſt hee ſoiorned ſo long in high Quercye, rouing and waſting the countrey, the Biſhop of Cahors, the Lords Saynt Sulpice and Comburat did inſtantly require him, that he would aſſault thoſe places aboue ſaid, which being holdē by them of the religion, did dayly annoy & moleſt them. which thing when the Duke could not be perſwaded to do. The Biſhop bleſſing him with his Epiſcopall benediction: and the two ſayd Lordes with hot tearmes, licenſed him to depart out of their countrie in the deuils name. Beſides eating, drinking, ſpoyling and whoring he did no good there, ſaue that he licenſed ſome Gentlemen of the countrey for money, to haue the exerciſe of the reformed religion in their houſes, ſo that thence they would not make warre: and to colour his cowardlines, hee excuſeth

himſelfe vnto the Biſhop, and other Lords aboue ſaide, that hee would goe to open the riuer of Garonne, and to put the commerce vpon that riuer at  libertie.
               Thus this ſecōd Hannibal, coaſting the riuer of Lot at his left hand, and Dordonne at his right hand, (for he would haue that riuer of Lot as a wall betweene him and mount Auban) entring in Agenoys, there iſſued out certain companies out of Montſ
                        •
                     anquine vpon the taile of his armie, which did ſlay in one conflict two hundred Harquebuſiers of his, and diſcomfited the companie of Captaine Guerche.
               
               At length he came with his Ianiſſaries to the fall of the riuer of Lot into Garonne, where is ſituated an olde Towne called Tunnings, conſiſting of lowe and high Towne and Caſtle. That place (about the inſurrection of the League) certaine Ruffians of Agen had ſeazed vppon, where they did greatly moleſt the countrey. The King of Nauarre in Auguſt after, paſſing by, ſent Captayne Leſtele to take that towne: which thing he did at the firſt approach, and did caſt downe thoſe 
                     ••
                  lthie ruffians with their harlots out of the windowe into the ditch, and kept the ſayd towne vnto the Dukes comming, which then was giuen ouer, and that ſmall garriſon that was there retyred to the other ſide of Gharonne, to Caumont and Clerake to reſerue themſelues to a better opportunitie. The Duke de Mayne tooke valiantly the ſayd towne of Tunnings, which no man kept agaynſt him. And hauing done this valiant exploit, he doth coaſt the riuer Garonne deſcending toward Bourdeaux. In that way he ſent a Coriero to the king, promiſing him that he will doo him ſuch notable ſeruice, as neuer no man did, for in great ſadues hee will take the King of Nauarre dead or aliue, if he did not reſolue himſelfe to depart out of the Realme: and if hée can take him he will ſend him his head in a Charger, as Herode did S. Iohn Baptiſt.
               
               As this great Duke went downe the riuer, the forerunners met with thirtie ſcattered and vnarmed poore lads, which belonged to the garriſon of Chaumont: they were ſent to cauſe the prouiſion (contributed by the countrey) to be brought to the ſayd towne of Chaumont. Theſe poore lads were killed by theſe ſtout warriors: which notable victorie was afterward publiſhed in Paris, by the title of the notable ouerthrowe of the garriſon of Chaumont and Nerake, by the Duke de Mayn.
               
               The next exployt done by this victorious Captaine, was at Castets. This is a little towne and a Caſtle belonging to the Lord Fabas, which place the Marſhall Matignon had beſieged before the ſpace of ten dayes before the Dukes comming, and had made a ſufficient breach. The Duke de Mayne to defraude the ſayd Lord Matignon of that little honour, compounded ſecretly with the ſayd Lord Fabas, thus: That the Lord Fabas firſt ſhould haue twelue thouſand Crownes for the loſſe of the houſe

and of the goods which were in it, and ſo ſhould ſurrender the ſame Caſtle to the Duke de Mayne to be raſed, which was performed: ſo Castets was  wonne with an aſſault of money, the Lord Matignon was defrauded, and the Duke de Mayne had the glorie: and if it pleaſeth him he ſhall be called Caſtenſis of Caſtets, as Scipio Carthaginenſis of the winning of Carthage.
               
               The next place was Meylan, an olde ruinous Towne, wherein was Captaine Melune with a ſmall garriſon, who conſidering the weaknes of the place gaue it ouer, ſuppoſing that it was more profitable to let ye Duke de Mayne to haue that place for a while, than to defend it. There the Duke with all his armie tooke great paynes to beate downe old ruinous walles, which no man did defend, leaſt it ſhould be ſayd that he had done nothing.
               From the raſing of the walles of Meylan, he went to Saint Bazeile, a  towne ſituated vpon the riuer of Garonne, hauing like ruinous old and decayed walles and forts, as the aforeſaid townes had. There were fewe of the religion in garriſon, who after hauing ſuſtayned certayne ſhot of ordinance and aſſaults, they conſidering that it was not a place to obſtinate themſelues therein, compounded to their great aduantage. Amorith did neuer ſo reioyce at the winning of Constantinople, as this Duke did for Saint Bazeile. By & by the Lord Saiſſeual (the Dukes Curiero) was ſent to the King in poſt with haſt haſt haſt, to aduertize him of theſe great conqueſts, and to fetch money to conquer more.
               This diſpatch done, he marched with this armie to Monſegne: This is an old Towne decayed in Bayadoys, where the exercize of the reformed religion had béen appoynted to bee had by the edict of peace ſo choſen, not for the ſtrength thereof, but for becauſe it was thought moſt commodious for the whole countrey there to aſſemble. This towne was kept by fewe of the religion: Theſe fewe made ſo little account of that armie, and of the Captaine thereof, that after they had cauſed him to beſtowe two thouſand and ſome hundred ſhot of ordinance, with certayne weekes of ſiege, and certayne aſſaults which were deare vnto the enemie, they yéelded themſelues with conditions very honorable, but pernicious to them. For the Souldiers comming foorth with their armes agaynſt faith and promiſe, were ſlaine for the moſt part of them in the middeſt of that cowardly army; part of them notwithſtanding ſaued themſelues and retyred to Chaſtilion, where afterward they had their penyworth of the enemie for that treacherie, and the death of their fellowes. The towne was giuen to the ſpoyle, but there was nothing found but the bare walles.
               When he had done theſe conqueſts and exploytes vpon the riuer of Garonne, he went to reſt himſelfe at Bourdeaux, for the ſpace of two moneths, to wit, Aprill and May, and part of Iune, as though he had wonne Carthage: where he practiſed the citizns to the League, and when he was wearie of his conſpiring, allured by the pleaſantnes of the place, and felicitie of

the Countrey, he putteth off the perſon of a Captaine, and played the Poet, in writing ſuch riming verſes as he could, of his loue. And while this  great Captaine was thus occupied, they of the religion fortified Meylan, and many other townes vpon the ſame riuer of Garonne, and made them ſtronger and better furniſhed then euer heretofore they had been: ſo that the traffick of that riuer, betweene Bourdeaux & Thoulouſe, was ſtopped more ſtraightly then euer it had been before. Whereupon, many who had commerce vpon that riuer, being greatly decayed, and ſome hauing broken their credit, and other which were in danger to doo the like, did agree with them of the religion for the opening of the traffick, bleſſing with many bitter curſes, the League, the Captaine, and the armie, which had bragged and promiſed much, and done nothing, but onely prouoked them of the religion, and waſted the countrey.
               The Duke de Mayne, hauing recreated himſelfe ſo long, was vrged by the King (who expected dayly to heare miracles wrought by this captaine and his armie) to lead the ſame out of that citie to doo ſome exploite, more moued by the earneſt ſute of the Lady de Mayne his wife, which had a ſtomack to them of Chastilion, at length hee determined to beſiege the ſaide Towne.
               
                  Chastilion is a little town vpon Dordonne, three Leagues aboue Liborne, and three Leagues beneath Saint 
                     
                        •
                     oy, hauing Montrauell on the one ſide, about a League, and Genſak another towne on the other ſide, ſo much diſtant: of this towne the Duke was Lorde, it was almoſt forſaken of the inhabitants. Therein the King of Nauarre had placed the Baron Saliniak, with a ſmall Gariſon, not to obſtinate himſelfe therein, but to miniſter ſome play to that armie, that weary with doing nothing, at length it might be reduced to nothing. Captaine Alen & Coronnean, with ſome other gentlemen and others, had folowed of their owne motion the ſaid Baron: there they were in all, to the number of nine hundred Souldiers.
               About the 18. of Iune, at the firſt approache of the enemie, they iſſued out with ſuch courage, that their ſallie coſt the liues of a great number  of their enemies. They within the towne had made a barticado at the ende of a ſuburb, which they defended ten daies againſt all that armie, and all the ſhot of their Ordinance. But at length, being inforced to retire into the towne, out of the which, they iſſuing oftentimes, gaue many fearefull alarums and hot ſkirmiſhes vnto the enemie, with the loſſe of the liues of many.
               During this ſiege of Chastilion, the Lorde Saiſsiual returned from the King, and brought letters of credit, of thirtie thouſand Crownes, but no man was willing to buie ſo deare a piece of paper. Yet the Duke gaue not them ouer ſo, hoping that the prieſts would haue him in their memento at Maſſe, and would bleſſe him yet with ſome more money: but to ſatiſfie his

wiues ſtomack, he would venture that little remuant of credit of his which reſted: wherefore hee cauſed many great rampiers of earth to bee made, as though he had to beſiege Ieruſalem. The ſiege continued ſeauen weekes,  in the which ſpace, the Vicount Turenne with a few (notwithſtanding that great armie) victualed the Towne, and fortified Montrauil, a towne ſituated vpon a hil, and Genſak on the other ſide, each of them diſtant from Chaſtilian a little League. On another ſide, Captaine Beutune, a man of great valour went forth out of Saint Foy, to attempt vpon that armie, and in the conflict, the ſaid Beutune, and the Lord Maligny, a valiant young Gentleman, Sonne to the Lorde Beauuoyr, with two Souldiours more were ſlaine, and the Lord Piles hurt. On the ſide of the Leaguers, were ſlaine three men of armes, Charles of Birague and Grimaldie, were taken priſoners & Monardy was wounded. During this long ſiege, the plague waxed ſo hot within the towne, that of nine hundred there remained but two hundred a liue, whereof many were infected, other were wounded, their Chirurgions were dead, medicines to heale with, powder and ſhot fayled them: there was left but two old women, which ſerued them in ſteade of Chirurgions and cookes. So that God diſpoſed of thoſe inuincible hearts that were almoſt deſtitute of force & meanes of defence, after the diſcharging of ſixe thouſand ſhot of ordinance, & ſeauen weekes of ſiege, at length hauing loſt but ſixe ſkore perſons onely by the lot of warre, and among them, but ſixe Gentlemen onely, Chastilion was ſurrendered by compoſition.
               In the ſurrendring, they that were whole did eſcape away, they that were ſick, were ſent forth. The Duke to pleaſe his wiues minde, would  neuer conſent that the inhabitantes ſhould bee comprehended in the capitulation, becauſe they were his tenants, yet at the inſtant requeſt of the Vicount of Aubeterre, they were promiſed to receaue no hurt, but notwithſtanding (contrarie to promiſe) moſt of them, who were found in the towne were executed: the ſpoyle of the towne was giuen to the Souldiours, but there they found nothing but few raggs infected with peſtilence.
               The Lorde Salignak, Captaine Alen and Coronnean, with thirteene Gentlemen more were taken priſoners, and ſent to the Caſtells of Bourdeaux and Blaye, to be ſafelie kept, whence not long after, they were deliuered by exchange for Popiſh Gentlemen, who were priſoners at Bergerark, Saint Foy and Rochel. The follie, c
                     •
                  wardlines, leaud and voluptuous life of this conquerour, his traiterous intent, which was, that vnder colour of conducting the Kings armie, ſought nothing but to make himſelf ſtrong againſt the King, by ſeducing his people vnder colour of the Catholick religion, being ſpied of the moſt part of the captains, but eſpecially by the Swiſſers, and Colonell of the French footemen: alſo the ſmall gaine which they haue had, for the ſpace of a whole yeare, and the little ſeruice

which they had done to their Kings intollerable charges, and the ſmall reputation which they had gotten, by ſeruing vnder ſuch a Captaine, cauſed  many to diſband themſelues: ſome for lack of paie refuſed to be any longer imployed. In Aprill laſt, while the Duke was wallowing in filth in the citie of Bourdeaux, the Duke of Guize vpon aduertiſement of his brother, who greatly feared the Vicount Turenne which watcht for him vnder euerie hedge, came to Paris, to ſhew the King that if his brother (the Duke de Mayne) were not aſſiſted, it were impoſſible for him to withſtand the forces of the hereticks in Guienne, which did ioyne to the Vicount Turenne out of euerie prouince of the realme, to oppreſſe his brother: he prayed therfore his Maieſtie to prouide ſome ſpeedie remedie, which might not be done otherwiſe than by diuerting their forces, he ſhewed alſo, how that might be done by ſending diuers armies into diuers countries, and ſo ſet vpon them on euerie ſide.
               This policie being approued, now they began to pleaſe themſelues in their owne conceites: whereupon the Marſhall Byron was appoynted to leade an armie into Xainctonge: the Marſhall Ioyeuſe was appointed for Languedock, the Lord Ioyeuſe his ſonne for Auuergne, the Duke of Eſpernon for Prouance.
               
               The Lord Chaſtre ſhould haue a nauy in a readines on the coaſt of Britayne, ſo that at the Leagues commaundement like mad men they ran to it by land and by water. The brute of theſe new armies being noyſed abroad, made the Captaynes of the Duke de Mayne his army to be leſſe willing to remayne in his ſeruice, and more willing to ſerue others, vnder whoſe conduct they hoped to ſpeed better, and do ſeruice with more credit. Theſe new armies a preparing were as the rockes, vppon the which this Sardanapalus army was caſt and broken to pieces. The ſouldiers therefore firſt, and then the Captaynes began to ſlyde away, after they had the ſpoyle of Chaſtilion, which was iuſt nothing but the plague, and ſuch as continued with him were imployed yet once more as you ſhall heare.
               There is a litle towne in the way to Chastilion, to the City Perigueux, named Puynormand, in the which there is an old Caſtell belonging to the king of Nauarre, wherein the ſayd King had put a Captayne of the Catholike religion, named Captayne Roux, not to make warre, but to kéepe the Caſtell as his houſe. The inhabitantes (except a few) were all of the popiſh religion: The perſon himſelfe did neuer depart from thence, knowing well, that for the number of them of the Religion hee needed not to feare. The inhabitantes brought dayly victuals, and the artificers of the ſayd towne neceſſary wares to the Dukes armie, at the ſieg of Chastilion, Into the ſayd Caſtell the Countrey had ſent their goods to bee ſafely kept.
               The ſayd Captayne Roux had in the Caſtell a priſoner named Cuſſel,
                  
who had confeſſed, that the Lord Lanſake had hyred him to kill the Marſhall Matignon: which Cuſſel, during the abode of the Duke de Mayne 
                   in Bourdeaux, the ſayd Lord Matygnon had determined to put to death for ſome offences: but at the requeſt of the Duke de Mayne, his life was ſpared, and he ſet at liberty: ſuch a one by the meanes of the Lord Lanſake the Duke had procured to murther the Marſhall Matignon, that he being made out of the way, his faction in the city of Bourdeaux might haue ſurprized the ſame with the caſtels.
               The Duke de Mayne to be reuenged of Captaine Roux, for giuing notice to the ſayd Matygnon of the enterpriſe confeſſed by Cuſſell, layd the ſiege before the ſaid town and caſtell, which within few daies was rendered with theſe conditions, that the Souldiers ſhould goe forth ſafe, with their liues & goods, & that the goods of the inhabitāts ſhould be preſerued.
               There went foorth ſixteene Souldiers, and foure countrey men, for the moſt part all catholikes: the caſtell contrary to promiſe beyng ranſacked, was ſet on fire and burned.
               The Duke de Mayne being at the ſiege of Puynormand, ſent Saiſſeual to the king, to aduertiſe him of his great conqueſt of Chaſtilion, but ſpecially to haue money, and within few dayes after he followed his meſſenger to do his meſſage him ſelfe. From Puynormand, the reſt of that armye fel to pieces, and within a while became inuiſible. That army I ſay, that had boaſted within ſixe moneths to roote out of Guyenne & Oaſtroyn, all them of the reformed religion, or elſe to force them to a perpetuall exile, without hauing any more liberty, not ſo much as to turne their forces toward their countrey.
               This valiant warryer had beſtowed a whole yeare, and waſted a million of Franks, which the Prieſts had contributed toward that warre: he hath for his money the villages of Montignak, Beaulieu, Triles, Caſtets, which he bought with the Prieſtes money, Saint Bezile, Montſegure, Chaſtilion, Puynormand, which immediatly came agayne into the hands of them of the reformed religion, and were fortifyed ſtronger then euer they had béen. Now, if this great Dukes Chaplens will haue more warre & conqueſtes at his handes, they muſt pay for it, or elſe let them goe againſt the heretikes themſelues, for he will goe home. Thus endeth the tragicall comedie of this Captaine.
               In October the cheefeſt of the reformed religion in the Iles of Maran, perceauing the diſorder which was in the gard of the caſtel of Portmaran, 
                   and knowing that the Prince before his iourney to Angers, had determined to put in a Gouernor, with a certayne number of Souldiers, and that there were many which made ſute for that gouernment, aduiſed to demaunde of the Prince ſome gentlemen of the gouernment of Rochel, who had meanes to defende them without oppreſſing eyther the one part or other:

which thing being granted vnto them, they demaunded the Lord Eſſars of Montalambert, a valiant and expert Captaine, who had giuen a  notable proofe of his valour & experience at the ſiege of Saint Jhan D'angelie, in the yeare 1569. and alſo at Rochel 1572. and 1573. The ſayd Lord Eſſars accepted it vnder the authority of the Prince, with 20. Souldiours appoynted him, whom hee vndertooke to pay with his owne hand, vppon the payment of a Sous for euery pound of marchandize which ſhould paſſe through Marans, and vpon promiſe to receaue one thouſand crownes for the fortifications of the Caſtell, as he ſhould thinke good: and into that gouernment he entred in October.
               But within few dayes after, the ſayd Lord of Eſſars began to vary with the inhabitants, who were of the religion for the moſt part. For the ſayd Lord hauing found the caſtell wholly vnfurniſhed of all houſhold and neceſſary commodities, required that they would furniſh it both for him and his ſouldiers, and alſo that in caſe the ſayd caſtell ſhould be beſieged, they would repayre to it for the defence of the ſame, and alſo willed them to bring in their moueables.
               Then anſwered the ſayd Lord Eſſars, that with moueables euery one had furniſhed what they could, and that the beſt of their goods were tranſported to Rochel. As for to retyre within the Caſtell, they thought it not expedient, for if the enemie ſhould beſiege it, and beate it, they knew well by experience, that it was not defenſible. They anſwered a
                     •
                  ſo, that they would not put in any more of their goods, but ſuch as they paſſed not greatly to loſe: & as for the fortifications, the Prince afore his departing, was content to quit them for one thouſand crownes, conſidering their vnablenes, wherof his receauer had alreadie receaued part. This anſwer the L. Eſſars did greatly miſlyke, which miſliking continued vntil the Princes returne out of England to Rochel, who being aduertized thereof, ſendeth the L. Reſſeus, and an other, to be fully informed of all ye matter. And finally to preuent al inconueniences which might enſue thereof, vnfit for the tyme & place of ſo great importance, thought good that the L. of Eſſars ſhould ſurrender yt gouernment into the hands of the L. Iarry nigh the ſands of Ollonne, who entered therein as gouernor the x. of Aprill 1586. & there remayned almoſt two yeares: who was enforced with ye L. Boyſduly to ſurrēder it to Lauerdine the 25. of March 1586. as it ſhall appeare more playnly hereafter.
               It is ſayd before, how the Prince of Conde (after the diſſolution of his army at Solonne in Vendomoys) through great daungers and difficultyes, repayred to the Iland of Gerneſey, and from thence into England, where he was receaued in moſt princelyke ſort of that gracious great Elizabeth Queene of England.
               
               During his ſoiorne there, many noblemen and gentlemen paſſed ouer the ſea into England, to accompany him home agayne, among whom was

the Lord Clermont. The Queene of England (after innumerable courteſies  and princelike intertaynment) ſent him home with a nauy: certayne ſhips alſo departed out of Rochel to meet the ſayd Prince, among whom was the Lord Pleſsis Gettey, who conducted two ſhippes, being then gouernour of the Ile of Rhe for the king of Nauarre. 
                  
               
               The ſayd Prince arriued at Rochel with that trayne the 3. of January, about eight a clocke in the night. This returne home, was no leſſe wonderfull  then ioyfull to all the Lords, who had gathered them ſelues, and retyred to Rochel, and Saynt Ihan D' angely, and to the inhabitantes of the townes and countrey, who ſhewed great reioyſing euery where, as hauing (by the ſpeciall gift of God) receaued this noble Prince, of whoſe health and preſeruation they had béen a long tyme doubtfull.
               The Prince being returned home ſo happely, ſoiorned not long at Rochel, but within fewe dayes tooke his iourney to S. Ihan, to prouide for the neceſſarie affayres, and to muſter the companies which were or could bee gathered.
               Fewe dayes before the Lord Laual was gone foorth out of Saint Ihan, with ſome companies to beſiege the Caſtle of Tours: but they which were within ſtayed not the ordinance which was comming from Saint Jhan, but yéelded themſelues without any delay. The ſayd Caſtle was rendered into the hand of the Lord Caze, to whom it did belong.
               At that time, to wit, after the comming of the Prince to Saint Ihan, the Lords, Captaines and companies, began to order themſelues vnder the ſayd Prince in forme of an armie, where with about the 17. of January he began to beſiege the Caſtle of Dampierre, pertayning to the Marſhall of Bets, nigh the towne of S. Ihan, ſituated vpon the riuer Botonne, within the which was a popiſh garriſon: which through their inſolencie and ordinarie roades vpon them of the religion, did drawe this ſtorme vppon their heads. The ſayd Caſtle being battered for certaine dayes, was ſurrendred about the 24. of Ianuary.
               There was found within that Caſtle great quantitie of corne and mooueable goods, which the people of the countrey round about had carried in. It was hard to let the Souldiers from the pillage, conſidering that they had ſo long ſuffered inſinite miſeries after the breaking of the armie in Vendomoys: for they which had reaſſembled themſelues in Poytow, had kept themſelues within the fauour of the townes of S. Ihan, and others, which were holden by them of the religion.
               The companies of the Prince (after the taking of Dampierre) were deuided into three parts, which went into thrée ſeuerall coaſts of the countrey. The firſt was the Lord S. Gelays, who followed the riuer Botonne, and tooke the townes thereupon ſituated, as Arnay, Monde
                        •
                     is, and Chizay.
               
               
                  
The Lord Ranques (with the fourth part of the companies) went toward Niort, and enterprized vppon the Caſtle of Saſſoy, and tooke it from  the hands of certaine Albaneſes, whom the Lord Malicorne (gouernour of Niort) had put there in garriſon. That caſtle by ſituation is very ſtrong: the garriſon did great iniuries to them of the religion about Rochel, Saint Jhan, Marans, other places and high wayes, by their ordinarie courſes. The Lord Ranques knowing the nature of the place, ſearched out the meanes to obtayne it: he accompanied him with nine or ten gentlemen and certaine reſolute Souldiers, to the number of two and twentie: he carried through the mariſh a little boate on a cart, wherewith he went through a channell which watereth the garden of the Caſtle. To this garden doth anſwer a gate of the ſayd Caſtle, through the which he thought to ſurpriſe the ſayd Caſtle. Notwithſtanding, the day before the taking of the ſame, the garriſon hauing intelligences of the purpoſe of the ſayd Lord Ranques, by one of the reformed religion, who entertayned himſelfe with them of the garriſon; they ſtopped that gate with brick, dung, and other things which were at hand, and doubled their gards, and ſo thought to haue well prouided the ſurprizing of the ſayd place. Notwithſtanding their thoughts beguiled them: for the ſayd Lord Ranques following his enterprize, applied a petaird againſt that gate which iſſued out into the garden: the ſayd péece opened the gate and brake their rampier, and gaue the alarum to the gariſon: whereof part ranne to the great gate, other were ſurpriſed within the Caſtell and ſlayne, other leapt ouer the walles. They who had retyred to the great gate, yeelded themſelues with promiſe of their liues: which thing was alſo performed. The place was by the ſayd Lord Ranques put in the keeping of Captayne Faueran and Vaunean, who within a while after being ſommoned by Captayne Merceur to render the ſame, and for not ſo doing, being threatned of the Canon, put the ſayd place in the hand of Malicorne gouernor of Niort.
               
               About the beginning of Aprill, the Lord Saynt Luke enterpriſed vpon the Ile of Oleron, where were certayne companies of the religion commaunded  by the Lord Aubigny, and Captayne Luuaille his Lieutenant. For to bring to paſſe his enterpriſe, bearing impaciently that neighbourhood, conuayed certayne companies into that Iland: & among theſe, was the regiment of Tierceline, conſiſting of foure hundred harquebuziers, fifty Muſkets, and two hundred pikes, reſolute Souldiers.
               The Prince aduertyzed, how this regiment of Tiercelyne had paſſed into that Iland, the Fryday before Eaſter, being the firſt of Aprill, he tooke his way to Marennes, nigh Browage, where he thought that the ſayd Tierceline was returned, and went all night to ſurpriſe him more eaſily: but finding them not, hee returned to Taillebourge, with the Lords Laual, and Boulay, and other Lords and Captaines who had accompanyed him.
               
                  
The 3. of Aprill being Eaſter day, the ſaid Prince had aduertiſement, that the ſaide Treceline, with his regiment, had repaſſed from Oleron, to Marennes, for to returne to Xainctes: vpon theſe intelligences, the ſaide  Prince departed, intending to ſtop their paſſage in a place, not farre from Xainctes. At his ariuing, there iſſued out of the towne about 16. or 20. men of armes, with a certaine number of Harquebuſiers, who were charged by the Lord Chargroys, which conducted the forrunners of the Lorde Laual, he paſſed them ſo hardly, that they could not retire within the reach of their Harquebuſiers, afore one of the enemies remayned on the place, and many were hurt. After this ſkirmiſh, the Prince ſeeing that Treceline remoued not that day (for that it was Eaſter day, or otherwiſe) retyred for the ſecond time to Taillebourg, without dooing any thing elſe. Treceline was aduertiſed, that his returne was ſpied, but hee made no account of it, truſting in the force of his regiment, and reſolued (as hee ſaide) to fight againſt whome ſoeuer would let his way, as well in the field as in a ſtrong place.
               So the fourth day of April, being Eaſter monday, departing out of Marennes, he tooke his iourney toward Xainctes, marching in good order with countenance of men reſolute to fight, whereof the Prince being admoniſhed, about two a clock in the after noone ſpeedilie tooke his horſe, accompanied with the Lorde Trimouille, his brother in law, the Lords Bowlay and Auantigny, to the number of 30. horſes, & ſo many Harquebuſiers of his garde, and ſome other who could bee found at hand: with that ſmall number, he went the ready way to Xainctes, where he found the enemie in the ſelfe ſame place, where he had ſtayed for him the day before, which was not much more than one thouſand paces from the ſuburbe: he found them too farre paſſed toward the towne, and were couered with hedges and ditches, yet he ſet vpon the rereware of them, whereat the firſt he laied on the ground about 30. or 40. of the enemies: the reſt put themſelues in battell aray, being fauored with the hedges and high way. In the firſt onſet, the horſe of the Lord Trimouille, (who did lead the aduenturers) was beaten downe with the ſhot of a muſket, and he alſo vnder, who was in no leſſe danger then the Lord Batardiere, which being ſtrooke with an Harquebuſh ſhot in the ſhoulder, was ſlaine in that place: the Lord Chanterelles alſo was wounded, and dyed ſhortly after, with Captaine Trauarre who being wounded on the head, died alſo ſhortly after: the Lord Auantigny was hurt in the hand and in the knee. The Lord Laual, who with great ſpeede was gone to fetch his companie (which was at Port d' Anneaulx, and ſcatteringly lodged) approaching to the lane of this ſkirmiſh, yet timely enough, galloping with 35. horſes of his, by the commaundement of the Prince, ſet vpon them on the ſide of the hedges, ayming ſtil to the Colonells Enſigne, for there was no more, which was compaſſed and couered with a ſquadron

of Pikes, whom he diſcomfited: after he had ſpent all their ſhot, he fought hand to hand with him who carried the Enſigne, which at length hee gaue  ouer to him, thinking to ſaue himſelfe with ſlight. The Enſigne taken, the Souldiours were quicklie put in diſorder and diſcomfited, although that they had been often ſupported, & vpholden by them of the citie. There remained vpon the place about three ſkore; many were wounded, Captaine Peſchays was taken, Tiercelin himſelfe was hurt in the arme.
               The Lord Laual had three bretheren, whereof the Lord Taulay, a little before died of ſicknes at Saint Ihan: the Lord Sailly, his third brother in that ſkirmiſh was hurt in the head, whereof he died: the morrow after, the Lord Rieulx his other brother, alſo was wounded in the belly with a pike, whereof hee dyed the ſixte day of the ſame moneth. The Lord Chargroys, Lieutenant of the Lord Laual, was hurt with ſhot in the knee: the Lord Monſche likewiſe in the Legge: fewe Souldiours of the Princes garde were hurt, and few ſlaine.
               During this ſkirmiſh, the Prince hauing gathered his companie together, ſet on a freſh vpon ſuch of the enemies as flocked together againe: but eſpeciallie vpon the horſemen of the enemie, who made ſhew to aduance themſelues. The night interrupted the fight, and gaue occaſion to the Prince to retire, who carried away the ſpoyle and armour of that regiment, with the Colonels Enſigne: the Victorie was fayre, but bloudy, by reaſon of the death of the Lords aboue ſaid. The Lord Rieulx ſpake to the very laſt breath, and rendered a notable teſtimonie to all them that were preſent, of his faith and generoſitie, and of his good nurture which hee had learned in the ſchoole of godlines, ſo that it may be ſaide of him, that he dyed a true Chriſtian Knight.
               The Prince conceaued a marueilous griefe for the death of theſe two Lords, but eſpecially the Lord Laual their brother, who conceaued ſuch ſorrow thereby, that he fell ſick and dyed eyght dayes after, to wit, the 11. of Aprill he was opened, and there was ſound an apoſtume in his head, full of yellow ſtinking water: ſo in few dayes died theſe foure Lords and brothers, to the great griefe and heauines of all good men: they were buried in the Temple, which is in the Caſtell Taillebourg.
               
               Now we haue to ſpeake of the King of Nauarre, who did nothing all this time, but onely in great ſilence, viewed whereto this voyage of his enemies would come. For firſt perceiuing that the Leaguers had a ſpeciall quarrell to him, becauſe they knew him to be in their way, and a ſpeciall ſtoppe of all their trayterous intents; they feared greatly his prudent counſell and wiſedome. He made his complaynt to the King, aunſwered to the articles of the declaration of his enemies, exhorted the King to take heede of them, proff
                     •
                  red him his ſeruice, prayed him to let him alone with them, for if it pleaſed his Maieſtie to giue him leaue, hee

doubted not, but with his owne power hee would ſo chaſtice them, that they ſhould be an example to their poſteritie. 
               
               The King by letters and meſſengers, exhorted and willed him to quiet himſelfe, to ſee his Edict of pacification to be obſerued in his gouernement, ſhewed him that their cauſe is but one, that hee ſeeth the intents of the ſayd Leaguers well enough, and truſteth that GOD ſhall make him able to repreſſe their madnes, proteſted that he had care of the ſaid K. of Nauarre, as of his own ſelfe, and held him as a deere brother, the true & rightfull heire of his Crown, in caſe he ſhould die without iſſue.
               It is ſaid alſo, how the King notwithſtanding this, was driuen to ioyne with them whom he had condemned before, and to alowe and iuſtifie their treaſons, was enforced through the pernitious counſell of his mother; and not only enforced, but induced to take condition
                     •
                   and lawes at their handes, to aſſiſt and arme his enemies whom he had ſo declared and iudged few dayes before, euen traytors againſt his perſon, ſtate, Crowne, and life, againſt them I ſay whome hee had proteſted to bee his faithfull ſubiects, good brothers, and coſins, & had receiued vnder his protection.
               It is ſaid alſo how the King of Nauarre before had forewarned the King to beware of ſuch aſſociation, ſhewing him the euil which would ſurely enſue, and at length certifieth the King that hee had admitted a higher power, a maſter and controuler ouer himſelfe, and that hee had weakned himſelfe, and ſtrengthened his enemies. Howe hee went to Saint Ihan de Cadeioux into Languedock, there to aduiſe of his affaires, and his friends, with the Prince of Conde, the Duke Monmorencie, and other Nobles, where they concluded vpon the defenſiue.
               The King of Nauarre returned into Gaſcoyne, kept himſelfe in ſilence, abiding all the iniuries that might be poſſible, the preparations, braggings, boaſtings, & attempts of his enemies, euen to the great imminent danger of his perſon, before that he would take armes in hande. Frō 
                  Gaſcoyne he went to Bergerak, in Perigrod, as a time of peace, where hauing ſoiourned for a time, he tooke his iourney to Montauban, knowing very well that the armie conducted by the Duke de Maine was againſt him, and already in Perigord, rauaging, pilling, ſpoyling, and waſting all that they came by. From thence he returned into Gaſcoyne againe aboute the latter end of Ianuarie. 1586.
               And whereas he knew well, that if he had ioyned all his forces with the power of the Prince, and the Vicount Turenne, hee had been able to ſtop the way of the Duke de Maine, that he had not walked ſo long at his pleaſure as he did. But that wiſe, prudent, and moderate Prince perceiuing by the attempts of that armie, the qualities of the leader, and the diſorder that was among them; but ſpecially hauing Gods fauour on his ſide: And ſeeing yt Gods curſe and wrath was powred on his enemies ſide,

he neuer thought it meete to trouble himſelfe nor his friends about that accurſed companie, and villayno
                     •
                  s rabble of rakehells, knowing that  God himſelfe would diſſipate them, & clothe them wt diſhonour as with a garment; he knew wel alſo that they did no more but to weaken their faction, in ſpending in vaine the large liberalitie, and intollerable expences of the Prieſts and Monks, who entertayned the ſaid armie.
               At length the King of Nauarre determined to paſſe the riuer of Garonne, to repaire into Poytow, to viſit the places of his gouernement about  the riuer of Loyre, and being returned from Montauban into Gaſcoyne, the Marſhal Matignon had beſieged Caſtets, a Caſtel ſituated vpon the riuer Garonne, pertayning to the Lord Fabas, about the moneth of Februarie.
               The King of Nauarre, hauing knowledge thereof, accompanied with two or three hundred horſes, and eighteene hundred Harquebuſiers, did raiſe the ſiege, and dined in the ſaide Caſtle that day, in witnes that he accompliſhed his purpoſe for that time.
               The K. of Nauarre from thence ſent al his companies to gariſons, and tooke his way to Bearne, to ſee the Ladie his ſiſter, and to take order for all neceſſarie things, concerning the ſecuritie and preſeruation of the townes and countrey.
               That being done, he tooke his iourney to Nerak, and paſſing through Eauſe, (which is his) prouided for the ſafety of the ſame in good time (for otherwiſe it was in danger to be loſt) and for that purpoſe there hee ſoiourned 2. daies.
               There newes was brought vnto him, that the Duke de Mayne haſted to let his paſſage ouer the riuer Garonne: for all that hee tooke his waye to Nerak, where he ſoiourned a whole day more to take order for the ſafetie of the towne. Thereunto more aduiſement was giuen him, that the ſayd Duke de Mayn was at Villeneufue d' Agenoys intending to ſtop his paſſage ouer the riuer Garonne. There was in apparance occaſiō enough, to cauſe the ſayd King to aduance and haſten extraordinarylie his voyage, but notwithſtanding, deſpiſing all the indeuours of the ſayd Duke, hee would change nothing of his purpoſe: but to the contrary, hauing done at Nerak all his affayres with leaſure, departed not thence vntill that it was alreadie farre in the day.
               From Nerak he tooke his iourney to Barbaſe, and continued as though he would goe to Caſtelialoux. Many did carefully muſe the day before what way he would take, vncertaine whether it would be through Caumont, or Saint Bazile, or through the Mas de verdune, but they coulde know nothing at all vntill they came within two leagues of Caſt
                        •
                     lialoux: For then being in the middle of the heath, he declared the way and order which would be kept in his paſſing ouer the riuer, hee ſeperated the men

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
of warre who accompanyed him: he kept with him about 20. gentlemen well horſed and 10. Souldiers for his garde, with whom he went toward Cammont. He appointed the Lord Roque for the conducting of the reſt,  which were two or 3. hundred horſes, among whom there was but 15. or 16. wel armed and horſed, and about 15. Harquebuſiers of his gard: hee commaunded the ſaid Lord Roque to paſſe at Saint Bazile, which thing he did without any let, although the marſhall Matignon was but at 3. leagues from thence. The King being ariued at Cammont, although he knew the Duke de Mayne to be within 2. leagues frō that place: notwithſtanding there he dined with as much leaſure, as any man could doe in the greateſt and moſt aſſured peace; and after dinner paſſed the riuer without any let or hindrance of his men.
               The King of Nauarre came the morrow after to Saynt Foy, which is a towne vppon Dordonne. The Lord Roque alſo with all them which had followed him, aryued there about two houres after. His Maieſty ſoiorned there, and at Bergerak a whole moneth. Theſe bee two townes ſituated vppon Dordonne: Bergerak is great and rich: Saynt Foy is leſſer a great deale, yet very riche, becauſe of the traffike vpon the ſayd riuer: S. Foy is beneath Bergerak three leagus: Chaſtilion beneath Saint Foy three leagues, and aboue Liborne, a great, ſtrong, and rich towne about three leagus of. Bergerak and Saynt Foy receaued the Goſpel aboue fifty years ago by the man of God Edmond Lauoy, who ſuffered at Bourdeaux for the teſtimony of Chriſt. Theſe two townes haue alwayes euer ſince perſiſted in the confeſſion of the Goſpell. in theſe 2. towns the King of Nauarre remayned (as is aboue ſayd) a whole moneth, expreſſely to ſee the countenance of his enemies. All that while his enemies were within 3. leagues of him, hee went dayly to hunting, and none of his enemyes that euer durſt ſhew their faces: which thing did ſhew euidently, that de Mayne had ſo litle corage in him, that hee durſt not let him to take his pleaſures when he was willing ſo to do, much leſſe to execute his enterpriſes, and proued for wayghty and neceſſary affayres.
               It is ſayd before, how that by the aduiſe of de Mayne, Guyze came to Paris, to require helpe for his brother. For as a conſcience guylty of greeuous crimes is alwayes timorous, and ſuſpecteth all things: ſo the woorm of the conſcience gnawed theſe men, and feared them ſo, that hee apprehended Gods iuſtice: and ſuppoſed that all them of the reformed religion in France (out of hand) would oppreſſe the Duke de Mayne his Brother.
               Therefore hee perſwaded the king to diuert theyr forces, and to aſſault them in all quarters of the Realme. Whereupon dyuers armies were prepared for diuers countries, and namely the Marſhall Biron was appointed for Guyenne.
               
               The Leaguers vnderſtanding that the King of Nauarre had paſſed Garonne,
                  
did greatly haſt the voyage of the ſayd Marſhall Biron. The inhabitantes of Niort hauing ſold themſelues to the Leaguers to worke iniquity,  made great ſute to haue that expedition performed out of hand, to the end, that the townes and countries of Marans, Annix, Rochel, and other partes of Xainctonge and Poytow, might bee ſpoyled and waſted before the ariuing of the king of Nauarre into that countrey, whom they knew (by his valour and wiſedome) was able to diſappoint al their attempts.
               The king of Nauarre vnderſtanding of theſe new preparations, and knowing, yea ſeeing with his eies that the moſt miſerable vilages of Guyenne were good ynough to occupy that army, and that the tyme of the infallible  diſſipation was at hand, hauing prouided for the principall places ſufficiently, and vnderſtanding of the readines of the army, which was to be lead by the Marſhal Biron, the ſaid king of Nauarre would rather ſhew a proofe of his valour and courage in oppoſing himſelfe to that valiant, old, and experienced Captayne, then to ſeeme to ſtriue with that effeminate, and ſlauiſh army.
               Therefore departing from Saynt Foy in the end of Aprill, and paſſing through Perigord, Engomoys, Poytow, & Landimoys, went to viſit the places of his gouernement vpon the riuer of Loyre.
               
               Whileſt the army for Guyenne is a preparing, and the king of Nauarre maketh his progreſſe into Poytow, and the townes vpon Loyre, the King vnderſtanding, that in the execution of the edict of October, and of the declaration thereof, giuen in December laſt, touching the ſeazing on the goods of them of the religion: and others, which did beare arms againſt the League, many creditors & others which pretended right in the goods, made claime to thē, ſo that the officers could haue no gayne thereof to the kings vſe and aduantage. Therefore the king about the 26. of Aprill ſetteth forth an edict, that the ſayd goods ſhall be ſeazed and ſould, or geuen to farme to the kinges vſe, and that after ſuch as did pretend any tytle to the ſame goods, hauing prooued theyr right, they then to bee ſatiſfied vppon the fruits of the yeares following.
               And for aſmuch as ſome were returned home from the countries, where  they had rep
                     •
                  yred, according to the edict of Iuly laſt paſt, the King the thirtéenth of May, ſent commaundement to all his officers, that ſuch perſonnes bee apprehended, and their proceſſe made and executed: alſo that theyr goods mouable and immouable bee ſeazed vpon to the kinges vſe, for the charges of the holy warre. During the preparations of this warre, the Pirats of Browage with theyr courſes did greatly hinder the traffike vpon the Sea, which cauſed them of Rochel to barre their hauen, in ſinking old ſhips in the mouth of the riuer, repleniſhed with great ſtones for to make them ſinke in the bottome of the water.
               For the performance of this, the Rochellers prepared a nauy of twenty

ſhips well furniſhed, three Galiots, with other ſmall veſſels to the number of 35. or 40. in all. Ouer this army commaunded the Lord Saynt Gelays, aſſiſted with Captayne Gardeleau: and a number alſo of Gentlemen  and Captaynes, aſwell ſtrangers as inhabitants of Rochel.
               
               The Lord Saynt Luke vppon the aduertizement which he receaued of this enterprize, with all diligence prepared himſelfe, and would haue ſtayed all the Galleyes which he had before receaued from Bourdeaux, but few remayned there: notwithſtanding hee made a Fort vpon the banke nigh the place where they would barre the ſayd hauen: which thing profited him a little, for in the keeping of the ſame hee loſt a great number of men.
               Whileſt this was a dooing at Browage, the King of Nauarre returned from Poytow, and fro the Coaſt of Loyre, and entered into Rochel the laſt day of May (being the Lords day) with a marueilous reioy ſing of al men, which receaued much comfort of his preſence there: for the ſayd King had alwayes no leſſe vertuouſly than happely oppoſed himſelfe to all the attempts and endeuours of all the armies of the enemies, which had béen ſent againſt them.
               The ſame day the ſayd King of Nauarre embarked himſelfe, to goe to viſit the Nauie which was before Browage, where he ſoiorned ſome dayes.
               In the meane while there had arriued certayne ſhippes to the Lord S. Luke gouernour of Browage, who with them went about to let that enterprize; but all was in vayne: ſo that without any great loſſe, all the ſhips appoynted for that exployt, were brought in and ſu
                     •
                  ke in the mouth of the Hauen, according to the deliberation taken. So the chanell by theſe means was barred in ſuch a ſort, as the Hauen hath béen in a manner rendered vnprofitable. Notwithſtanding that, the Lord S. Luke hath beſtowed much labour to open it, and at the charges of the inhabitants of the Ilands, he hath drawne out foure or fiue veſſels. Yet is that Hauen alwayes ſuſpected vnto ſhips, and they néede to ſet markes to the ſhips that will enter in, leaſt they take hurt.
               This being done, the Nauie returned to Rochel, without any loſſe, except of one Captayne named Mercur, and fewe Souldiers which were taken in the ſkirmiſhes that were made at the Fort aboue mentioned.
               About the fourth of Iune, the King being returned to Rochel with this Nauie, and vnderſtanding that the Marſhall Byron with this armie approached,  and that Luſignen, Mele and Chizay (Townes not defenſible) had yéelded themſelues, tooke his iourney to Marans, to conſider the places whether théy were able to make head againſt that armie.
               The armie lead by the Marſhall Byron did conſiſt of twelue hundred horſemen, and foure thouſand footemen with a conuenient furniture. This armie was very ſmall; the cauſe was, that the King (at the commaundement

of the Leaguers) had deuided his forces into ſundrie armies for ſundrie Prouinces, to diuert the forces of them of the religion from the Duke  
                  de Mayne, as is afore ſaid.
               The King of Nauarre hauing well viewed the Forts of the Iles of Maran, concluded to defend the places agaynſt that armie,
               The 7. day of Iune came two ſorts of deputies appoynted to require of the King of Nauarre two contrary things: namely, the 
                     ••
                  putie of Rochel required his Maieſtie that hee would cauſe the Caſtle of Maran to bée raſed, for the reaſons which they then alleaged. On the other ſide, the Gentlemen of Annix required him not to doo ſo, for as much as the Papiſts would take occaſion to doo the like to their houſes. The King of Nauarre anſwered to them both, that thereupon he would take aduiſe.
               Whileſt theſe things were a dooing, the King of Nauarre had aduertiſement that the Duke de Mayne diſtreſſed Chastilion: whereupon he aſſembled as great a companie of horſemen as he could, and with the Prince determined to reſcue that place: which he could not bring to paſſe, by reaſon of the aduancing of Byron and his armie. For the armie of Byron was alreadie aduanced to Niort, and hauing no néerer place than Maran to aſſault, made his reckoning not to beſiege it, but onely to fright the inhabitants and about fiftie ſouldiers, which he knewe to be lodged in the forts: and in the greater of the ſayd forts there was not aboue nine or ten Souldiers; the ſayd forts being very ill furniſhed, which made him beléeue that ſuch a ſmall companie would not withſtand him, but ſurrender the ſayd forts.
               The feare indéede was great among many, whereof ſome of them had alreadie retyred to Rochel. But the Lord Iarry (gouernour of the place) and his Souldiers (with ſome of the inhabitants) tooke courage: many did deſpayre of the ſuccour of the King of Nauarre, whom they thought to haue paſſed into Gaſcoyne. They reſolued notwithſtanding to hold againſt that armie. And on the monday the 7. of Iune at night, they ſent meſſengers to Rochel, to demaund ſuccour both of men and munition of warre, and of certaine péeces. They of Rochel anſwered, that they could not conueniently ſpare men; as for munition and peeces they would willingly let them haue, ſo that they might haue ſecuritie to be payed the price that it coſt them.
               This refuſall of men did ſo feare the inhabitants, that euen that night many did retyre, and carried away the reſt of their goods.
               But on the Wedneſday morning about foure of the clocke arriued from the King of Nauarre two Gentlemen, to wit, the Lord Fouqueroles, and Valiere, whom he had ſent in great diligence: they calling the gouernour, the Miniſter of the place, and ſome of the inhabitants, aſſured them that the King of Nauarre was comming in great diligence for to ſuccour them,

and that he would arriue euen the ſame day: and after they had reſted a while, the ſayd Lords went to view the Holds and entrings into the Ilands, and ſo likewiſe the day following. 
               
               The 12. day of Iune, the King of Nauarre came with fewe in companie, but his troupes followed him apace.
               The 13. 14. and 15. dayes of that moneth, there entered braue companies of Souldiers, as they of the Lords Puelles, Granuile, Drakuille and S. Foy, Normands. There entered alſo Barache, the regiment of Sorlus, the Lord of Neufuy, vnder fiue Enſignes, for the moſt part Perigordins and Limoſins, yet very well trained in Military Diſcipline. All theſe companies were placed in the forts by the King of Nauarre, namely, the Lord Puelles was in the Bastile, Drakuille in Beauregard, Barache at Barnay, Granuile with Saint Foy, were put in the Brune, and Repentne on the way to Rochel: Captaine Plaune with his companie of Poytiuines, was placed at Poyneuf, Captaine Saint Ihan at Clouſie, Captaine Treille in Brault: there was a company of Rochellers, few in number, but men reſolute vnder Captaine Mot, they were put to keepe the entrey of the mill in the Marſh.
               The Lord Iarrie gouernour of Mans, vndertooke to keepe the Forts Paulee, Allowete, and Botsblauk, with his companie, and ſome of the inhabitants. The King of Nauarre commaunded all to obey the Lord Fonquereles, who ſhewed a marueilous care and diligence in the ſame ſiege.
               The 10. day of Iulie, the Marſhall Byron with a companie of horſes,  came himſelfe to view the Bastile, but approaching a little too nigh, he was ſaluted out of ſome ſmall forts, which the Lorde Puelles had placed vpon the high way; hee had his thumb and ſome other fingers taken off with a ſhot; the ſame ſhot did greatly (as it was reported) hurt a Gentleman, who was by him.
               All that weeke, the enemie did none other thing, but aduaunced himſelfe toward the Bastile, ſet his gabions nigh the farme of Angle, there to place three pieces to batter the fort of Bastile. In the mean time, the King of Nauarre did ſhew a wonderful diligence, as wel in fortifying the Iland, as in bringing companies to make head to the enemie at euerie comming in, and alſo in prouiding of victuals and munition of warre, as well out of Rochel, as out of the Ile of Rhe, and out of Luſſon, whence hee brought great ſtoare of corne, meale and wine. He had a great ſhip out of the Ile of Rhe, well furniſhed, hauing two great pieces before, to defend the Fort Paulce, he had alſo ſeauen great pieces caried from Rochel, which were deuided in the Forts, to wit, one in the Brune, two in the Bastile, one at Beauregarde, two at Paulce, and two remained at the Caſtell.
               The 22. of Iuly, was ſeene that the enemie paſſed through the Marſhes of Beauregard, and comming foorth out of a little Iland named Cigogne,
                  
began to ſet vp a fort in the middle of the Marſhes, diſtant from the firme land about fiue hundred paces, on the other ſide, our men made a trench and  a rampier of earth vpon the end of the Marſh, of the length of fiue hundred paces, flanking the ſame with little Forts and Baſtions. On the other ſide the enemie ſet vp foure other forts, ſomewhat more aduaunced than the firſt, and from them did ſhoote ouer the reeds at all aduenture, without dooing any hurt, ſauing that the third day after they hurt a Souldiour on the foote, as he went downe to the Trenches. The next day after, they killed another as he was playing at cardes vpon the ſide of the Trenches, the which being reported by the Miniſter, and admoniſhed to goe to publique praiers, which were appoynted to be made at the Fort of the Lord Drakuille, he regarded it not, ſo that as the miniſter returned from praiers, the ſaid Souldier was ſhot through with a muſket, and preſentlie departed, before that the Miniſter had any time to admoniſh and comfort him. The ſame day, the enemie with great diligence ſet vp a great fort, within ſixe ſcore paces of our trenches, it was made with great pieces of timber, fagots and earth, and hogſheads filled with earth, which were diſpoſed by ſeauen, ſet one againſt another; that fort might be of 30. foot ſquare, and 15. in heigt, and for to bring all the ſtuffe from the Iland Cagogne, they cauſed the water of the Mariſhes to riſe aboue a foote in heigt, by the meanes of opening the ſluſes and mills, about Fontenay and Niort. This thing our men did helpe alſo, for becauſe of the great heate, they feared that the water would drie too faſt, and ſo giue too eaſie acceſſe to the enemie through the Marſh, for they ſtopped the ſluces below nigh the ſea, therefore the water courſe being opened aboue, and ſtopped beneath, did riſe in a ſhort ſpace. By this meanes the enemie had opportunitie to bring a very great Culuerine, with other ſmall pieces, wherewith they began to ſhoote vppon our men, & vpon the houſe of Beauregard the laſt day of Iuly, about two a clock, without dooing any hurt to any man.
               This battering, notwithſtanding did amaze a great many, becauſe they neuer thought that they would haue brought ſuch pieces; for it was bruted, and euen the Papiſts had giuen out, that the enemie would raiſe the ſiege: but by this it appeared, that he meant in good earneſt.
               For all the great diligence and care of the King of Nauarre, in prouiding for victuals, there was ſo many mouthes who liued of the ſtoare, that they who did beſt ſeruice, oftentimes dined worſt. For during the ſpace of eight or ten dayes, they had not in a day but one or two loaues of Barley bread; for other corne was not ripe as yet in that countrey, which cauſed that ſcarſitie. There were yet two diſcommodities which vrged them greatly; the one was an extreame heate, which continued ten weekes and more: the other 
                     〈◊〉
                   that in 
                     •
                  he night▪ eſpecially the Gnats were ſo importunate, that many were ſtung with them, euen with bloud drawing in the

face and other partes of the bodie which were vncouered, ſo that the ſtockens of linnen cloth, could not defend them from ſuch moleſta
                     •
                  ions.
               Some dayes before, the King of Nauarre had taken order, that one of  the Galiots of Rochel came within the hauen of Marans, with a long Culuerine, bearing the armes of Britayne, which in the former warres, the Rochelers had taken out of the Caſtell of Marans, which afterward was called Chaſsebiron. That euening it was had out of the Galiot, and carried with horſes & men halfe the way to Beauregard, but there it was ouerthrowne, and one of the wheeles broaken: from thence it was drawne vpon rowles, and being placed againſt the fort of the enemie, in ſuch ſort as it could not bee indomaged, did them good ſeruice. For the 2. of Auguſt, about ſixe a clock in the morning, the enemie brought downe the water from  
                  Niort, a double Cannon vpon two boates, and with them began to ſhoote againſt the Fort Paulee. There they did no other hurt, but ſhooting within a ſhort piece of yron, they did breake it about a foote, and the pieces ſtroake off the arme of the Gunner, and did hurt two Souldious; they hurt alſo a Souldiour of the Ship, who did ſhew great endeuour to ſhoote at the enemie, with a number of Harquebuſes and Muſkets.
               And below the fort Paulee, the Lord Iarry with his harquebuſiers, but ſpecially with the long fowling pieces of the inhabitantes of Maran, who did inceſſantly ſhoote vpon the boates, and alſo into the coppes nigh the riuer, did ſo moleſt the enemy, that about nine a clocke they were enforced to forſake their boats, and theyr double Canon, which remayned in the midle of the Riuer, vntill that hauing tyed the beats with coardes, they drew them away vp the riuer, and did no other thing therewith: for although they might haue endomaged the fort by a long battering, yet had it béen impoſſible vnto them to approach to it to ſeaze vpon, conſidering that the riuer was ſtaked thicke, and the ſhot fell vppon them as thicke, if they diſcouered themſelues neuer ſo litle, ſo they were not ſuffered to appeare within their reache. While they drew theyr boats, there was a raſh fellow to occupy our harquebuziers, which did diſcouer himſelfe armed a great while in the ſight of our men, playing with his two hand ſword: and although they ſhot an infinit number of pellets at him, yet was he not hit but of two, and was very litle hurt, as it was afterward reported.
               The third of Auguſt there was a great alarum geuen at the trenches of Beauregard, for the enemy made a countenance to aduance forward vpon vs.
               At midnight wee ſet vpon the towers of the caſtell with great lanterns of light, becauſe that the enemie had great fires in all their watches, and a mighty fire vpon the vaultes of S. Ihan of Lauerſay nigh the lodging of the Marſhall Biron, half a league off from Baſtile. At that tyme was there meanes made for the agreement betweene the king of Nauarre, and the

Marſhall Biron generall af the Popiſh army, which was concluded vpon the fifth day of the ſame Auguſt. So that the night following the enemy  began to draw pieces out of their fort: and at the breaking of the day put fire to it, which there continued the ſpace of ſixe moneths, hauing caught vnder the earth to thoſe great pieces of timber, wherewith it was made euen from the very foundation. The compoſition was very honorable, and to the great aduantage of the king of Nauarre: for it was firſt agreed, that the Marſhall Biron ſhould lead away his army beyond the riuer, without attempting vppon Tonnay Charante, a place very weake, which hee di
                     •
                   hold for the king of Nauarre.
               
               Secondly, that Marans ſhould remayne free for the traffike.
               Thirdly, that the king of Nauarre ſhould haue a Gentleman of his in the caſte
                     •
                  l, with certayne number of ſouldiers to hold the inhabitantes of both religions in the ſame liberty which they had before the warre. This agreement they of Fontenay and Niort would not hold, and neuer ceaſed to make warre vntill that they were well puniſhed: for wicked robbers did continually iſſue out of Fontenay, Maillezayes & Niort, hauing for their Captayne a certayne Maſſe Prieſt, named Sir Merye, pariſh Prieſt of Ronde, who did dayly robbe Marchants and trauellers of their goods, and often times of their liues, vntill they were reduced vnder the handes of the king of Nauarre.
               
               The ſeuenth of the ſame moneth, the king of Nauarre came from Rochel, when it was very late, entered the Iles of Maran, by the fort Brune, and from thence to the Baſtile, viewed all the fortes and trenches on that ſide: and about ten in the night did ſuppe at the ſigne of the Moone.
               The eight day hee deuided his companies, ſending ſome into Poytow, other into Annis to refreſh themſelues, whileſt the L. Byron lead his army into Xainctonge: ſo that armie began to bee broken agaynſt Reeds and Ruſhes of Marans, doing afterward nothing: but within a while after by litle and litle it was ſcattered and reduced to nothing.
               The Papiſtes ſpake diuerſly according to their paſſion, as though this armie had not done what they might haue done. But the truth is, that the king of Nauarre had prouided ſuch a good order within the Iland, and that there was ſuch a number of men of valour, that the Lord Biron could not do otherwiſe then he did, except he would haue thruſt his mē to the ſlaughter without endomaging much his enemy.
               Secondly, the mariſhes which at that tyme were wont to bee drye, were yet full of water euen a foot high, for the cauſes aboue recited.
               Thirdly, the men of warre haue made fortes at euery entrance into the Iland, furniſhed with good and reſolued men: for they were about one hundred of braue and 
                     〈…〉
                   gentlemen, making about two hundred good horſes, a
                     •
                  le to oppoſe themſelues agaynſt the enemy, if he had attempted

to enter. Alſo the enemyes had to goe aboue fifteene hundred paces in the Marſh, not aboue fiue in a ranke, all diſcouered to our men who were in the forts. 
               
               Fourthly, the Mariſh was full of ſteppes, which the Cattell made in winter: ſo that if the horſemen had waded, the one foote had ſoonke very deepe, and the other would haue ſtayed vppon the firme ground, with a great number of Galthrops, which were caſt in diuers places. Such was the ſtate of Maran, when the compoſition was made. The king of Nauarre left the Lord Iarry gouernor there as before, with charge to warre agaynſt no man if they ſhould not warre agaynſt him.
               The Lord Nemours (whom the King had ſent thither to commaund ouer the men of armes) ſtayed not there long: for hee was commaunded by the king of Nauarre to retyre in Poytow, and after went to Bruant.
               
               Few dayes after the diſtributing of the companies out of Marans, captayne Lommeau diſcouered the money of the tributes & Impoſt of Poytow, conducted toward Loyre by certayne Albaneſes: and ſome gentlemen with Popiſh ſouldiers of the countrey, whom they ſet vpon: but they ſaued them ſelues in a Priory. Not farre from thence he compaſſed them immediatly with certayne companies.
               The king of Nauarre being aduertiſed thereof at Rochel, departed ſpeedily, and cauſed the great Culuerine of Marans to bee brought before the Priory, which was ſtrong without canon: they within yeelded themſelues by compoſition, which was, that they ſhould goe away ſafe, leauing behind them ſix thouſand crownes, which was the charge of their conuoy.
               As the king of Nauarre vſed a wonderfull diligence in going thether, ſo was his diligence no leſſe in retyring thence, and commaunded all the companyes to do the like, knowing well that ye enemie (which was yet at Morye, and about Fontenay with his armie) would not faile to ſet on him; which thing did happen. But the ſayd king of Nauarre had already repaſſed the fort of Brault, which thing all his companies did not, for many remaining at Luſſon to refreſh themſelues, and to fare French-like, were charged and put to flight, ſome were ſlaine, ſome taken priſoners, moſt of them ſaued them ſelues, leauing behind them their ſtuffe and baggage, and among them captayne Lommeau.
               
               It is ſayd before, that by the aduiſe of the Duke of Guyze, diuers armies were appoynted for diuers prouinces, and namely the Duke Ioyeuſe for Languedock, where he entering with a power tooke the Cities of Lodeue and Saint Ponce: hée tooke alſo Monteſquion: but Marueiolx hee tooke by treaſon. In all theſe places he committed incredible cruelties, and ſuch as it were needfull to find out new wordes to deſcribe them. But as God is a iuſt reuenger of wronges, ſo did he not ſuffer theſe crueltyes long vnpuniſhed, but ſhewed tokens that his iuſtice is neither fayned nor idle,

nor his hand ſhortned in puniſhing ſuch inſolent Tyrants: For after diuers and manifold exceſſes and iniuries done in the countrey, he beſieged the mas Saint Puelles, the weakeſt, moſt miſerable, and leaſt defenſible of  all the places of Loragoys: there was he ſo ſhamefully beaten & put back, that after they had ſlaine him thirty Captaines, and fiue hundred Harquebuſieres, they ſcattered his regiments, and ſo leauing his credit behinde him cracked among men of valour, was faine to returne home as well as he could, well chaſtized, to tell newes of his good ſpeede to his Maſter.
               Shortly after, the Nobilitie of Languedock aduiſed better by the proud and inſolent outragiouſnes of the man and of his companies, and taught by the execution of Gods iuſtice vpon that rabble of ſauage robbers, aſſembled the ſtates of that prouince, at Caſtelnawdarry, where they concluded neuer to meddle anie more with the leaguers, neither to proceede any more by the way of warre and vyolence agaynſt them of the Religion.
               It is ſayd before how the Duke d'Eſpernon was appointed for Daulphine and Prouance, and the ſonne of Ioyeuſe for Auuergne. The Lord Eſpernon therefore entring into Daulphine with his power, had better ſucceſſe: for firſt he tooke Valance, Tallard, and Guileſlie from the league, and reduced them to the Kings obedience. He tooke alſo many townes from them of the Religion, as Sorges and others: hee was more moderate and voyde of crueltie and ſauagenes, yet at length ſeeing that as he had taken one place he left andther, and that warre was an endleſſe thing there, and that with long toyle of warre, and lack of money, his army was ſcattered, (as at length it went inuiſible) leauing his brother the Lord Valete there with ſuch forces as he had left, to doe what he were able: ſo he went to the King againe (and not without cauſe) conſidering he was one of his moſt faithfulleſt about his perſon.
               The young Ioyeuſe in Auuergne walked at liberty, tooke his pleaſures, ſpent the Kings money francklie, and when that was done, for lacke of more, returnd from whence he came as wiſe as when he went out.
               Thus we ſee that within the compaſſe of a yeare, 6. armies haue beene ſent (with great preparation of all neceſſarie things) into ſeuerall prouinces, to warre againſt heauen and earth, and to oppoſe themſelues againſt all that is good and godly, and how they are all fallen to pieces, as though they had been ſmitten downe by the hand of the God of armies, as the Lapithes and Centaures are reported by the Poets.
               During theſe lamentable tempeſts, the which did ſo toſſe France with theſe ſixe armyes in diuers prouinces: The Princes and certaine  cities in Germanie moued with compaſſiō, pittying the miſerable ſubuerſion and ranſaking of France their next neighbours: ſent an Ambaſſage

to the King, to perſwade him (if it were poſſible) to extinguiſh that cō
                  buſtion raiſed by the league, & by peace to reſtore the ſtate of his Realme  to ſome good ſtay.
               The Ambaſſadours were ſent by the Princes Electors of Saxony, Palatine and Brandenbourg, and by other Princes of the ſacred empire as the Noble Princes Ioachim Frederick, Marqueſſe of Brandenbourg, and adminiſtrator of Magdebourg, Iuly of Brundſwik, and Lunebourg, William Lewis, and George Landgraues of Heſsen, brethren: Ioachim earneſt Prince of Chatten, with the foure principal imperial cities, Straſbourg, Vlmes, Merſebourg, and Fr
                        •
                     nckefort, with the ambaſſadours of Vtten and Iſſenbourg, they al came, except they of Vtten & Iſſenbourg, which vpon certaine vrgent affayres went back (deliuering their cōmiſſions to their fellowes) to Saint Germain in Laye, & had audience the tenth of October.
               Firſt, they offer the commendations and ſeruices of their Princes and commonwealths vnto him.
               Secondly, they recite how they had beene aduertized, euen by the letters of Mandolet, gouernour of Lyons for the King, that his Maieſties intention had been to preſerue the edict of pacification, ſtabliſhed vpon the faith of the Maieſtie of a Prince.
               Thirdly, that they vnderſtand that hee had beene enforced, contrary to his godly intention, to reuoke the ſaid edict of peace, and by way of armes to perſecute his moſt faithfull ſubiects, euen the chiefeſt of the Princes of his blood, which thing they would hardly haue beleeued, if it had not bee
                     •
                  ne made knowne by his owne letters ſent vnto ſome of the ſaid Princes, by the Lord Schemberg, hearing da
                     •
                  e the 22. of October. 1585.
               Fourthly, proteſting of the good affection of their Princes and common wealths toward his Maieſtie, they doo in their names in moſt humble wiſe beſeech him, that conſidering into what pitifull ſtate France had beene reduced by the former warres, and the good benefites which haue enſued the laſt peace: he wil not be induced by the perſwaſiōs of the Pope, to bring in againe blood ſhed, hatred of the Crowne of France, loſſe of ſo many Princes, Lords, and Nobilitie, and of ſo many his faythfull ſubiects, which haue done to h
                     •
                  m and his predeceſſors ſo many notable ſeruices; which thing vndoubtedly will enſue, (if not worſe) if he do not defend the edict of peace, conſidering that by his owne declaration he confeſ, ſeth, that the reformed Religion will not be rooted out by the ſworde.
               Fiftly, wheras he had ſhewed by his declaration, that the edict of peace was made by ripe deliberation and counſell, and publiſhed with all ſolē
                  nities requiſite thereunto, and that the ſayd edict was ſworn by his brother of happy memory, Duke of Alançon, by the Princes and Lordes, in lifting vp their handes to heauen, and that hee himſelfe would haue that peace to be called his peace, which he made (as he ſaid) voluntarily, without

any compulſion, & for that would haue it kept inuiolable, there was no reaſon why the benefites of that peace ſhould bee cut off, by rayſing warre  at the Popes pleaſure. Laſt of all, they doo ſhewe that there will enſue of the reuoking of this edict of peace, a moſt certaine and aſſured ſubuerſion of the ſtate and Crowne of France.
               
               And by the way of concluſion, they beſeech his Maieſtie, that conſidering the reaſons by them ſhewed, & taking ſome pitie of his poore Realme, it may pleaſe him to reiect the perſwaſions of the Pope and Leaguers, and to preſerue the edict of peace: offering vnto him in the names of their Princes and Commonwealths, that if there bee any meanes in them that may further a good peace, and reſtabliſh his eſtate, his Maieſtie ſhall vnderſtand how they are affectionate to procure all things which pertaine to his honour and greatnes: and if it pleaſeth him, they will employ all their faithfull ſeruice in the aſſuring of his dignitie and royall Crowne, and to the benefite of all Chriſtendome, but ſpecially to ſuppreſſe this warre, whereunto (in their iudgement) he had béen enforced.
               Hauing made an ende of their ambaſſage, they deliuered him their inſtructions both in Dutch and 
                     〈◊〉
                  . The King giueth anſwere the 11. of October, but ſuch an anſwere as he ſeemed rather to be offended with them for their duetie and good will of their Princes & Commonwealths, than to be mooued to any moderate counſell.
               It is ſayd before, that in Aprill of this yere 1586. the King made great preparation of warre in prouiding fiue armies all at once: at which time alſo they made a motion for peace vnto the King of Nauarre. By this it was an eaſie thing to iudge, that they who diſpoſed themſelues to warre ſo furiouſly, could not bee brought to condeſcend to any moderate counſell or reaſonable peace.
               But whileſt al theſe armies were readie, and marching to doo ſome great exployts, and to inuade the Prouinces (whereunto they of the reformed religion had retyred and were ſtrong) the Q Mother alſo marched toward Guienne, in hope to obtayne a greater victorie in aſſaulting the King of Nauarre with a parley, than al thoſe armies with force. For ſhe tooke with her out of the ſtoare of Italian trickes, temptation, diſuniting and weakening. For firſt ſhe will trie the tricke of Sathan in the 4. of Mathew, when he tempting Chriſt proffered him all the kingdomes of the earth: So ſhée thought to win this godly and noble Prince, in ſhewing him, that if he would forſake the Sonne of God, he ſhould be declared the right heire of the Crowne, in caſe the King ſhould deceaſe without iſſue: otherwiſe it would be impoſſible to him to attayne vnto that Crowne, conſidering the great ſtrength of the Catholikes, and how eagerly they are bent agaynſt the reformed religion.
               If ſhe heareth the ſame anſwere of him, which Sathan heard of Chriſt,

then will ſhe take the ſecond weapon of her warre in hand, which is Diſuniting: for if the ſayd King will not conſent (vpon the proffer of peace) to aboliſh the exercize of the reformed religion, then ſhe will render him odious  with infamous Libels throughout France, both to them of the reformed religion, and alſo to the Catholikes; for both were deſitous of peace: ſo ſhe imagineth, that by theſe meanes ſhe might diſunite them from the King of Nauarre, laying to his charge, that it reſted but in him that France was not at reſt.
               If this would not ſerue neither, then ſhe thought ſure that the third would doo the feate; which was to abuſe the true intentions of the ſayd King of Nauarre, that holding him long about the hope of peace, and whileſt he ſhould labour about it, he might be ſurprized by ſome poynt of Italian valour: and if not, his partakers would bee ſo weakened in the Prouinces, with theſe armies, that either he would not be able hereafter to defend himſelfe, or withſtand his enemies: or els that hee would bee inforced by this weakning, to accept at their hands a moſt diſaduantagious peace.
               And to begin withall, ſhe ſendeth to the Lords Monpenſier and Monmorency, willing them to diſpoſe the heart of the ſayd King to peace (as ſhe ſayd): which thing was diuerſly taken. For the Leaguers feared the authoritie of the Prince Monpenſier, miſtruſting that by theſe meanes the Queene vnawares would vnite him to the head of his houſe. They of the religion feared his facilitie, that he was made a meane for peace, leaſt hée ſhould ioyne himſelfe to the King of Nauarre in this quarrell and warre, (raiſed by the Leaguers) to deſtroy the houſe of Bourbon: ſo that by one thing both parts tooke occaſion to diſtruſt this meſſage.
               Aſſoone as the negotiation of peace began, the practizes of the Leaguers began alſo to interrupt the peace, which they greatly feared. For after the meſſage of theſe two Lords, the Abbot of Gadaigne was ſent to the King of Nauarre, (for no Tragedie can be wel played without a Prieſt) who being wel entertayned at Rochel by the ſayd King, euery man began to hope well of that thing which was ſo greatly deſired.
               But when the Q. Mother came to Cheuonceau, a towne lying vpon the riuer Chere, which falleth in Loyre beneath Tours, all this hope vaniſhed away like a lightming. For then the hatred and deceitfull meaning of the Q. Mother was diſcouered, which had lien hid vnder thoſe courteous meſſages. For the Abbot of Gadaigne was ſent to Browage, there to play Symons part (if he could): but his going thether was much ſuſpected of the Rochelers. The victualling alſo of Browage was taken for a ſtoare houſe againſt their Towne.
               There was a Gentleman named la Roche the leſſer, who went many voyages betwéene the King of Nauarre and the Q. Mother, to agree of the place, and other meanes of the interuiew. The Q. by little and little

did draw nere to Xainctonge: the King of Nauarre would haue aduaunced as farre as Champaigne in Tourene, ſo that the Marſhall Byron, who had paſſed Loyre, to aſſault Poytow, would retire beyond Loyre, and that  thing he required for his ſecuritie.
               The Queene would, that he ſhould truſt in her; the King willed her to truſt in him; ſhe aleaged her good will, he aleaged his fidelitie & innocencie, who did neuer breake his word toward any perſon. Shee did lay to his charge, that he was the cauſe that the parley could not be brought to paſſe. He anſwered, that it did ſtay but in her, that France was not in quietnes, & that he was ready to ſee her, ſo that it were in a ſure place, and that his way might be ſure.
               Whileſt theſe thing paſſed ſo betweene thē, by meſſengers, ſome counſelled the King of Nauarre to help Chastilion, which was then beſieged by the Duke d'Mayne: others willed him not to take heede to her deceitefull words, and to expect the ſame courteſies which he had receaued heretofore at their hands.
               It is ſaide before, how that among thoſe fiue armies which were prepated in Aprill and May, the commaunder Chaſtre was appoynted to furniſh a Nauie in Britain, well prouided. And in Auguſt, as they were taking  order for the place and manner of the interuiew, this Nauy on a ſuddaine came before Rochel, which thing was the cauſe, that all was on the point to bee broken. The King of Nauarre complained to the King by the Lorde Riaulx, beſeeching his Maieſtie to call back that armie, ſhewing that hee could not leaue a towne of ſuch importance as that was, in that ſtate, without ſeeking for the quietnes and ſafety thereof. The armie notwithſtanding remoued not thence, as long as they had any prouiſion of victuals, whatſoeuer meanes the King of Nauarre made for it: but at length in the moneth of Nouember, the famine made them hoyſe vp ſailes, and not the Kinges commaundement.
               The ſelfe ſame day that the Nauie tooke vp ancker, Captaine Arman was taken with letters of the Queene, to the commaunder Chaſtre, by the  which hee was commaunded not to depart, or elſe not to goe farre from Rochel: theſe letters fell into the hands of the King of Nauarre. Hee notwithſtanding ouercomming with patience all theſe occaſions, which hee might take to refuſe the parely, he offered to ſee the Queene, vpon the conditions aboue ſaid, requiring that in the meane time, there ſhould no act of hoſtilitie be done of either ſides.
               The Queene required a truce to be taken, and publiſhed. The King of Nauarre anſwered, that he could not conſent thereunto, for as much as hee had promiſed to his partakers, to enter into no agreement of peace, without their aduiſe and conſent: ſhee found (to her thinking) that anſwer very ſtrange. Thus like the Carthagenians, who wept when they ſhould pay

tribute to the Romans, but were not moued at all, when they yéelded themſelues tributaries to them. 
               
               For when the King of Nauarre, anſwered to the Kings meſſengers, that he would ſtay yet ſixe moneths for the Kings ſuccour, afore hee would employ his friends, and that he would firſt be demaunded of peace, before he would reſolue himſelfe to warre. Now, when ſhee findes that hee hath giuen his word▪ ſhe weepeth: it had been better to haue wept when the edicts were broken, the innocent iudged guiltie, the obedient rebels, and the iuſt malefactors. After much a doo, the Q. Mother graunted certaine paſports, which the King of Nauarre demanded for to aduertiſe his friends what he was in hand to doo. At the ſelfe ſame time, ſhee cauſed the truce to be proclaymed, which almoſt mard all, for the King of Nauarre ſuſpected, that vnder colour of that truce, ſhee would ſtay the leauie of the Germanes.
               Thereupon the King of Nauarre ſhewed vnto her, that this truce had a  reſpect vnto a common ſecuritie, and that it ſhould haue been done by the common aduiſe, ſo he cauſed the publiſhing to be called in, yet was it ſecretly printed, and ſent into Germanie.
               
               As they were about to conclude the ſaide truce, certaine of the companies of the Lord Neufuy were charged, which did greatly offend the King of Nauarre. Thus this negotiation of peace going forward by meſſengers to and fro, the Duke d'Mayne in the meane while (ſuppoſing that the Q. Mothers abſence from the Court, might bee a good helpe to doo ſome good exploit) haſted his iourney from Puynormand, where his army partly weary and aſhamed to obey ſuch a cowardly Captaine, partly for want of money was ſcattered, euery man repairing where hee thought to ſpeede beſt: the Duke de Mayne (I ſay) came to Paris, where hee and the reſt of that houſe began to make new broyles.
               But to returne to the matter, at length after many voyages to and fro, la Roche brought an order, both for the place and manner of the interuiew, and alſo of the truce graunted of both parts. For the accompliſhment thereof, therefore the King of Nauarre came to larnak, a towne ſituated vpon the riuer Charante betweene Coignak and Engoleſme the 11. of December, ſo the 13. day he want to Saint Brice with a good companie.
               At the firſt meeting there were many complaintes of both ſides: the Queene reproached him of his diſobedience, & paſſing ouer the former actions, ſhe ſtayed vpon the preſent calamities which doo afflict Fraunce; ſhe letteth him vnderſtand, that the King was enforced to make peace with the League to ſaue his eſtate, and that without that remedie, all was loſt.
               Secondly, that the pretence of religion ought to be taken away, to take away the warre out of the realme.
               
                  
The King of Nauarre on the other ſide anſwered to the firſt complaining, that he had none other way been damnicted or endaungered, but by  obaying the King: for the League was waxed ſtrong, becauſe he remained ſo long feeble, and that hee had hazarded his life to keepe his faith. Furthermore, reducing all the preſent calamities to the head ſpring, hee imputed all the miſeries, wherewith the realme is afflicted, to the peace made by the League: hee ſhewed alſo that the King was rather deceaued with ill counſell, then forced to doo that which he did.
               Thirdly, he ſhewed that the preſeruation of the Kings eſtate, depended of the intertaining of his edicts, and that they were his edicts in deede, which he had voluntarily ſworne.
               Alſo, that they were edicts of peace, which chaſed away warre, and not they which (for to ſatiſfy certaine ſeditious perſons raiſed in ſome prouince) repleniſhed the realme with ſedition.
               Madam (ſaid he) you cannot accuſe me, but of too much fidelitie: I doo not complaine of your faith, but of your age, which dooing wrong to your memorie, hath made you to forget what you had promiſed me: This was the end of the firſt interuiew.
               The ſumme of the principall articles of this truce, was, that it ſhoulde indure vnto the ſixt of Ianuarie, that ſhee might aduertiſe the King what was done, and that the ſaide truce, if the King dooth not agree to it, ſhall be prolonged fifteene dayes, for euerie one to retire, or elſe to take further aduiſe.
               Secondly, to auoyde the diſorders, the impoſtes, ſubtilties, and other payments, ſhall not be gathered by neither ſide, and that within the firſt of Ianuarie next comming, fifteene thouſand crownes ſhall bee deliuered or leauied vpon the places, which they of the religion holde for the maintaining of the Gariſons of the reformed religion.
               Thirdly, that the Proteſtants ſhall ceaſe to leauie the tenths, goods and rents of Prieſtes, where they haue heretofore leauied them: and as for the goods of the Catholicks, ſeazed on by them of the reformed religion, they ſhall not meddle neither of the one ſide, nor of the other.
               Fourthly, the men of warre of both ſides, ſhall make no roades, oppreſſions, nor any act of hoſtilitie, during the ſaide truce.
               Laſt of all, the Q. Mother ſhall graunt paſſeports to the King of Nauarre, his ſeruants, friends, alleyed and partakers through the realme, and out of the realme, to aduertiſe them of that which he is about, and alſo that he may ſend to the King, to let him knowe what endeuour the ſaide King of Nauarre hath vſed, to bring all things to a good peace. This was concluded at Tours, the 19. of December: in this truce were comprehended Poytow, Xainctonge, Engomoys, Lodumoyes, Mirebaloys.
               
               The Vicount Turenne was ſent to Coignak, a Towne vpon the riuer

                  Charante, betweene Xainctes and Iaruk, to agree vpon the particularities of the truce with the Q. Mother. 
                  
               
               There the Q. hauing agreed to theſe articles, & ſome other depending of theſe, gaue him to vnderſtand, that for to haue peace the king of Nauarre muſt needes cauſe the exerciſe of the reformed religion to ceaſe in the townes which he did hold: and gaue him a ſpeciall charge to declare to the ſayd King of Nauarre, that this was the kinges will.
               The King of Nauarre being in the way to come to ſee her, was met by the ſayd Vicount, who declared vnto his Maieſty, what he was encharged by the Q. Mother to ſhew him. Whereupon the king was about to turne backe, but ſuppoſing tha
                     •
                   ſhee had ſayd ſo by the aduiſe of the Counſell, hee determined neuertheleſſe to ſee her, and to ſatiſfy his mind in anſwering her.
               When he had kiſſed her handes with a ſad countenaunce, ſhe aſked him whether the Vicount Turenne had ſpoken with him, and aſſured him that it was the kinges reſolution.
               The king of Nauarre anſwered, that hee muſed much, that ſhee would take ſo great paynes to t
                     •
                  ll him that whereof his eares were already weary to heare, and that ſhe being ſo wiſe went about to reſolue a difficulty by the ſelfe ſame difficulty. Alſo that ſhe propoſed to him that thing which he could not, would not, nor ought to do.
               For firſt, if he ſhould forget himſelfe ſo much, as to goe about to do that which ſhee required of him, yet were hee not able to reduce all them of the religion, nor to cauſe them to leaue the exerciſe of the ſame.
               Secondly, he himſelfe would not, for then ſhould hee greatly hurt his conſcience and honor: and for the one hee hath God onely for iudge. His honor he ſhould greatly empayre, doing iniury to himſelfe, when he ſhould ſeeme to yeeld more to the armes of his enemies, then to the commaundement of his Lord and King.
               Thirdly, he anſwered that he ought ſo doe: for if he ſhould ſeeme to allow of that which was propoſed to him, he ſhould ſeeme to allow the colour which the Leaguers haue pretended: in whoſe pretences doth conſiſt the ſtrength of their armes, and in the ſtrength of their armes the decay and vndoing of the ſtate.
               And although he knew well, that in ſo doing he ſhould approach neere the fauors of ye king, yet ſhould he geue thē opportunity to take from him both the right which to him appertayneth, and to bereaue the king of the faythfulleſt friend and ſeruant hee had.
               But they will not haue ſuch men as I am aboue the king (ſayd he) for thereby they ſhould be miſerable, he ſhould be better ſerued, and all his ſubiects better gouerned.
               To this anſwere the Queene replyed nothing, but went about to make

himſelfe feele the diſcommodities which hee ſuffered by meanes of that religion which hee profeſſed. 
               
               I beare them willingly (ſaid hee) when you haue layed them vpon me (as it ſeemeth) to eaſe your ſelfe.
               Atlength ſhe reproached him, that he did not in Rochel what he would.
               Yes Madam (ſaid he) for I will nothing but what I ſhould.
               The Duke of Neuers tooke the word, that he could not ſet an impoſt in Rochel.
               
               True (ſayd he) for wee haue no Italians among vs.
               After theſe ſpeaches ſhee opened vnto him agayne a generall truce for a yeare, on that condition, that there ſhould bee no exerciſe of the reformed religion within the realme, and within that time the ſtates ſhould be called.
               He anſwered, that if they of yt religion ſhould ſo lightly geue ouer their holdes, that the League would bee ſtronger, the king weaker, and the ſtates more vnprofitable.
               Alſo, that it were impoſſible to ceaſe the religion in France, except it were by a counſell duly aſſembled.
               So he taking his leaue of the Queene, ſhe oftē tymes repeated the ſame ſpeeches which ſhe had with the Vicount Turenne, & willed him to let the nobility which folowed him vnderſtand of it: which thing themorow after he did with great griefe, fearing to cauſe ſome alteration in theyr mindes.
               After that, hee ſent two noble men of the mildeſt ſpirites in all his troupes, to wit, the Lords Mauguyon & Force, to witnes vnto her what ſorrow euery one of them had conceaued, to ſee things reduced to ſuch an extreame reſolution: and alſo to knowe whether they had any other thing to hope of the power which the king had giuen her.
               The Queene ſeeing, that all was vpon the poynt to be broken, ſaid, that ſhouee wld ſend the Lord Ramboullet to the king to know his laſt determination.
               She after told the Prince Monpenſier, that all which ſhe had ſayd to the Vicount Turenne, was but by the way of diſcourſe, diſſembling to haue had ſuch ſpeeches in playne tearmes to the king of Nauarre, and willed the ſayd Prince to let the king of Nauarre vnderſtand, that ſhee had a great deſire to ſee him agayne, and alſo prayed him to make meanes of ſome prorogation of truce, which thinge the ſayd Prince ſhewed to the king of Nauarre when hee went to take his leaue from him.
               Theſe double dealings of the Queene was diuerſly ſpoken, for ſome thought (to content the League) ſhe would not open the meanes topeace.
               Others thought, that her Counſell being Leaguers, fed her with new hope, grounded vpon the afflicted affayres of the religion, promiſing her at length to obtaine a peace to the kinges contentation: ſo they lead her cloſly to entertaine a warre profitable for the League.
               
                  
The Lord Rambouillet returned from the court, brought the oth, which the king had ſworne in the ſolemnities of the order of the holy ghoſt, neuer to conſent to the exerciſe of the reformed religion: at whoſe returne the  
                  Q. Mother was very important to haue a third parley with the king of Nauarre, geuing forth that the returne of the Lord Rambouillet ſhould be agreeable to him: to the which thing hee was very vnwilling to condeſcend, ſuppoſing the hope which he had conceaued of that interuiew would be if not loſt, yet farre wide out of the way.
               They of his ſide diſcouraged him, fearing that he would not only continue the ſpeaches which ſhee had vttered before, and alſo to reiterate often times the truce, hauing aduertizements that the truce was ſent into Germany and Suiſſerland.
               
               Others aduiſed him, that ſhe held him in hand about a treatie of peace, in the meane time to prepare warre againſt him. That ſhee propoſed him of  hard conditions, to induce him to breake off: and by that meane to make him hatefull to all France, as the onely hinderer of the peace thereof.
               Some others gaue him notice, that ſhe ſolicited the next townes and cities to execute the kinges laſt edict: and that fayning to ſeeke the common benefit of the ſtate, ſhe did much hurt in particular to the ſtate of Rochel.
               
               Vppon this earneſt ſute of the Q Mother, in Februarie the Leaguers tooke by force the Towne of 
                     Ʋouans, and fayre Montau, the which being places of no importance, cauſed men to ſuſpect ſome treachery. The K. of Nauarre alſo thought that hee might not expect yt they would giue him any good thing, which tooke ſo great pains to take away ſo litle from him: notwithſtanding the Queene did ſo preſſe him, that hee graunted the third interview, either to make the world know and ſee, that the fault was not in him if they did not obtayne peace: or elſe that he perſwaded himſelfe that the Queene would not take ſo much paines to bring him ill newes. Shee therefore tooke her iourney to Fontenay.
               
               The 20. of February the king of Nauarre came to Marans, accompanied with many noble men and company of Rochelers about threehundred men, guyded by the Lord Gargoleau and other Captaynes, hauing the Colonels enſigne of Rochel: his comming thether was to parley with the Q. Mother, which was already at Fontenay. But for becauſe the interuiew was to be made firſt in the Ile Ellen, and after for her eaſe at the Fort Veluyre, the Lordes Biron and Sariſack, with many other came to the king of Nauarre to agree of the place.
               As the will to ſee one another did encreaſe; ſo the miſtruſt did growe in their counſels. For the Q. Mother (or rather ſome of hers) did feare to goe to the place where the Rochelers were ſtronger. And for as much as it was reported that the Enſigne Colonell was at the foord 
                     Ʋeluyre, they made as though they did feare to approach, conſidering alſo that the Rochelers

had ſet vp ſtrong Barriers for the ſafetie of the King of Nauarre. Theſe things ſhe pretended to bee the cauſes that ſhe would not come thether.  But in very deede ſhe and hers ſawe not there the commoditie how to execute that which they pretended to doo. The King of Nauarre did feare the entrances and turnings of theſe Mariſhes: for the naturall ſituation of that countrey is ſuch, that a man may doo a feate without great hazard.
               Whileſt theſe going too and fro were betwéene them, the League tooke the alarum by theſe actions of the Q. but partly to let the peace which they did greatly feare, and partly (ſeeing ſome occaſion) to execute their intended purpoſe, did conſpire againſt the Kings perſon.
               The Q. Mother perceiuing that ſhe could not execute that for which ſhe was ſent, (for no doubt ſhe neuer entended to make any peace, but to commit ſome treacherie vpon the King of Nauarre his perſon) and (by the iuſt iudgement of God) that which ſhe had deuiſed againſt that vertuous and innocent Prince, ſhe heard that it was practized vpon her ſonne. She departed from Fontenay to Nyort, intending thus to take her iourney to Paris, where ſhe thought her preſence to be needfull. But before her departing out of the countrey, ſhe would faine to doo ſomewhat, leaſt it ſhould be ſayd ſhe had done nothing. Therefore ſhe ſent to the King of Nauarre, that he would ſend to her the Vicount Turenne; to whome ſhe offered libertie to talke withall. To the which thing he conſented eaſily. The Q. ſhewed that ſhe would treate with him, being informed of his prudence. The King of Nauarre conſented to that thing, being ſure of his fidelitie. All ſorts of men déemed (that becauſe he was knowne to loue the bleſſed ſtate and quietnes of the Realme) he was indéede a fit inſtrument, if the counſell of the Q. would haue vſed him vnto that purpoſe.
               The Vicount Turenne for that purpoſe came to Fontenay, and hauing certified the Q. that he was there to receaue his commandements, ſhe propoſed vnto him to make a generall truce, and that the affayres were ſuch as there could be no talke of a peace as yet: for the which propoſition hée anſwered.
               That the King of Nauarre would eaſily conſent to that, and that hee would alwayes allow the name of truce, ſo that it would produce the euents of a good peace. But that hitherto they had ſo ſtopped their cares to his requeſts, that he had beene enforced to imploy his friends to that ende hee might bee heard, and that hee coulde make neither peace, nor generall truce without their aduiſe and conſent, for hee was elected protector of a part, forſaken by the King, which conſiſted of many particular perſons who had beene particularly iniuryed, to whome no ſatiſfaction could be made without hearing their complaintes: that if it pleaſe her to graunt the requiſite paſportes, and a reaſonable time to call

them together, that it ſhould be done with all ſpeed. And for to bring this thing to paſſe, he thought good to make a particlar truce for the Prouinces of Poytow & Xainctonge for two moneths, during the which the King  of Nauarre might prouide and aduiſe vpon the means how to make the peace, for the treatie whereof, the deputies of the Prouinces might come together.
               The Queene thought that truce very ill, and commanded her counſell to ſhew the reaſons.
               One of them anſwered, that it were prciudiciable to the King, for as much as during that time of truce, the King of Nauarre would haue meanes to bring the ſtrangers into the Realme.
               Alſo that the Catholiks would become idle, and accuſtome themſelues to reſt: alſo that they of the league, would take that truce for a ſhadow of peace, of the which fearing the bodie, they would make a ſecond inſurrection.
               To thoſe reaſons the Vicount of Turenne anſwered, that the place of the entring of the ſtraungers, had no correſpondence with the high and low Poytow, and that the treatie of peace, did rather ſtay, than further the leauie of them.
               He anſwered alſo to the ſecond reaſon, which hee ſaid to be common to both parts, and that they of the reformed Religion would abuſe reſt ſooner, than the Catholikes, becauſe they were leſſe vſed to it.
               As for the inſurrection of the league, he would ſay nothing to it, becauſe he knew not not what they might doo. But this hee knewe that the Duke of Guyze had but a ſmall power: The Duke de Mayne had broken his armie, and that of ſmall rubbell there was neuer great buildinges made.
               But for becauſe he had ſpoken hitherto without charge, being come only to heare, the Queene thought good that hee ſhould returne to the King of Nauarre, to bee particularly inſtructed of his pleaſure.
               Comming then to the King of Nauarre, hee found him well aſſured of the leauie of Germaines, by a man which came the ſelfeſame day.
               The ſame day the Vicount Turenne returned to the Queene ſpeedily, & foūd her at Niort, determined to take her iourney to Paris: he was heard, and made an ample diſcourſe of ye proſperous ſtate of the K. of Nauarre.
               
               Firſt, that he had ſuſtayned the burthen of fiue armies, which haue ſerued for nothing els, but to ſhew that he was ſtill in readines, for the tryall of the forces of his enemies: contrarywiſe that they were deceaued both in forces and credit, & that they had reaſons to the conſpiracies and ſeditions of a towne not able to warre in the fielde.
               Alſo that they could hope for no more ſuccor of the ſpantard, who was ſo occupyed to defend himſelfe, that he could not doe ſo much as to dreame

to aſſault others: that if the King of Nauarre had loſt ſome weake villages, he had fortified ſtrong holdes. And whereas hee had beene hitherto  vpon the defenſiue: now he hath power to make his enemies to take his part. That he hath a mightie armie of ſtrangers, whom the neceſſitie of his affayres did neuer procure him to call to his ſuccour. That hee neuer thought to imploy their ſeruice to make warre, but rather to make a good peace.
               Furthermore, that notwithſtanding he hath receaued extreame iniuries, yet it neuer came in his minde to vſe that to bee reuenged of them, whome he knew to be ſeruants of this Crowne.
               The Lord of Neuers aſſured him whether the King of Nauarre had not bound himſelfe to the preiudice of his crowne.
               The Vicount continuing his diſcourſe, beſeeched the Queene in moſt  humble wiſe, to beleeue that he was neither raſh, nor a lyar, and that hee would ſay nothing but what he knew certainly to be true; and that if hee knew otherwiſe, he would neuer diſguiſe the truth, but that he certainly knew that the King of Nauarre had done nothing with the ſtrangers which be not for the good and quietnes of the ſtate, and to reſtore to the King and his faithfull ſeruants their authoritie.
               And to that ende Madame (ſaide hee) that you may iudge of his intent, he proteſteth that whenſoeuer your Maieſties pleaſure is to vſe his forces, he will euer turne his face that way, whither the commoditie of the Realme and your comandement ſhall call him.
               The King of Nauarre (ſaid he) continuing his diſcourſes, hath alwaies beleeued that the King hauing taken warre in hand being the weaker, will neuer be able to reſtore peace before he be ſtronger. And then ſhall he be ſtronger indeed, when the Princes of his blood ſhall haue his forces in hand, to reſtore the obedience which is due to him.
               This is the laſt remedie Madame (ſaid he) which I could wiſh to bee otherwiſe. And I doo tell you this particularly as ſeruant to your Maieſtie, and not as a Hugonet, to whome (it may be) it were more ſure to expect an armie, than a Negotiation, and a battell, than an edict. Beleeue not Madame, that damage of the State is ſought by the friendes thereof; it is more profitable and honourable to conſent voluntarily to a peace, and to chooſe by time with a good will the meanes thereof, then to take the ſame enforced by neceſſitie.
               The Queene ſaid, that they ſhould then ſtay the armie of ſtrangers, and did much braule about the forme of paſportes.
               Then the Vicount replied, Madam, if yee bee ſo vnwilling to giue vs good wordes, we are not come to that paſſe to expect good effects, for the which we ſhould ſtay the longer if we ſhould ſtay for the meanes whereby, to enforce you thereunto. Madam, the time is no more that we will aſſure

our ſelues vpon a ſingle promiſe, ſeeing that the edicts haue fayled vs.
               The Queene did ſo giue eare to theſe reaſons, that ſhee ſeemed to haue her minde occupied more vpon the aduertiſements which were giuen her  on euery ſide: for they ſet before her face the apparance of a great rebellion, and the King was ill prouided of companie. The Duke d'Mayne was in Paris, practiſing againſt the Kings perſon: the Duke of Guize was about to put himſelfe into Paris alſo. They made her ſee in their aduertiſements, the occaſions which the heads of the League had to giue the laſt blow of diſpaire, they did ſhew her that the hope which the Leaguers had of England was dead with the Quéene of Scottes, and that the deuotion of the Cleargy did coole as faſt as the ambition of the League did heate. They ſhewed her how the ſixe armies alreadie were ſpent and conſumed without dooing any thing, that they of the reformed religion were growne ſtrong, ſo that there was no more hope for them to build out of the ruines of them, whereby it appeared euidently in what daunger of them the King ſtoode. All theſe things being ſet before her eyes, made her to take her iourney in haſte from Niort to Paris, fearing leaſt theſe ſeditious perſons, who had left nothing more to enterpriſe, would execute their miſchieuous intents vpon the Kings perſon: therefore at the ſame time, the miſtruſt did greatly encreaſe at the Court, where there were diuers factions, for the King miſtruſted the Leaguers, and the Leaguers the King, and among the Leaguers, one miſtruſted another. Euery one going about, vnder the colour of defending the Romiſh religion, to lay downe the foundation of their greatnes by rebellion, murther, and particide: which ſturring of rebellion, cauſed alſo that this generall truce which was in hand was not brought to effect.
               It is ſaide before, that the 13. day of December 1586. the Q▪ Mother 
                   required of the King of Nauarre, that a truce for a whole yeare might bee taken, which the King of Nauarre graunted, ſo that it might be by the conſent and aduice of his friends, ſeruants, and confederats, and ſuch as had elected him for their protector and defender, whome the King had forſaken by his edicts, ploclaiming warre againſt them, and alſo to certifie the Germans thereof, which were his friends and alyed: whereupon ſhee agreed to giue paſſeports, that with ſafety of the meſſengers, they might be aduertiſed thereof.
               Vpon this promiſe of paſſeports the 29. of December, the King of Nauarre to omit nothing, which might ſhew the deſire hee had to pacifie the miſerable troubles of the realme: and for to diſpoſe as well them of the religion, as his friends, confederates, and ſeruants, he ſent forth notable gentlemen into diuers countreyes, as well of the realme as out of the realme, with letters of credit, and ample memories to informe them of all that had paſſed in the interuiew betweene him and the Q. Mother, to that end that

nothing ſhould be diſguiſed and falſified to them, as it had chaunced often times in the former ciuil diſſenſions, by them who doo watch nothing more  then to diſunite the heartes vn
                     •
                  ted to ſo good a worke, as is the quarrell debated ſo many yeares againſt the Romiſh League, enemie to al quietnes: theſe were the contents of theſe letters of credit.
               The King of Nauarre ſent to them, to whom he directed his letters, this Gentleman N. carrier of the ſaid letters to viſit them, and to let them vnderſtand the ſtate of the common affaires, and how all things had paſſed at the meeting of him and the Q. Mother: hee praieth them to beleeue the meſſenger, as well about the particularities of the meeting, as about all thoſe things which he had to tell them from him: he praieth them alſo to be of good courage, and not to bee wearie, becauſe of the good hope which hee hath of the bleſſed iſſue of ſo many labours: and for his part he will omit no point of his duetie, touching the preſeruation of the common cauſe. As touching the memories, the write incloſed in the letters, contained the ſumme of them.
               The King of Nauarre protector of the reformed Churches in France, ſuppoſing that to bee the charge of his duety, after ſo many ſtormes paſſed, to viſit and to confirme the remnant of the diſſipation: hath ſent this the Lord N. to repreſent vnto all them of the religion, in the Prouince N. what the eſtate of the common affaires is. And to this effect the ſaide Lord ſhal repaire to the Lords, Gentlemen, & other perſons of meaner qualitie, who haue retired to their owne houſes, or vnto other places of the ſaid. Prouince, for the rigour of the edicts (if it can be poſſible that he may find them) and ſhall certifie them, how that after ſo many lettes and delayes, which miſtruſt bringeth, hee hath ſeene the Q. Mother nigh Coignak: that hee hath entred into no treatie of peace, but onely hath hearkened vnto all that ſhould be propoſed to him, touching the attaining to the ſame, & that he hath promiſed to doo nothing therein, without the aduiſe of the Churches, kinſmen, friends, confederats and ſeruants.
               And that acknowledging the honor which the ſayd Lady hath done to him, conſidering the labour which ſhe had taken at that tyme of the yeare, and in that age that ſhe is of (after many diſcourſes which ſhe hath made of her deſire and inclination to peace) he hath conſented to a truce of two moneths in the prouinces of high and low Poytow, Laudonoys, Mirabaloys, Angomoys & Xainctonge, as well on this ſide of Charante as beyond, as alſo in the towne and gouernement of Browage and Aluert, the countrey of Aunis, the town and gouernment of Rochel: in the meane tyme to ſend for the deputies, as well of the churches of France, as of the con
                     •
                  ederats out of the realme, for to intreat of the peace by theyr common aduiſe.
               But hauing ſent the Lord Turenne with ſix men of honor with him to Coignak, for to agree vpon the conditions neceſſary for the entertaining

of the ſayd truce. The ſayd Q. mother (among other diſcourſes) had declared vnto him, that the king would ſuffer but one religion in the realme, to wit, his owne, which determination of the King ſhe ſa
                     •
                  d ſhee would  playnely ſhew leaſt any man ſhould bee deceaued therein, commaunding him to declare the ſame to the king of Nauarre & to his partakers. Which meſſage the ſayd Vicount reported vnto the king of Nauarre, as hee was vpon the way to goe to the place appointed for the ſecond interuiew. The ſayd Lady alſo had made him more particular declaration, and alſo commaunded him to make acquainted the other nobles and gentlemen which were with him, and to ſend her anſwere the morrow after.
               Which thing the ſaid king of Nauarre ſhewing her to be impoſſible to graunt, after hauing ſupported for ſo many yeares the weight of armes, for the defence of the ſelfe ſame thing onely: and that if ſo it were indeede, that there was no neede to take ſo much payns as ſhe did to looſe it. She perſiſted therein, notwithſtanding, ſo that thereupon the ſayd king of Nauarre tooke his leaue of her.
               And the ſelfe ſame day at night, the ſayd king of Nauarre geuing notice to the ſayd Lordes which were there at Iarnak of the kinges determination: all anſwered with one mind and conſent, that it was impoſſible the ſaid determination to be obeied and performed. The morrow after by a common accord, they ſent to her the Lords Montguyon and Force, to deſire her moſt humbly to declare again whether that was the laſt reſolution of the king. For as much as they were all reſolute, after hauing ſhed their bloud, and fought for ſo iuſt a quarrell to liue and die: yet for the defence of the ſame, and vpon that to finiſh the truce, which was to end ſix dayes after.
               Vpon that occaſion ſhee ſent the Lord Monpenſier, and the Marſhall Biron, to excuſe her ſelfe, that ſhee had not ſpoken ſo rawly, and that her diſcourſe about that matter was of aduiſe, and not of reſolution: deſiring that they would ſtay vntill the ſixt day of Ianuarie next, whileſt ſhe ſendeth the Lord Rambouillet to the king to knowe his anſwere: and expecting the kinges anſwere, the truce hath béene continued according to the articles agreed vppon for that purpoſe.
               Since the K. of Nauarre returned from Rochel, whens he had likewiſe ſent a gentleman to the king, to notifie vnto him what was paſſed in that interuiew, to the end that he might alſo know the dutie of the king of Nauarre therein.
               Which thing likewiſe he hath done to the churches, and to the chiefeſt who make profeſſion of the religion, to let them vnderſtand in what maner he hath proceeded, leaſt the aduerſaries ſhould giue out thinges otherwiſe then they are, as their manner is to doo, for to ſow hatred and diſſention among vs, to deuide vs by ſuch crafty meanes.
               
                  
The ſelfe ſame meſſage hath the King of Nauarre ſent to other prouinces and Lords, ſtrangers, our partakers, of whom wee do expect ſuccour. 
               
               Now therefore knowing the ſtate of the affaires, the king of Nauarre prayeth them to giue him their aduiſe what is expedient to be done, greatly deſiring in that which concerneth the honour of God, and the common quietneſſe of his whole church, to proceed (as he hath done before) not in following his owne opinion, but by the common aduiſe and conſent of all.
               He willeth them to know, that as partaker of the miſeries, of the griefs, & vexations, which ſo many perſons do ſuffer in their ſoules, bodies, & goods, being partaker of ſo many gronings and teares, of ſo many poore families ſcattered and depriued of their commodityes: he hath alwaies deſired that for their deliuerance it might pleaſe God to giue vs a good peace. But perceauing the crafts and deceites of our aduerſaries, and their hardnes of heart, hee hath bent himſelfe to patience, finding all his paines and labours whatſoeuer light and eaſie in the defence of ſo good and iuſt a cauſe: wherein hee hath felt in himſelfe a wonderful great fauour and aſſiſtance of God, hauing ſeene that which he durſt not haue thought on, and done that which he would neuer haue beleeued. Whereupon he exhorteth them that haue remained conſtant, expecting the goodwill and pleaſure of God, to perſeuer and hope ſhortly of a good iſſue.
               And them, which through feeblenes, or heauy burthen of euils, haue fallen to keepe their hartes to God, and that they will not ſuffer that fire of zeale, whereof they do feele yet the heat, to be cooled and quenched, hoping for their deliuerance, that by the meanes thereof, and the grace of God, they may reunite themſelues, and ioine to that body where from they are gone.
               That they will aſſure themſelues both the one and the other, that there ſhall neuer be peace before affaires be eſtabliſhed as wel beyond as on this ſide of Loyre: and that the ſaid king will prouide for neceſſarie ſafety in caſe of imminent danger for their ſafe retire, otherwiſe there ſhould be nothing done.
               As the king of Nauarre beareth to them, and all that concerne them a ſingular loue and affection, that they would render vnto him the like: that Godbleſſing ſuch a correſpondance of good willes, we may all enioyne to his honor and glorie the fruit, which ſuch vnity and concord would bring to the confuſion of Gods enemies.
               Alſo other particularities neceſſarie to this Argument, the ſaid gentleman N. ſhall ſhew vnto them of the Religion following what he hath ſeene and heard by the courſe of the affaires, being otherwiſe impoſſible to reduce them all in writing.
               And aboue all thinges hee ſhall aſſure them of the good firme, and conſtant reſolution of the ſaid king of Nauarre, and of them who do aſſiſt him

to employ their liues and meanes for the glorie of God, and deliuerance of  his Church. At Rochel the 29. of December. Henry, & below, Berzeau.
               
               The end of the third Booke.
            
            
               THE FORVTH BOOKE.
               
                  IT is ſayd before, how the Duke of Guize in the apprehenſion, of a great fright, & in a great heate went both to complaine to the King, how all the heretickes of France had conſpired to ioyne their forces together, to oppreſſe his brother the Duke de Mayne, almoſt deſtitute of defence: and alſo to giue him counſell how to let ſuch a dangerous aſſociation of them, to wit, by diuerting their forces. And that could not be done, but by ſending ſeuerall armies into ſeuerall Prouinces, where they of the religion were ſtrong. It is alſo ſayd, how vpon this aduiſe the King prouided ſixe armies, whereof be ſent one into Poytow, and another into Languedock, the third into Daulphine, the fourth into Auuergne, and the laſt was a Nauie conducted by the Commaunder la Chaſtre, and the ſixt moſt daungerous was lead by his Mother agaynſt the King of Nauarre, vnder the colour of parley of peace, hauing with her a legion of Italian wrenches and figges which did her no ſeruice.
               Whileſt the King was left alone, and his forces ſcattered farre & wide from him, the Duke of Guize aduiſed himſelfe of a dilemma, that either he might eaſily oppreſſe the King, or els at leaſt might worke iollily the ſeduction of the people. Therfore he called his brother the Duke de Mayne, began to complayne greatly of the King, and to impute the ill ſucceſſe of his brother in Guyenne to him, to wit, how his brother was forſaken, deſtitute of men, money and munition. That this was the argument, that the Catholikes were betrayed, that the King was corrupted by counſell, and that he hated and deſpiſed them whom hee ſhould loue and embrace: and that he had intelligences with the heretickes. And that if he would not diſhenerite and degrade the King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, then there was no cauſe why the Catholikes ſhould commit their liues to a diſſembling King, who had nothing in his tongue but warre, and in his hart

did ſeeke for peace with heretikes. And therefore they cryed out that the enemie was at hand, and ſtoode at the doore, and that omitting and leauing  all others, he onely was to be aſſaulted. This was the text whereupon the Friers, Prieſts and Ieſuits made their chattering diſcourſes in the pulpets. This was the leſſon which his fauourers ſhould repeate with great vehemencie, among men of all degrees, when they met in companie.
               By theſe falſe reports and trayterous ſlaunders, much hatred and miſliking of his gouernment was procured to the King. Yet conſidering that both he and his partakers were very néere daunger, the Q. Mother was ſent out of Poytow, where ſhe had béen parlying and brawling with the K. of Nauarre foure or fiue moneths, ſeeking occaſion to make her Italian pipes play. She in great haſt (fearing the breaking of good fellowſhip betwéene the King and the Duke of Guize) (for by ſuch frayes ſhe had kept her ſelfe alwayes in authoritie) commeth to the Court, and by the Leaguers who were about the Kings perſon, eaſily doo perſwade him to holde with the Leaguers; and ſo once more the heads of the Leaguers do obtayne ſecuritie, and doo pauſe a while wayting for a better opportunitie.
               For as much as the voyage and practizes of the Q. Mother agaynſt the King of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde, in the parley and interuiew at Saint Brice, could not bring to paſſe the effects pretended, her returne to Paris, and the intelligences of the leauie of the Germanes, gaue matter vnto the King to enter into newe deliberations to defend the Leaguers. For without his counſell, power and countenance, they had béen reduced to that plunge, as they had neuer béen able to get out.
               With this newe yeare therefore 1587. we will begin this fourth booke,  which will ſhewe marueilous tempeſts and euents to haue béen brought foorth, to the ſmall aduantage of Gods enemies, yet to the great furtherance of that rebellion which hath enſued, wrought, and procured by the Leaguers. But firſt wee will ſpeake and begin by the exployts of warre which had béen done, ſpecially in Daulphine, and then wee will returne to purſuing of the great ſtirres and preparations of this yeare.
               It is ſaid before, how the Duke Eſpernon appointed for Daulphine and Prouance, did there what hee could, and in diſplacing the Leaguers out of many townes and holdes, he did good ſerui
                     •
                  e to the King, but ſeeing that warre in that countrey to be endleſſe, committing the remnant of his forces to his brother the Lord Valete, & repayred to the King in Nouember 1586 after the ſiege of Sorges. After his departure out of Daulphine, the Lorde Diguieres recouered the towne of Sorges, and imployed three-moneths, to wit, Ianuarie, Februarie and March, in viſiting the countrey, viewing of the places, fortifying the holdes, and repairing the ruines which the armies had made the yeare before, looking to haue a new armie vpon his back the ſpring folowing (which notwithſtading came not to paſſe) by reaſon

that the King made all preparations which could bee poſſible againſt the Germanes, both in the heart of France, and on the way which they ſhould come in, to receaue them with ſmall courteſie. This thing cauſed, that the  Lord des Diguieres had apportunitie to doo great things this yeare 1587. in that Prouince, as foloweth. In the beginning of Aprill, the Lorde Diguieres tooke the Caſtel of Champer, two Leagues from Grenoble, at which time the Court of Parliament there opened a way to a truce, which notwithſtanding did not let the exploytes of war, for as much as in the meane time, the ſaid Lord Diguieres brought three pieces of batterie to Nants, to batter 
                     Ʋenterol towne and Caſtell, but they ſurrendred themſelues before they ſaw the cannon.
               The 7. of May, the companie of men of armes, of the Lorde Diguieres, 
                   conducted by the Lorde Poligny his Lieutenaunt, and the companie of the Lord Roſſe, a popiſh Gentleman, lead by himſelfe, did drawe foorth to ſkirmiſh the Gariſon of Saults. There they killed ſixe ſkore men, among whom there were twentie of commaundement, tooke ſixe priſoners, and wel nigh had entred into the towne mingled with the enemies: all this was done with the loſſe of one man, onely of the religion.
               The 31. and laſt of May, the Caſtell of the Lord Meneſtrier, ſtrong, and  ſituated vpon a rock, builded againe at the charges of the Countrey, to keepe them of the religion in bondage, was rendered by compoſition, and raſed, after it had ſuſtayned 14. dayes ſiege, by the Lord Diguieres, aſſiſted by the Lords Brikmaut, Morges, and others.
               A little before that, the Pont of Coignet (ſurpriſed few dayes before by the Lorde Valete) was yeelded at the diſeretion of the Lorde Diguieres. The towne of Quinſieur in Merindol was compaſſed about by the Lorde Gouernet, and a while after, the Lord Diguieres (aſſiſted with the Lordes Poet, Blacons, Montbrune, Vacheres, Brikmaut the younger, and the troupes of the Prouince) there conducted three pieces of artilerie; at the ariuing and ſight of the, the which towne was ſurrendred with their ſafetie, and the Caſtell at diſcretion.
               The 18. Beniuay was ſurrendered likewiſe.
               The 19. the townes of Pierrelongue and Eſgalieres were taken.
               The 22. Ionquieres a towne belonging to the principalitie of Orange was compaſſed, and the ſame day taken, after it had ſuſtained 25. voleys of Ordinance. Gygondas alſo was rendered at the newes of rendering of Ionquieres.
               
               The 23. Poet Laual was beſieged, and after it had ſuſtained one hundred and fiftie ſhot of two field pieces, at length was ſurrendred the 29. of the ſame moneth, although that the breach was not ſufficient, and that they who beſieged, had ſet vp the ladders, and after tooke them vp with further aſſault.
               
                  
The thirteenth day of Iuly, the Lorde Valete tooke Pierrelongue by compoſition, after ſixe ſcore ſhotte of pieces of battery. They who were  within the towne, came foorth with their armour, their ſtuffe and baggage ſafe, their Enſigne open, the drumme playing, and their match fired.
               The eightenth day the Lord Diguieres went to Oſte, a towne vnwalled, and beſtowed the reſt of the moneth in fortifiyng of that place, wherein he imployed the Lord Vacheres, to make warre againſt the towne of Cerf, halfe a mile diſtant from that place.
               The Lord Chaſtilion hauing gathered certain forces in Languedock, to ioyne with the Suiſſers, who were comming into Daulphine, was expected  vpon the Roſne by all the forces of Daulphine from the 19. of Iuly. The Lord de Poet, gouernour of the towne of Montlimart, went foorth with a good parte of the forces there, to fauour his paſſage. The ſayde Lord Chaſtilion and Diguieres paſſed ouer the Roſne the firſt day of Auguſt, and ſoiourning long there, they gaue leaſure to the Lord Valete to ſeaze vpon the banck of the riuer Lizere, and ſo letting their paſſage, had opportunitie to doe what hee did.
               Whileſt the L. Chaſtilion ſoiourned in Daulphine, the ſaid L. Valete practized a ſecret execution vpon the towne of Montlimart, & ſo began to drawe his forces thither ward: but the inhabitants miſtruſting his approches, prepared themſelues, which cauſed him to retyre back againe: yet he ſet ſuch an order, that the Lord Balathye ſurprized the towne, but the Caſtel remayned ſtill in the hands of them of the reformed Religion. The L. Valete did greatly feare, that the ſayd towne would be ſurprized again by the Caſtell, and would haue prouided a greater power to put in for the keeping of the ſame: But the ſaid Lord Balathye anſwered, that he was ſtrong enough to defend the ſame towne. This was done the ſixteenth of Auguſt.
               The ſeuenteenth day at 9 a clock in the morning, the Lord Chaſtilion and Diguieres vnderſtoode of this exployt done, though they were more then twenty leagues off. The ſaid Lord Diguieres diſpatched ſpeedely the Lords Poet, Blacons, Sales, and Sousbrochet, with their companies, they tooke alſo the Lord Vacheres, with ſome other companies.
               In the mean while, the gentlemē of Viuar
                        •
                     ts which doe lie right againſt it on the other ſide of the Roſne, vnde
                     •
                  ſtanding of this ſurprize, did ſend forces into the Caſtell by two Noblemen of the countrey, to wit, the Lords Mirebel and Allard.
               
               When the enemie had poſſeſſed the ſaid towne of Montlimart three dayes, the Lord Poet with his companyes (being about three hundred men and fiftie horſes) entred at night into the Caſtell, and propoſing what was to be done, determined to ſet ſpeedily on the towne, and the 19.

day about 7. a clock in the morning he aſſembled all his forces, which were about two hundred pikes, and one thouſand Harquebuſiers, iſſued out of  the Caſtell into the towne, with ſuch fiercenes, that they forced their trenches and Barricadoes, and cut in pieces aboue two thouſand men, and among others the countie of Suze, the Lords Ancone and Logieres, Teil the ſonne, and Dupuy, Saint Martin, with many others, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Captaynes, and men of fame, remayned dead vpon the place. There were a great number wounded, among whom were Ancone and Saint Fereol.
               
               Many were taken priſoners among them, men of name which were theſe; the eldeſt ſonne of the Countie Suze, the Baron Garde, Chemlak, gouernour of Viuarets, Straung, Teil the Father, Pracontat, the young Coſſans, the young Vauterel, Balathye the Captaine of the enterprize vpon Montlimart, all Noble men. The Lord Ramfort had ariued in the towne but foure houres before, not willing to flie away ſhamefully, found the meanes to get into a tower of the towne, where hee defended himſelfe three dayes: but at length ſeeing the peeces, yeelded himſelfe to them of the reformed Religion: there died not many more than twenty, among whome was the Lord Tiſſieres: there was about ſixe and twenty hurte.
               This blow did greatly weaken the Papiſts in that Countrey, ſo that afterward they were more flexible vnto a reaſonable peace, than they had beene before.
               This was the worke of God which vſed the valour, diligence, & good gouernement of theſe Noble men, but ſpecially of the Lord Poet, chiefeſt gouernour of the ſaid place. There excelled alſo the valia
                     •
                  tnes of the Lord Blacons, Vacheres, Mirebel and Allart, Gentlemen of 
                     Ʋiuarets, the which being in ſo ſmall number, to wit, about twelue hundred men, forced more than three thouſand men of warre, furniſhed & lodged aduantagiouſly within their Barricadoes, flanked and defended in front with three Cannons, to reuenge the cruelties which they had vſed, and to beat downe their pride
               The Lord Chaſtilion had procured certaine regiments of Suiſſers, to come out of the Lordſhips of Berne, to deſcend along the lake of Loſanne, and to repaire into Daulphine, there to aſſiſt them of the Religion againſt the Lord Valete, and to bring that countrey, and the next prouinces about, out of the bondage of the Leaguers and Catholikes. The Lorde Chaſtilion came (as is ſaide before) into Daulphine the firſt day of Auguſt, and went accompanyed with the Lordes Diguieres and Poet, to receiue them at the riuer Lizere. But the Lord Valete hauing left Balathye in Montlimart for the ſafe keeping thereof, went with ſpeed ouer Lizere, to let the L. Chaſtilion with his cōpany, to paſſe ouer that riuer to ioyne

with the Swiſſers.
               The Swiſſers being two thouſand Pikes, fiue hundred Corſtets,  three hundred Harquebuſiers, two hundred Muſket
                     •
                  ers, and foure hundred Frenchmen, gathered on the frontiers of Suiſſerland, being all in number three thouſand and foure hundred men, drew neare to the riuer Lizere, to haue ioyned with the ſaid Chaſtilion. But the Lord Valete accompanied with Alphonſe Corſe, hauing intelligences of their comming with fiue hundred Harquebuſieres, and foure companies of horſemen, ſet vpon them, defeated them, and tooke eleuen Enſignes which hee ſent to the King, and one Coronet of horſemen. This ouerthrowe was giuen the ſame day of the recouering of Montlimart, and in the ſight of the Lords Chaſtilion and Diguieres, who were on the other ſide of the riuer, and by no meanes could paſſe ouer to reſcue them. There were ſlayne about one thouſand men, twelue hundred taken priſoners, and were ſent to 
                     Ʋalence, to worke to the fortifications there: a greatnumber ſaued them ſelues in Daulphine. God maketh the number and armes preuaile as pleaſeth him. They which were priſoners, were redeemed by exchaunge of them that were taken at Montlimart.
               
               Thus thinges paſſed on both ſides, the Lord Chaſtilion at length hauing intelligences of the Germans comming with his companies, tooke his iourney to meet them, whom he met in Baſignye nigh Chaumōt the 22. of September next following, as ſhall be noted hereafter.
               The 31. of Auguſt, the eldeſt ſonne of the County of Grignan, at the ſolicitation of the Lord Diguieres, tooke part with the king of Nauarre agaynſt the League, and ſeazed vppon the towne of Clauſures and Monſegur, townes well ſituated in the County of Grignan, wherein the Lord Valete had put garriſons few dayes before.
               About the ſame tyme, the Lord Blacons tooke the town of Suze, which after it was ranſacked, was geuen ouer becauſe the caſtell could not bee taken.
               The firſt day of September, the Lord Diguieres accompanied with  the Lordes Gouernet, Brikmaut, and the yong Morges beſieged Guylheſtre, and battered it with foure meane peeces, and two litle field péeces: ſo that after hauing ſuſtayned two hundred ſhot, and the breach being reaſonable, the enemy forſooke the towne, and retyred into the caſtell: the which alſo after certayne volyes of canon ſhot, rendered themſelues the 5. of September by compoſition; by the which it was agreed that the Gaſcoynes ſhould depart and be ſent away with a white ſtaffe in their handes, and they of the countrey to remayne vpon diſcretion.
               The tenth of October the Caſtell of Quyras, beſieged ſince the 25. of  September, was ſurrendred to the Lord Diguieres, aſſiſted with ye Lord Brikmaut and Morges, where is a thing worthy of remembrance, that

the wayes being ſo high and difficult for the artillery to be caryed ouer the  mountaynes, contrary to the impoſſibility which wee thought to be, and the expectation of the Papiſtes, yet it paſſed ouer. They were ſixe hundred Souldiers, & 15. hundred Pioniers, in drawing the ſame ouer the mountaynes but foure Leagues, in the ſpace of 15. daies.
               At the ſame tyme the Lord Diguieres knowing that the enemy fortifyed a temple in the towne of Saynt Peter in the Marquiſat of Saluces, ſendeth thether ye Lord Brikmaut with his companies, who forced that place in the middle of the day the twelft of October, tooke the captaine priſoner, and cut to pieces the reſt: this was the firſt exployt beyond the mountaynes.
               The eight of Nouember the Lords Ramefort, Eſpornakes, and Signak, 
                   through intelligences which they had in Ionquieres, had ſeazed vpon al the towne, ſaue one tower onely: the newes were brought to Orange to the Lord Blacons, the which three howres after the taking thereof, appeared before the towne with 30. horſes. This his ſodaine and vnlooked for comming, did ſo terrify the footmen who were within the towne (calling to remembrance the entertaynment which they had at Montlimart) that they ſorſooke the place, the captayne being not able to hold them, although they were in number foure hundred footmen, and ſixe ſcore horſes, which were not yet entred into the towne, whom the Lord Blacons let goe without any purſuing, content onely to enter into the towne for to chaſtize the traytors.
               In the moneth of Aprill, the States of the countrey, and Senate of Grenoble had ſome ſpeeches of peace, as is aforeſayd: but it was delayed Decemb. from tyme to tyme, the people being not willing to conclude any thing without the good will and aduiſe of the King of Nauarre, knowing him faythfull to the king, louer of the good, and proſperity of the realme, and that he deſireth nothing more then the wealth and quietnes, as well of the State in generall, as of their prouince, as alſo to be a true Prince of the blood, a Prince true and faythfull in his word, hauing neuer altered his word in reſpect of any perſon, whoſe ſingular valiantnes, mildnes, and gentlenes (if there were no other thinges in him) might mooue the people to honor and acknowledge him, according to that degree which he hath in the realme of France. Theſe were the cauſes which moued the States & people of Daulphine to conclude nothing without his direction.
               The Articles propoſed in the prouinciall States of Daulphine were three.
               Firſt, that proteſtation be made to the obedience due to the King, and to the iſſue male, which it ſhall pleaſe God to giue him.
               And that for lack of yſſue the king of Nauarre be acknowledged as head of the Princes of the bloud, firſt ſucceſſor of the crowne, and after him the

other Princes, according to ye prim
                     •
                  geniture of their degree, with deteſtaon of the manifeſtes, and other ſuch libels, whereby they of the League  haue gone about to alter this ſucceſſion.
               Secondly, that the reformed religion be receaued throughout all the Prouince of Daulphine indifferently: and that they of the reformed religion ſhall permit the Romiſh, and ſuffer the church men to enter and enioy their goods and liuinges: on both ſides they do promiſe to acknowledge the court of Parliament of Grenoble, and to obay the Lord Maugyron: & that whatſoeuer alteration may happen to the State, the king of Nauarre ſhall imploy his authority preſent, and to come to the obſeruation of the agreement, namely, in that which doth concerne the dignity of the court, of the Lieutenant, of the King, and of the church men.
               Thirdly, that in expecting a peace, in more ampie maner euery one ſhal keepe that which he holdeth, ſhortning notwithſtanding the garriſons as much as ſhall be poſſible.
               This was concluded and agreed in the prouinciall States of Daulphine, with an agreement vppon their common defence about the 20. of December.
               Although the Lord Eſpernon be a moſt zealous and deuout Catholike, & that he did agaynſt them of the reformed religion all that euer he could, yet with ſome moderatnes he had committed the gouernmēt of his charge to the Lord Valete his brother, which vſed the ſame valiantnes, with the like modeſty: God did ſo bleſſe the good intents of theſe two noble Catholikes indeede, as iſſued out of an ancient and noble ſtocke, without any degenerating, that hauing well rid that Prouince of Daulphine of ſeditious and factions Leaguers, afterward the Catholikes and reformed haue fallen to a good and peaceable compoſition, by the which they haue entertayned themſelues in amity, and kept their countrey from ranſacking, and ſubuerſion.
               So wee ſee now theſe two great and large prouinces Languedock, and Daulphine, the one through ye ſauage cruelty of Ioyeuſe, the other through the faithfull ſeruice and modeſty of the Lords Eſpernon and Valete, bretheren, to be ſet in good peaceable ſtate.
               It is ſayd how the king of Nauarre had certaine meetings and parleys with the Q. Mother, and how the laſt parl
                     •
                  y appoynted, was interrupted by the conſpiracies of the Leaguers, ſeeking to lay the foundation of their greatnes, vnder colour of defending the Romiſh religion: after the which interruption, the King of Nauarre retyred into Rochel, where he continued vntill the end of Aprill.
               Now let vs lay downe what the ſayd King of Nauarre did from this time, to wit, the latter end of Aprill vnto the end of December, and then we will take the courſe of thoſe things which haue paſſed in other countreys,

and by the ſetting downe of other men.
               About the ende of Aprill, the King of Nauarre departing from Rochel 
                   with certayne péeces of ordinance, tooke Chizay by compoſition, and Saſſay by aſſault, where he commaunded certaine robbers of Niort, (who had obſtinatly reſolued to withſtand him) to be hanged. From thence he went to S. Mexent, which yéelded vpon compoſition after they had ſeene the Canon. From thence (fayning to goe ſomewhere els) departed in the euening, and in the morning earely was before Fontenay, and on a ſudden (without great reſiſting) tooke the Suburbe called Loges, and at the ſame inſtant compaſſed the towne on euery ſide, leaſt any ſuccour ſhould enter in. But ſeeing that he had neede of more ordinance than he had, ſpeedily departed to Rochel to haue more; which thing the Rochellers did very willingly and ſpeedily graunt: ſo that within leſſe than fiue dayes he returned, and began to batter Fontenay with nine péeces. The Prince alſo brought certaine peeces from S. Jhan d' Angely, ſo that Captaine Roſsiere, who commaunded there ouer the Albaneſes and inhabitants, were enforced to yéeld by compoſition, almoſt at the diſcredition of the ſaid King of Nauarre, who vſed them very courteouſly, performing inuiolably whatſoeuer hee had promiſed them.
               From Fontenay the King of Nauarre ſent the Prince of Conde to Manlion, a little towne, with three peeces of ordinance, which notwithſtanding was taken with ladders before the ordinance had played. The morrowe after, the King of Nauarre arriued thether, who had retyred to Luſſon, after the taking of Fontenay, fayning to retyre to Rochel.
               
               The King perceiuing that his▪ Mother could neither execute her ſecret practizes, nor beſtowe her Italian figges vpon the King of Nauarre, nor the Prince of Conde, immediatly after her returne to the Court, to pleaſe the Leaguers, and to entertayne their fauour, for that he was ſo much beholding to them, immediatly he determined to ſend a mightie armie into Guyenne, againſt the King of Nauarre and of them of the religion. And ſuppoſing that the Marſhall Byron had gone too ſlowly about his matters in the laſt armie, he was deſirous to trie what another Captaine of a hotter ſpirit could doo. And becauſe the Duke Ioyeuſe the Kings brother in lawe was ſomewhat famous, not for his valour, but for incredible & monſtrous exceſſes of crueltie, which he had ſhewed the yeare before at Lodeue, Saint Ponce and Marueiolx, and other places in Languedock: for the true deſcription whereof, newe t
                     ••
                  rmes and words had néede to bee deuiſed. The King (I ſay) ſuppoſing him a fit iuſtrument to execute his choler vppon them of the religion, which ſo valiantly had heretofore reſiſted the iniuries of the Leaguers, and deſpiſed their forces, for the great wrongs proffered to his Maieſtie by the Leaguers, ſent him with a mightie armie to paſſe ouer the riuer Loyre. The King of Nauarre and the Prince of

                  Conde were in the low Poytow with their companies very braue and luſtie, though very ſmall in compariſon of the multitude of the enemies. And as ſome companies of the Duke Ioyeuſe had paſſed Loyre, and aduaunced  themſelues vpon the King of Nauarre his men, the ſaid King of Nauarre wholly diſcomfited a band of the enemies: which thing being done, he cauſed his companies to retyre, ſome to Saint Mexent, others into Xainctonge, to employ them as occaſion might ſerue, to the ouerthrowing of that newe mightie armie. But not long after it happened (I knowe not by  whoſe fault committed) that two regiments, to wit, the regiment of Charboniere, and of Captaine Debory, were left within the towne of Mote Saint Eloy, nigh Saint Mexent, being not aſſured of the Caſtell, but only by the promiſe of them who did hold it. Which afterward, ſeeing the enemie aſſault the ſaid Charboniere and Debory, did not fauour them, but tooke part againſt them, and that more is, deliuered two pieces of ordinance to the enemie, wherewith they brake the Barricadoes of our men: ſo they were diſcomfited by the Lord Ioyeuſe, Debory was taken priſoner. Charboniere was then at S. Mexent, where hee did good ſeruice at the ſiege, which the enemy ſhortly after laied before the ſaide towne. Among other examples of barbarous and ſauage crueltie in diuers places, by the ſaid Ioyeuſe executed, deſerueth a ſpeciall note of infamie, that the poſteritie may diſcerne men from monſters. The Souldiours of the ſaid Charboniere and Debory, (to whome vpon his faith he had promiſed ſafety of life) yet contrarie vnto the ſame, hauing cauſed them to be ſtripped ſtarke naked, and ſo they falling vpon their knees, crying vnto God for mercie, and vnto the enemie for compaſſion, without any pittie or feeling of humanitie, commaunded his Souldiours to trie their ſtrength of their armes, and the ſharpen
                     •
                  s of their ſwords vpon thoſe naked bodies, deſtitute of all defence.
               After that he beſieged Saint Mexent, which reſiſted the furie of his armie, and of all his ordinance for the ſpace of 15. dayes, and about the 22. of Iune, the towne was ſurrendered by compoſition: which the King of Nauarre did greatly miſlike, becauſe that L. Iarriete being knowne and ſtayed at the gate, as he went forth among the reſt was brought to the Lord Ioyeuſe, which committed him to the hands of the Marſhall, with commaundement to put him to a ſhamefull death. This learned and godly man had faithfully and vertuouſly executed the miniſtery in that towne, and there he confirmed the doctrine which he had preached, with a moſt conſtant and Chriſtian death, which was vnhappie to them, who without a cauſe put him to the ſame. For they themſelues who executed that vniuſt commaundement, would not diſſemble to ſay (after they had heard the earneſt confeſſion of his faith and praiers which he made in the end of his life) that certainely God would reuenge the death of ſo good and godly a man, in

whome there was found no cauſe of ſuch puniſhment, and in deede the Duke Ioyeuſe and his armie did not ſuruiue him long. 
               
               After the taking of Saint Mexent, the Lorde Ioyeuſe came to Niort, with ſhew to ſeaſe vppon Marans, as well to cut the way into Poytow, to the King of Nauarre, as to ſhut him vp into Rochel, and by theſe meanes to beſiege Fontenay with leſſe danger, which as yet was but ſlenderly fortified: alſo to ſeaſe vpon Talmound, hauing al the reſt to his deuotion; which thing ſeemed to him eaſilie to performe.
               For although the King of Nauarre fayned that he would defend Maran againſt that armie, as he did the yeare before againſt the Marſhall Byron, at the ſelfeſame ſeaſon, yet notwithſtanding hee had not determined ſo to doo, as alſo it was a thing impoſſible to defend it, for the Mariſhes and ditches and channels were ſo dried vp, and the earth ſo hardened, that the footmen could eaſilie goe thorough euery where: there was ſome more diſcommoditie for horſemen, by reaſon of the ſteps, but yet it was acceſſible euery where.
               In the meane time, the King of Nauarre ſent in the regiment of Captaine Preau, with ſome other companies, who ſhewed great diligence in fortifying the holdes of Bastile, Brune, Poyneuf, and Clowſie: as for the Fort Brault, the King made it in forme of Sheeres on the ſide of the land, and had determined to defend that onely and the Caſtell. The others were only to holde the enemie in hand, and in the meane time that this reſolution might be ſtayed, the heads hauing commaundement to retire into the towne, and not harden themſelues obſtinately in the defence of the ſaid Fortes. After that the Caſtell was furniſhed with neceſſaries, Captaine Preau ſhould retyre to Fontenay, the Lord Iarry with a number of Souldiours ſhould retyre into the Caſtell, when he ſhould be enforced to forſake the towne, and there to abide the force of the enemie for eyght dayes: which thing he could doo well enough. In the which ſpace, the King of Nauarre and the Prince hauing aſſembled their forces, woulde haue giuen ſo many croſſes to the Duke Ioyeuſe, that perhappes he ſhould not haue needed to take the paine to goe to dye at Coutras: notwithſtanding, for theſe conſiderations or other, the Duke Ioyeuſe ſet not on Marans, but at the requeſt of the Lord Saint Luke and others, going out of Niort through the countrey of Aunix, and the towne Sorgeres, went to batter Tonnay Charante, which he tooke by compoſition: and there vnderſtanding that the companie of the Lorde Puelles was at Croixchapeau, halfe the way betweene Tonney Charante and Rochel, he went with the choyſe of his armie, to ſet vpon them at the breaking of the day.
               This companie commaunded by ſome officer (for the Lord Puelles was then at Rochel) did moſt couragiouſly defend themſelues: but the place was ſuch, as the enemie had meanes to encloſe them on euery ſide, and to get

to the top of the houſes through the back ſide, and to driue them out by ſetting the houſes on fire: great part of them was ſlaine in the fight; other yelded  themſelues vpon promiſe of the ſafetie of their liues; other hid themſelues in the caues. They were almoſt all killed againſt the faith giuen to them, with like ſauagenes, and barbarous crueltie, as the Souldiours of Debory and Charboniere were at the Mote Saint Eloy.
               
               This done, the Lord Ioyeuſe returned to Tonney Charante (vnderſtanding that the King of Nauarre was gone out of Rochel to ſet vpon him) and thence to Niort. At the ſame time, they which were at Marans did looke to be ſet on, but he vnderſtanding that ſome companies of the Prince  had taken Tonney Charante, vpon the Gariſon which hee had left there, in haſt returned thether with his Ordinance, tooke it againe, being kept only by a ſergiant of a band, who with 15. Souldiours onely, had obſtinatly vndertaken the defence thereof.
               In the ſelfe ſame place he was aduertiſed of the euill watch, and of the ſmall company which was at the Abbey of Maillezay, a very ſtrong place, thether he went with ſpeede, and the Lorde Malicorne gouernour of Poytow with him, he compaſſed it ſo, that it was not poſſible to put in new forces, ſo that the fourth day after it was ſurrendered by compoſition.
               After the taking of Maillezay, it was thought that the Duke Ioyeuſe would ſet on Marans, but hee durſt not, fearing the King of Nauarre and the Prince, who were in the field ſeeking occaſion. Some dayes after Ioyeſue made a ſhew to ſet vpon Talmound, but the Lord Saint Stephen hauing ſeazed vpon it firſt, cauſed him to haue no great affection thereto. So as his armie decayed dayly, being infected with the Peſtilence: the King of Nauarres on the other ſide waxed ſtrong.
               The Lord Ioyeuſe hauing ſtayed in Poytow ſomewhat leſſer then three moneths, about the 15. day of Auguſt he rode in poſte to Paris to the Duke of Guize, as well to informe him of his noble actes, and what Kingdomes hee had conquered in winning few villages in Poytow, as to miniſter texts vnto the Fryers and Ieſuits to preach vpon vnto the ſottiſh people of Paris: to wit, the notable ſlaughters which hee had committed vpon the hereticks in Poytow, he was receaued with exceeding ioye of the Pariſions, he left his companies with the Lorde Lauerdine, who conducted them after him all by eaſe.
               But the King of Nauarre who ſlept not, went forth out of Rochel vpon the newes of the retiring of the ſaide Ioyeuſe, with a marueilous celeritie, and paſſing through Marans with ſome horſemen, purſued the remnant of that armie ſo liuely, (and that with few men) that he diſcomfited three companies of men of warre, conducted by the Marquis Renel, tooke their Enſignes, and many of them, with a great number of Gentlemen.
               This being done, he purſued after Lauerdine, which conducted the footmen

with two culuerines, but with the fauour of paſſages ouer the riuers, ſaued himſelf in the Haye in Tourenne, where the king of Nauarre beſieged  him: but hauing neither Ordinance nor footemen, forſooke him and went to Monſoreau vpon the riuer of Loyre in Tourenne, where he made a Fort vpon the riuer, and there he ſtaied 15. daies to expect the companies which were brought to him out of France, by the County Soiſſons.
               
               Whileſt theſe thinges were paſſing thus in Poytow, the king about the 23. of Iune vnderſtood that the army of Germans, both great and ſtrong was in readines to take their iourney into France: whereupon the King determined to prepare not onely to defend himſelfe, but alſo to inuade the enemie. Therefore he ſendeth his commiſſioners into all Prouinces, to aſſemble all his Nobilitie, with all their forces, and them to deuide into three ſeuerall armies, wherof the rendes vous of the one vnder the conduct of the Duke of Guyze, comprehending the Nobilitie and others who were knowen notorious leaguers, was giuen the 20. of Iuly in the towne of Chaumont in Baſſignye. The ſecond armie vnder the conduct of the K. himſelfe, was of the Nobilitie, in the which hee had moſt truſt, out of Picardy, France, Normandie, Britayne, and other Prouinces betweene Seyne and Loyre. The rendes vous was appoynted at Saint Florentine in Bourgony, between the cities of Troyes and Auxer, the firſt day of Auguſt. The third vnder the conduct of the L. Ioyeuſe, was of the Nobilitie of ye coū
                  tries beyond Loyre, and the rendes vous was aſſigned at Gien.
               
               The Duke of Guize with his armie of conſpirators and Leaguers ſhould ſtop the paſſage to the Germanes, vpon the borders of Lorreyne, & ſpecially ſhould hinder them frō taking their way through Champaigne, on the north ſide of the riuer of Seyne.
               
               The King of Nauarre about the beginning of Iune, vnderſtanding that his armie of Germanes was in readines to departe out of Germanie to come to his ſuccour, ſent Ambaſſadonrs to the King, humbly to intreate him to take ſome pitie of his kingdome and poore ſubiects, both to ſhew him ſome wayes of peace, and alſo becauſe that heretofore the ſaide King had acknowledged the heads of the League to be his enemies, and to haue rayſed all theſe vprores, not ſo much againſt the houſe of Bourbon, as againſt his owne perſon: he requeſted the King to vſe his, and the Germane forces againſt the common enemie of the Realme. But the King hauing many diſloyall ſeruants, both about his perſon and in his counſell, who were greatly addicted to the league, they diſloyally betrayed him, making him beleeue that if he ſhould accept the King of Nauarre his offers, and ſo change his mind, it were the neareſt way to rayſe an vniuerſal rebelliou of all his ſubiects againſt him, and that this Ambaſſage of the King of Nauarre did proceed, not from loue and duetie, but frō feare and dread▪ who ſaw his manifeſt ouerthrowe at hand, by theſe three great and mightie armies which he was ſetting in a readines. The Duke of

                  Guyze with his conſpirators, aduertized by his ſpecial friends (which hee had alwayes about the Kings perſon, & who were priuie to al his ſecrets)  of this Ambaſſage and proffers made by the King of Nauarre, was not a little amazed, fearing that the King now was better aduiſed, hauing a fit opportunity to reuenge himſelfe vpon the pride, arrogancie, & iniuries proffred him by them, conſidering that they were not able to withſtand ſo great a power, and that they might be vndone ere euer they ſhould perceaue it, vſeth two ſhifts to auoide the tempeſt hee ſawe comming: Firſt writeth a letter full of flattering prayers, proteſtations, and feare: for he with an humble ſtile, endeuoureth to make the king beleeue that he had been gentle and tractable, neuer refuſing the means of a good peace. Thē he prayeth the King to thinke no hurt in that which they had done, as not proceeding from any malice, but rather frō zeale of the Catholike Religion, and inflaming him to oppoſe himſelfe and all his forces againſt the Germanes, the auncient enemies of the Realme, promiſeth him for that purpoſe, a ſtrong ayde and ſuccour againſt them. Laſt of all, hee fayned himſelfe, his partakers, and all the Catholikes, to ſtand in great feare of a ſucceſſour vnknowen, and like to be much inferiour vnto him, and an enemie of the Catholike Religion, and that if hee would reſolue his ſubiects in that matter, doo aſſure him that all things would proſper and ſucceede after his owne wiſhing.
               The King with his armie of Catholikes ſhould ſtay for them in Berry, and keepe their paſſages ouer the Loyre, but ſhould ſuffer them to goe forward betweene the riuers of Sene & Loyre, that at length when they had gone forward in that ſliue betweene the ſaid two riuers, the Catholikes on the one ſide, and the Leaguers on the other ſide, following after them, either ſhould enforce them through difficulties to retyre homeward, the ſelfe ſame way that they came, or elſe by ſome occaſion or ſurprize ſhould oppreſſe them. The Duke Ioyeuſe with his armie ſhould goe to get the aduantage betweene the K. of Nauarre and the Germanes.
               Upon this occaſion the Duke Ioyeuſe (as is ſayd) repayred to Paris, there to haue his inſtructions, & to receaue the Kings commandements.
               According to this orer the Duke Mercure, (almoſt then king of Britaine) taked out of Britaine as many Leaguers as he could, and being ſent vnto the Duke of Guyze vnder the conduct of the Lord Hautboys, they miſcaried by the way: for about the beginning of September they were met and ſlayne by the King of Nauarre, being then at Monſorean.
               
               During which time of the ſoiourning of the King of Nauarre at Mō
                     ſoreau, the Duke Mercure tooke his iourney out of Britaine to ioyne with the armie of the Duke Ioyeuſe his brother in law, who hauing encreaſed his armie with a new ſupplie of men of armes, artillery and inunicion, ſtayed at Tours, to march againſt the King of Nauarre. The Vicount Turenne hauing intelligence thereof, ſet vpon him and tooke his rich carriage

nigh Saumur: and ſhortly after the ſayd King of Nauarre hauing receaued the County of Soyſſons with his French companies, returned to Xainctonge, and ſo went to Rochel, where after he had remayned ſome  dayes, at length he departed thence the tenth of October: there he tooke ſome peeces of artillery, and going through Taillebourg, repayred to Pons, where hauing aſſembled and muſtered all his forces, determined to paſſe into Gaſcoyne, partly to gather more forces in going, partly to ioyne with his army of Germans (which were already farre entred into Bourgundy) paſſing through the Prouinces, which were fauourable to him.
               For to execute this determination, it was needfull for him to paſſe the riuers Droune and Liſle, which were the neareſt, with reſolution to fight with Ioyeuſe if neede were.
               The Duke Ioyeuſe, had aduaunced already to Saint Mexent, when the king of Nauarre departed out of Rochel, and knowing the intent of the ſaid King of Nauarre, thought to cut his way: and with great iourneys paſſing through Poytow & Engomoys, came to Barbeſieulx, & ſo to Rochechalays in Perigord, with commaundement (as he ſayd) not to ſpare the extremity of the battayle, if other meanes would not ſerue: concluding, that by the ouerthrow of the king of Nauarre (which hee made ſure in his conceit) the army of the Germans would not bee able to continue.
               The chiefeſt aduantage in this exployt, was to paſſe ouer the ſayd riuers, for it ſeemed that hee who firſt might goe ouer theſe two Riuers, would haue great aduantage vpon the other; for the which cauſe the king of Nauarre vſing that prouidence and accuſtomed diligence, which doth render him admirable, accompanied with the Princes of Conde and Soyſſons, the Lords Trimouille and Turenne, and others, taketh his way to paſſe the riuer Droune, and lodged at Archiak and Montlieu, and other places thereabout.
               The Marſhall Matygnon had geuen counſell to the ſayd Ioyeuſe, to ſeaze vpon Coutras, a towne and caſtell ſituated ſomewhat aboue the meeting of the ſayd riuers Liſle, and Droune, a place of importance.
               Both the King of Nauarre and Ioyeuſe did ſtriue to get that towne, the one did ſtriue to paſſe ouer the riuer Droune, the other to ſtop the paſſage thereof.
               The Lord Ioyeuſe cauſed his light horſes to aduaunce to the place, who arryued there one hower ſooner then he could haue done himſelfe. But as they were taking theyr lodginges, there they found the companyes of the king of Nauarre, which came thither alſo, to whom the enemy gaue place quickly, as beyng the weaker.
               The king of Nauarre therfore paſſed his forces ouer the foord of Droune, but the Duke Ioyeuſe hauing great deſire to do ſome great exployt: and conſidering that the king of Nauarre was incloſed betweene two great

riuers, he promiſed himſelfe an aſſured victory of him, as not able to auoyd any way. Therefore he giueth the rendes vous the morrow morning after beyng the 20. of October, to a certayne place betweene Rochechalays, and  
                  Coutras.
               
               The day being come, he tooke his place for the battayle, with as much aduantage as he could chooſe within halfe a league of Coutras.
               
               Here is the place, the perſons, the cauſes, and euentes to be conſideres. The place is in the very edge of Xainctonge, where he had committed horrible and ſauage cruelties, and other exceſſes againſt them of the reformed religion, which haue no names in any language. The perſons were Leaguers for the moſt, Atheiſtes walking among them, vnder colour of zeale of popiſh religion, men beſides polluted for the moſt part with the bloud of the Saynts which they had ſpilled like water vpon the earth, and other abominations which follow treaſons, Idolatry, & Atheiſme: they were more in number without compariſon better armed and furniſhed with all neceſſaryes.
               The cauſes were, that after they had for theſe foure yeares refuſed all reaſonable offers of the king of Nauarre, they hated him without a cauſe, they did draw theyr tongues and ſwords agaynſt the God of heauen, and his Goſpell with a Ciclopicall rage. Therefore Adraſta did ſtay them in that place, ſwolen with pride, arrogancie, contumelie, vaine hope and confidence in the arme of fleſh, which could not deliuer them. There they do
                     •
                   prooue the force of the God of Battels, and drinke a harty draught, or rather a carowſe of the Dregges of Gods wrath and iuſtice, leaſt that theyr abominable crueltyes ſhould be knowen further. And alſo, that the ſaincts, as it were out of the middeſt of thoſe prouinces, which do embrace the Goſpel, might ſee that the Lord is the iuſt reuenger of ſuch abominations, and defender of the iuſt cauſe. And that they may learne to feare him, and in him onely to truſt and repoſe themſelues. Here therefore Adraſtia doth ſtay them to anſwere vnto Gods iudgement.
               Now let vs come to the euents. The King of Nauarre early in the morning being firſt aduertyzed of this preparation, was not mooued at it; no more was hee vpon the ſecond warning. But at the third tyme he ſhewed no leſſer deſire to fight, then the enemy to whom twiſe before he had proffered the occaſions.
               He taketh horſe, rydeth forth out of Coutras to méet ye enemy, commaundeth the Lord Clermont maſter of his Ordinaunce, in all haſt to paſſe ouer the canon (for he could not do it the day before:) he putteth his army in battayle array, placeth his artillery in the forefront ſo commodiouſly, that all peeces did ſeruice without harming any man of his owne, & greatly did endomage the enemy. At length hauing encouraged his ſouldiers to the battayle (whom he found full of deſire and readines) cauſed prayers

to be made from company to company.
               About 9. a clocke in the morning the artillery began to play on both  ſides: the ordinance of the king of Nauarre was ſo commodiouſly placed, that it did wonderfully annoy the men of Armes, which the Lord Ioyeuſe had at his right hand, and the regimentes which did flanke thoſe men of armes. Many being beaten downe with it, ſome of the heads tooke reſolution rather to goe to the charge, then to die ſo miſerably without any fight.
               The Harquebuziers in like maner began to ioyne, and there was no man on both ſides who ſhewed not to haue a great deſire to do well.
               The Ordinance of Ioyeuſe did let flye certayne ſhot towards the company of the Prince of Conde, but without any effect, ſaue a horſe whereon a page did ride, which was ſlayne. The cauſe of this ſmall effect, was a litle riſing of the ground, which did let the free aſpect and ayming of the Ordinance, ſo that many ſhot did light vpon the ground.
               About nine a clocke the light horſemen of the Lord Ioyeuſe, to the number of foure hundred horſes, conducted by the Lord Lauerdine, and captain Mercure, ſet on the horſemen of the king of Nauarre: but after ſome fight, began to wauer and to make roome.
               The reſt of the horſemen of the king of Nauarre conſiſted of 4. Squadrons, diſtant the one from the other in this wiſe.
               The Squadrons of the King of Nauarre, and of the Prince of Conde were diſtant about a hundred and fifty paces.
               The Squadron of the Prince of Soiſſons, at the left hand of the king of Nauarre about three ſcore paces.
               The Squadron of yt Vicount Turenne, diſtant ſo much from the Prince of Conde at his right hand. The Lord Lauerdine charged the Vicount Turenne, but without any endomaging of him.
               Theſe three ſquadrons (where ſtoode the Princes of the blood ſtanding faſt) did behold all this fight, vntill the Lord Ioyeuſe followed with his mayne force of horſemen; and hauing both on the right hand and the left two great hedges of horſemen, aduanced to giue the generall onſet.
               Then theſe three Princes marching euery one at the forefront of his ſquadron cloſe, firſt went a ſoft pace, then began to gallop, laſt, the watch word being giuen with a looſed bridle, ſet on ſo liuely (euery one ſeuerally by himſelf according to his courſe) vpon that multitude, that incontinently the companies were mingled, and came to handiblowes. The ſpeares which were in great number in the armie of Ioyeuſe, did but ſmall ſeruice, for they ioyned néerer.
               It is a wonderfull thing, that in a moment ſuch a furious troupe as was that of the Lord Ioyeuſe, armed & furniſhed to the aduantage, flanked both on the right hand and the left with two great battaillions of footmen,

was ouerthrowne and vanquiſhed, by a troupe which had neither in number, nor in furniture, nor in armes, nor in ſituation of the battell any aduantage at all. God (who gouerneth all things, and holdeth in his hands  the balance of victories and ouerthrowes) made then courage to preuayle againſt multitude; the iuſt cauſe, againſt iniurie; and the lawfull defence, againſt bragging, and the great preparation of warre.
               And as the men of armes were quickly ouerthrowne, trodden vnder foote, and put to flight; ſo in as little ſpace were the footmen diſcomfited, being ſet on by the regiment of the King of Nauarre, where commaunded as Maſters of the Campe, Caſtelnaw, Parabiere, Salignake, and others. And at the left hand of the King of Nauarre, Charboniere, Preau, Orges, and others, who all euery man right forward (following the occaſion of the victorie) cut in péeces all that made any reſiſtance, and put to flight the reſt which were on the ſide of copſes at the right hand, as on the ſide of the riuer Droune at the left hand. And as a little before nine a clocke theſe two armies came to hands, the quarrell was ſo ſoone decided, that at ten a clock there was found not one onely man of the enemies which ſtood to his defence, nor that was in ſight, but ſuch as were laied dead vpon the ground, or taken priſoners, or in flight. The place where the battell was fought, remayned ſo couered with men of armes, horſes and armours, but ſpecially of Launces matted ſo thicke that they ſtopt the way. There remayned the Lord Ioyeuſe, and alſo his brother, with a great number and notableſt Lords.
               The King of Nauarre, the Princes of Conde and Soiſſons, with the reſt of the armie purſued the victorie. There were taken many notable Gentlemen, and among others the Lord Belegarde gouernour of Xainctonge, the Lords S. Luke, and Montigny of Berry, who commaunded ouer a companie of horſemen: hee was noted in ioyning of the battell to haue pearced further then any of the companie; for hee entered euen to the ſide of the gardes of the King of Nauarre, which were at his right hand, and there by them beaten downe was taken by ſome of the ſayd gardes.
               God gaue this notable victorie to the King of Nauarre, and in that iorney did ſhine the valour wherewith hee hath indued him in all the ſpeciall graces which may decke a noble and vertuous Prince, and great Captain, not onely for the counſell, reſolution, diligence, and wiſe gouernment, but alſo in the execution of armes. For doing the office of a Captaine & Souldier, he preſſed ſo farre as to take the enemie by the coller.
               The Prince of Conde alſo ſhewed himſelfe valiant; for he had his horſe ſlaine vnder him; the Prince of Soiſsons alſo tooke priſoners with his owne hand. The horſe of the Vicount Turenne was alſo ſlaine. God made theſe Princes ſtrong in this dayes worke, according to the order of their preheminence, by them to doo the execution which pleaſed him: ſo that euery

one in his owne perſon did ſome honorable exployt in this victorie. This victorie was the more honorable vnto the ſayd King of Nauarre, that it was not bloudie to him. For ſo great number being ſlaine on the ſide of the  enemies, he loſt a very ſmall number of either horſemen or footmen of his own. And among that ſmall number, there was not found one of marke or commandement. On the other ſide, all the chiefeſt were ſlaine, wounded or taken, except Lauerdine, who ſaued himſelfe with much a doo. Captayne Mercure while they were in battaile, ran to Contras to ſeaze vpon the king of Nauarre his baggage, ſuppoſing that the Duke Ioyeuſe had gotten the victorie. But when he heard the crye of victorie for the King of Nauarre, he went out in haſt, and following the bancke of the riuer Droune toward Rochechalays, ſaued himſelfe by flight and ſhame.
               The victorie was purſued three houres and more, in the which purſuing were ſlaine and taken a great number: the ordinance was carried away, and the baggage loſt. After the returne from purſuing of the enemie, thankes were giuen to GOD vpon the place of the battell, the wounded were taken vp, the dead buried, the campe of the enemie burned vp.
               But that which filled the meaſure of the King of Nauarre his vertue and honour, was, that hee ſhewed himſelfe no leſſe courteous and gentle toward the priſoners and wounded, than hee had ſhewed himſelfe valiant in the fight. Let them who haue tried him by experience, giue the teſtimony thereof, who alſo haue acknowledged by effect, ye good affection which he beareth to good French men, diſcerning by a wiſe prudence all good men, from the conſpiring and traiterous Leaguers, enemies of the ſtate. He commaunded the wounded to be diligently dreſſed and attended: he ſent away almoſt all the priſoners without any raunſome: he gratified many of the chiefeſt, & to ſome he rendered their Enſignes, namely, vnto the Lord Montigny. If he could haue guided the lot of armes in the battell, many were left there vpon the place to whom he would haue willingly forgiuen. For there was ſeene in him in this proſperous ſucceſſe not one token of inſolencie or paſſion, which is commonly the mother of crueltie.
               Here foloweth the names of the moſt notable men, who dyed in this battell.
               
                  The Lord Ioyeuſe general of the army,
                  and Saint Suuer his brother.
                  
                     Breſſay.
                  
                  
                     Rouſſay.
                  
                  County of Suze.
                  
                  County Ganelo.
                  
                  County Aubjyou.
                  
                  
                     Fumel.
                  
                  
                     Neufuy in Perigord the elder.
                  
                     Rochefort.
                  
                  
                     Gurat.
                  
                  Saint Fort.
                  
                  
                     Vaulx, Lieutenant of Bellegard.
                  
                  The Enſigne bearer of the Lorde Montigny.
                  
                  
                     Tierceline, maſter of the Campe.
                  
                     Cheſner.
                  
                  
                     Valade.
                  
                  
                     
                     Baculard.
                  
                  
                     Champel the younger.
                  
                     Pluuiault.
                  
                  
                     Brangerie.
                  
                  Al theſe were lords, hauing charg in  ye army, wt many other men of Mark.
               
               Theſe folowing were taken priſoners and wounded.
               
                  
                     Bellegard taken, wounded, and afterward dyed.
                  Saint Luke.
                  
                  The Marquis of Prennes.
                  
                  County Monſoreau.
                  
                  
                     Sanſak.
                  
                  
                     Cipiere.
                  
                  
                     Saultray.
                  
                  
                     Montigny.
                  
                  
                     Villecomblin.
                  
                  
                     Chaſteaurenauld.
                  
                  
                     Maumont.
                  
                  
                     Parriere.
                  
                  
                     Chaſteauuieulx.
                  
                  
                     Chaſtelou.
                  
                  
                     Auuerdiere.
                  
                  All theſe were men of commaundement.
               
               Beſide theſe were a number of Gentlemen, Captaines, and other men of name, part of them ſlaine, part taken. The body of Ioyeuſe was embaumed and brought to Paris. God in that day and place, rained from Heauen his fearefull iudgements, and made them of France, who loue the bloud of ciuill warres, to knowe, that in the end the loſſe is common, and that ſuch peſtilence deſtroyeth the authors thereof.
               The King being at Gien vpon Loyre, aboue Orleans, with his armie, to withſtand the Germans at the paſſage of Loyre, receaued newes, that the two armies had met, and it was firſt reported, that it was but a little ſkirmiſh, where the King of Nauarre was put to the worſt. But the trueth could not be hidden long, for at length it was knowne to all men, that the King of Nauarre had obtayned the notableſt victory, which was yet in all the ciuill warres of France, for the defence of the religion, with an irrecuperable loſſe of them, who would haue it rooted out. The Court kept a great mourning thereof, which qualified well the great ioy that they had for the ouerthrow of the Germanes, which they had promiſed to thēſelues. After this victorie the King of Nauarre folowed his purpoſed iourney into Gaſcoyne, for the cauſes afore ſaid: he brought with him the beſt part of all the companies, hee was accompanied with the Prince of Soiſſons. The Prince of Conde repayred into Xainctonge, for to aſſemble moreouer al that he might, and to be at the appoynted rendes vous, when they ſhould take their iourney toward the armie of the Germains vpon the riuer of Liſle, and afterward willing to goe further for to haſte with great diligence his way, he left the bodie of his forces with the Vicount Turenne, who looſing neither time nor occaſion, tooke many places vpon the ſaid riuer, and in the rountrey round about, which hee reduced vnder the power of the King of Nauarre.
               
               Here foloweth the names of the places taken by force, or compoſition after

the battell of Coutras.
               
               The houſe and mill of Auber demont nigh Coutras was rendered by compoſition: there were gariſons placed. 
               
               The Mill of Penot beaten downe.
               The Mill of Cauſe taken, and the fortifications deſtroyed.
               The Caſtell and Mill of Saint Seuerine, forſaken by night of them who did holde it. Captaine Roux commaunded there for the King of Nauarre.
               The new Mill giuen ouer, and burned to the very foundations, with all the moueable goods and victuals which were within, whereby many men were vndone, hauing loſt their euidences.
               The Mill of Co
                     •
                  y put vnder the protection of the King of Nauarre, with the condition to make no warre there. The Uicount Miles anſwered for it.
               The Mill of Meneplet did the like vpon the ſame condition: ſo did the mill of Ʋauclere.
               The houſe of Captaine Fay.
               The Abbey of Vauclere.
               The Church of Saint Laurens.
               The towne and Abbey of Guistre▪ taken by force, and a Gariſon put there.
               Saint Denis was forſaken, and a Gariſon put therein.
               Lapalays taken by aſſault, after threeſkore and fiue ſhot of Ordinance, there were about 31. perſons killed, and 32. hanged for the great outrages and violences committed therein, and many other reaſons which were found worthy of Iuſtice, the ſtrong holde, the Church and the towne wholy conſumed with fire, with all the fruites and goods which were within, for that it was a very den of theeues and robbers.
               The Caſtell of Vigneron rendered by compoſition, and a Gariſon put therein.
               The towne and Church of Puiſiguin ſuſtained the ſiege a day and a halfe, & was rendered to diſeretion: there were ſome executed iudicially, for the great iniuries and complaints laide againſt them.
               The Lord Semens who was wont to be one of the pillers of the League in that countrie, brought the reſt there abouts, to the ſeruice of the King of Nauarre, and did ſhew himſelfe more adicted to the ſaid King of Nauarre, then he did euer to the contrarie ſide.
               The fort and towne of Luſſak forſaken, after they had ſtayed for the cannon. It was vtterly deſtroyed.
               Montague abandoned by night, ranſaked and deſtroyed. The houſe of Mondeſier rendered, and after put in the hands of the Uicount Myels, who gaue his word for it. Monpaun forſaken by night, and the wales deſtroyed,

no liuing ſoule left dwelling in. They did fortifie it againe.
               The 4. of December, the ſtrong hold and towne of Sorzack was rendered by compoſition, after ſixe dayes of ſiege: the cannon could not ariue  ſooner, by reaſon of the foule weather and foule waies.
               The Caſtell of Greenholds, one of the ſtrongeſt places of all the countrey was ſurpriſed, and Gariſons put therein.
               The houſe of the Lord Oulmes giuen ouer.
               The Caſtle Franckes forſaken, the fortreſſes were raſed.
               The Caſtell of Muſſidan a ſtrong hold, with the towne, were put in the protection of Salignak, who anſwered that they ſhoulde make no warre thence.
               The houſes of Herbaſſes, Gaudilak, and Mazeroles were put in the protection of the King, with the houſe of the Lorde Brouillet, with the houſe of Viuant, and the noble houſe and auncient Caſtell of Marſilak.
               
               The Caſtell of Saint Pardoux, which was belonging to the Lorde of Neufuy, was put into the hands of his brother, the Lord Foillons.
               
               The 10. day of December, the armie departed from Sorzak, to goe to beſ
                     •
                  ege the towne of S. Aſtier, and Biſhops Caſtell, diſtant two Leagues from Perigeulx.
               
               Theſe Leaguers about the Kings perſon, did caſt forth their forcering perfumes, to wit, if his Maieſtie ſhould accept the King of Nauarre his offers, firſt he ſhould put the holy Catholick Romane faith in daunger to be wholy ſubuerted in few yeares, and at length he ſhould be by the Hereticks ſupplanted, depoſed and diſplaced.
               Secondly, that there would enſue an vniuerſall rebellion of the Catholicks, ſo that the hereticks themſelues, if they would▪ (which thing they woulde neuer (carrying alwaies in remembrance the iniuries and maſſacars by him committed vppon them) bee able to keepe him in the poſſeſſion of his eſtate.
               Thirdly, that the holy father, and all other Catholick potentates of Chriſtendome, would take it in very ill part, and would bend their forces againſt him, ſo that Iupiter himſelfe woulde not bee able to defende him.
               Laſt of all, that it would dot be honorable for him ſo to doo: for it would be thought, that after the freſh loſſe at Coutras, feare had compelled him to yeeld to diſhonorable conditions, and to receaue law of his ſubiects, and ſo againſt the honorable actes of his aunceſtors, hee ſhould ſeeme to haue ioyned himſelfe, though not in opinion, yet in ſocietie with the hereticks, and ſo thought not to haue forſaken, yet to haue been himſelfe againſt the Catholick religion.
               Furthermore, the heathens did neuer giue ſo much credit to the oracles of Apollo, as this beſotted King (whome God had endued with good

partes, if hee would haue vſed them with libertie) did attribute vnto his mother, being vnto him as 
                     Ʋates fatidica, and a ſhee Prieſt of Apollo, a  ſnare, confuſion and ſhame. Shee therefore at the requeſt of the Maſters of the League, ſendeth her Oracle, ex aurcatripode, that by no meanes the King ſhould accept the offers of the King of Nauarre. Fearing that if the King had receaued the offers aboue ſaide, hauing the Princes of the bloud about him, to helpe by their counſell and wiſdome the eſtabliſhing of the decayed ſtate, ſhee ſhould haue been turned out of gouernement, and de Ponte Deiecta, commaunded to ſit at home to mumble her beades. So this great King, yet once more traiterouſlie was be witched, and by the aboueſaid counſellers and Mother, was ſold to his owne ruine, and wofull fall.
               The King of Nauarre, after the victory obtayned at Coutras, became not inſolent of the victory, but mooued with compaſſion for the miſeries which afflicted France, ſubmitted himſelfe, and ſearching out the means to pacify the troubles, ſent Ambaſſadors to the king thē being on the South ſide the riuer Loyre in Berry, to require him yet moſt earneſtly and humbly to conſider the pitifull ſtate of his realme, and to pity and remedy the manifold oppreſſions of his people. And although they might haue conſidered his good ſucceſſe for the ſpace of three yeares in beholding ſo great forces and ſtrong armies prepared and ſent agaynſt him, partly to haue vaniſhed away as duſt blowen by the wind, and partly ouerthrowen by the ſingular aſſiſtance of the mighty God of battels, yet doth proffer with many humble prayers and ſubmiſſion, not onely peace to his diſaduantage, but alſo his forces with the army of the Germans, if it pleaſeth him to vſe thē, to take reuengement of the iniuries, & ſo often reiterated rebellions of the League.
               But the Duke of Guyze, head of the League, hearing of this meſſage, & ſeeing himſelfe, his practiſes, hope, and all that euer he had with his fellows, followers, and companions to be in a dreadfull precipice, like to be thrown down into a miſerable headlong downfall, taketh order by pollicy to deuiſe ſome meanes to auoyd the danger, that is, to worke by all means poſſible to let the accompliſhing of this ambaſſage. And that this thing may be brought to paſſe, the king is to be enchaunted with that kind of ſorcery which in old tyme was called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which is a 
                     •
                  eluding of mans reaſon, as to make a man thinke to ſee that which he ſeeth not. Two ſorts of witches are to bee employed, to wit, the Leaguers of his counſell, as Villeroy, Rets, and others, but ſpecially his mother, whoſe deuilliſh and factions craftines was admired of him, as a moſt perfect wiſdome. Theſe perſons muſt vphold the League, or elſe all wil be ſpilled.
               It is ſaid before how the King with all the forces he could make, gaue his laſt indeuour to oppreſſe the King of Nauarre, and with him them of

the Religion, for the which purpoſe he 
                     •
                  et vp three great mightie armies, the one to abide vpon the paſſages of out of Germanie into Lorreyne, 
                   there to ſtoppe the entring the ſayd Germanes into France.
               
               The ſecond, the king himſelfe ſhould haue about him in his owne perſon, to let the paſſage ouer Loyre, leaſt the ſayd Germanes ſhould ioyne with the King of Nauarre.
               
               The third was conducted by the Lord Ioyeuſe into Guienne, where we ſhewed the ſame to haue beene buried in perpetuall infamie at the battel of Coutras.
               
               Now remayneth to ſpeak of the other two, what they did, and what became of them.
               The King had in deede gathered mighty armies, but he had no money to maintain them, for the Prieſts would haue no more warre ſo coſtly as they had two yeares before: the Pariſiens would heare no more theſe words, da mihi, affer mihi: The Kings money either was intercepted by the way in diuers chances, or elſe his Taliages, Tributs, or ſubſidies were not payed, either by ſome for lack of good wil, or elſe by ſome for lack of money. Therefore in the latter end of Auguſt hauing foure thouſand Swiſſers at Eſtampes, and eight thouſand more entring already into France, with foure thouſand Rutters, which were euery day expected, he muſt needes prouide money for them. For theſe ſhameles Mercenaries (who ſell themſelues to dye at other mens commaundement, neuer conſidering the iuſtice of the cauſe) will make no warre longer than they are fed with money. Conſidering the great charge which he through euil coū
                  ſell had drawen vpon his armes; he gathered a great ſumme of mony vpon the Courts of his Parl
                     •
                  aments, wherewith he payed thoſe Souldiers.
               But whileſt the K. was ſo buſie to fight againſt the God of battells, & his Sonne whome he had anoynted vpon his holy hill Sion; and poll
                     •
                  d his iudges and Magiſtrates, that they might recouer money with aduantage by peruerting indgement. Beholde a preamble of that rebellion which followed againſt him in Paris the moneth of Maie next enſuing.
               There was a certaine Maſſe Prieſt, Parſon of Saint Seuerine, at the lower ende of Saint Iames ſtreate, named Preuoſt, who preached moſt ſeditiouſly againſt the King and certain other Lords, who were his faithfull ſeruaunts, without any reſpect of perſons, degree, or dignitie. This Prieſt being threatned to be had before the King, a certaine notarie made a great aſſembly, both of armes and men for to defend the Prieſt.
               The King being aduertized of this miſ
                     •
                  emeanour, commanded one of the porters of his chamber, accompanied with two Archers of his garde, to goe to the ſayd Notary, to bid him come to ſpeak with the King. They which were aſſembled in the Notaries houſe, ſeeing the ſayde company to enter into the houſe, ſet vpon them with great violence, and enforced

them to ſaue their liues by flight 
                     •
                  rying arme, arme, and ſo put al the ſide of the Vniuerſitie in ſuch a wonderfull commotion, that there was nothing elſe to be hoped, but a tragicall euent, and afterwarde vntill the 8.  day of the ſayd moneth, the whole Citie was in an vprore, keeping watch al night at the corners of the ſtreates.
               Now to returne to the courſe of the hiſtory: The King hauing three great mighty armyes, and no money to entertaine them, turned him
                     •
                  elfe to the olde ſhifts, brough
                     •
                   into France by the Cardinall of Lorreyne, and paltring Italians, who came with the Q. Mother, and gouernd King Henry the ſecond (father to this King) at their pleaſure, when they were diſpoſed to make him a ſlaue to their paſſions. For the ninth of September the King went to Parliament, for to eſtabliſh fifteene Edicts, among the which there were three notable: the firſt was of the eſtabliſhing 27. Secretaries: The ſecond was to chooſe the ſixt chamber of enqueſts, conſiſting of twenty counſellers, and two preſidents. The third was the creation of the Maſters of accounts, with two preſidents: out of the which eſtates, he made his reckoning to pluck two Millions of golde. Where thou mayeſt ſee (gentle Reader) in what miſerable ſtate France was then, from the higheſt to the loweſt. The Leaguers ſecretly agaynſt the king: They openly made warre agaynſt God, diſtroyed his ſubiectes to bring to paſſe his owne ſubuerſion, and to hide the treaſons of his enemies, refuſing to harken vnto any motion of peace proffered him by the king of Nauarre, or to any good counſels: and for to maintayne this his enterpriſes, iuſtice muſt be peruerted by plurality of offices, which is one of the principalleſt pillers of kingdoms: by the which magiſtracy is vpholden & mans ſociety entertayned.
               As concerning the armies which were in hand, that which ſhould bee lead by the king himſelfe conſiſted of foure ſcore and eight companyes of men of armes, and ten thouſand footmen, twelue thouſand Swiſſers, 4. thouſand Rutters, he caryed twelue double Canons, and two thouſand Pioners, and about the 1. of September the companies began to repayre to Montereau faut Yoynne, with commaundement to ſtay there abouts, & about Sens in Bourgony, vntill his comming, and then to repayre all to S. Florentine there to be muſtered.
               The king ſent to Marſhal Biron to Montereau, to view the place where they ſhould campe: for the king had determined to campe alwayes: and for that cauſe all the Lords had prouided tentes. He tooke for his counſel, the Lords Villeroy, and Bruſlard, ſecretaries, the Dukes Eſpernon, Danuile, Retes, and the Marſhals Biron and Aumont.
               
               The Prince Soyſſons was with the king of Nauarre, and the Prince County, was in Normādy, Mayne & Aniow, to gather as many companies as he could, to ioyne with the Germans, knowing well, that theſe great armies

were ſpecially prouided to deſtroy the houſe of Bourbon, vnder the colour of defending the popiſh religion. The Duke d'Aumaule was appoynted Colonel of the Swiſſers: this armie went not further Eaſtward  then Sens, from thence turning South and Weſt ward, and croſſing the Countrey of Auxeroy, and Gastinoys, paſſed Loyre into Berry, after the determinatiun of the Germanes was knowne.
               As for the third armies, thus is it: the Duke of Guize & Lorreyne, at the beginning of September were at Nancy, there they had between 20. and 25000. men, among them were many horſemen, there they receaued 400. Launces of the Duke of Parma, all olde Souldiers, 2000. footemen Italians, and betweene ſixe or ſeauen hundred light horſes, they made no great account of the Italians: the ſonne of the Lord Antragues, gouernour of Orleans, about the 15. of September brought vnto the Duke of Guize, beſide horſemen, about 700. footemen, when a little before, all the companies of the Leaguers of Britayn, ſent vnto him by the Duke Mercure, vnder the conduct of the Lord Hault Boys, were diſcomfited by the King of Nauarre nigh Monſoreau, vpon Loyre, as is before reported.
               The army of Germans for ye king of Nauarre when it departed out of Germany, was of fiue thouſand Rutters, fiue thouſand Launceknights, armed with corſ
                     •
                  ets and launces, ſixteene thouſand Swiſſers, foure thouſand harquebuſiers on horſebacke, and about thre hundred horſes of French men. But after they had paſſed the mountayne of Sauerne, the further it went forward, the more it did encreaſe: for the Lord Mouy brought two thouſand Harquebuſiers French men on horſbacke. The L. Villeneufue Cormon one thouſandand, the Lord Lours one thouſand.
               The Lord Chaſtilion the 22. of September brought to it fifteene hundered Harquebuſiers, & about 200. horſes, ſo that the totall ſumme myght amount to 34. or 35. thouſand, beſides the companies which the Prince County brought afterward.
               They had 16. pieces of ordinance, to wit, foure great culuerines, eight field pieces, and three peeces which were taken from Salabrine.
               
               The Lieutenant of the King of Nauarre was the Prince Bullion, aſſiſted with a counſel, conſiſting of theſe which follow: the Lordes Guitri, Oneaulx, Cleruan, Beauuoys la Nocle, Vezins, Digoyne, Louet, Ramboillet, Laube, Cheuorles, Huguery, and Beauuieu.
               
               This army was the terror of the one ſide, and the hope of the other, and yet both were diſappointed of their expectation. For God ſhewed to the one part, that he hath means ynough to chaſtife whom, and when he pleaſeth: to the other part hee ſhewed, that they are not ſafe who do truſt in man, and make their force the arme of fleſh.
               Beſide theſe three mighty armies, and the armies of the king of Nauarre and Ioyeuſe, whereof it is ſpoken before: The Lords Mommorency and

                  Diguieres had the fifth in Daulphine agaynſt the Lord Valete, beſide the armes and aſſembled forces ſcattered elſwhere.
               Such was the ſtate of miſerable France, which had great cauſe to grone  vnder the heauy burthen of ſo many, ſo great and mighty armies. This tempeſt was very blacke and thicke, and at length thereout iſſued dreadfull thunder clappes.
               But now we haue to ſpeake of theſe three armyes conioyntly, to wit, of the Leaguers, lead by the Guyzes: of the Catholikes, conducted by the king himſelfe: and of the Germans, guided chiefly by the Duke of Boillon.
               
               Here we haue to conſider the iudgementes of God, which were powred vpon theſe armies. Firſt, ye Leaguers by the K. forces did work ye K. vndooing, yt by his fall they might be lifted vp on high. The king in pretending ye defence of the Catholike religion, which no man did oppugne by violence, but the Leaguers, went about to root the Goſpell of Chriſt out of France. The Germans for the moſt part were mercenaries, who regarded not the right of the cauſe, neither came to ſerue him, who procured them, but did in mynd ſwallow downe the ſpoyle of France. And ſome among them who were lead with an vpright mind, yet being mingled with prophane and irreligious men, and truſting in the outward apparance of that army, turned theyr confidence from God to the arme of fleſh: therefore all were diſappointed of theyr intents, for neyther of them all had any benefit by this great warre, but blowes, ſlaughters and calamityes.
               About the latter ende of Auguſt, after this great armie, had paſſed the mountaine of Zauerne, and began to enter into Lorreyne, the Dukes eldeſt ſonne, with certaine regiments approached ſo nigh them at Salabrine, that 3. of his companies were diſcomfited, and ſix Enſignes ſent to Straſbourg, and proceeding further they tooke Blaſmond.
               
               The ſaid army drawing neere to Nancy, about the beginning of September, certayne ſeruantes going about to forrage with their cartes, were ſet on by certayne companies which iſſued out of Nancy: & when they had ſeazed vppon ſome cartes, were purſued and beaten into the very gates of Nancy.
               
               This army of Germans being about Nancy, there was a counſell holden, to wit, agaynſt whom they ſhould firſt turne theyr armes.
               The French men were of that aduile, to make warre in Lorreyne, and that it was the pleaſure of the king of Nauarre, that they who had of luſtines kindled that miſerable warre in France, might firſt of all feele the heauy burthen of the ſame: but ſpecially the Duke of Lorreyne, who was one of the heads of the League.
               The Germans in taking a certaine ſumme of money, which the Duke of Lorreyne proffered them, were at length content to paſſe by as neighbours and friends: yet notwithſtanding they concluded warre, & did there

many acts of hoſtilitie, ſuch as warre doth commonly drawe after it.
               This armie being yet newe and luſtie, did neglect a notable occaſion to oppreſſe the enemie at the bridge S. Vincent: vpon what occaſion that opportunitie  was neglected, it is vncertaine. But it is confeſſed of all men, that if they had come to hands that day, they had ſeene the end (by the iudgment of men) of that warre aſſoone as the beginning. Thus ſome exployts of warre being done there, the ſcarcitie of victualls beginning to growe, they determined to goe foorth out of Lorreyne. But vpon the determination of the way which they ſhould followe, there was great difficultie found. For the Germans deſired to paſſe toward Sedan, from whence they might hope of many good commodities, and if néede ſhould be they might haue a newe ſupply of forces out of Germany: which thing could not bee, if they encloſed themſelues among ſo many riuers which are on the South ſide of Seyne. Some French men on the contrary, ſayd, that they ſhould turne right to the riuer of Loyre, for to ioyne with the King of Nauarre.
               
               The Lord Boillon deſired greatly that they would approach to Sedan, as they had (as he ſayd) promiſed him, and that in hope of it he had made great preparations of powder and artillerie, which hee had made of purpoſe. Conſidering alſo that he had to prouide for the ſecuritie of his places, which might incurre ſome daunger if they were not prouided for. All reaſons debated and weighed on both ſides, the courſe to the riuer of Loyre was concluded.
               Whileſt theſe things ſo paſſed in Lorreyne, the Lord Chaſtilion the 22. of September came to the armie with his troupes: he had much adoo to paſſe, and was as if it were encloſed in the towne of Greſille, but was reſcued by the Countie de la Mark, yonger brother to the Duke of Boillon. The armie drawing néere to Chaumont in Baſſigny, there it was put in deliberation to execute a certaine enterprize which the Lord Chaſtilion had in hand; but it could not be done.
               The armie came to Chasteauuilaine, where they ſoiorned ſome dayes: and in the meane while they tooke a Gentleman named Viliers, comming from Rome: his iourney to Rome was to ſolicite the Pope to helpe his maſter with money, to make warre againſt them of the reformed religion, and alſo to pray the Pope (Frier Sixtus) to name the King head of the League, aſſuring him that it would greatly mooue him to warre, and roote out them of the religion, whom he named heretickes. The anſwere which the Pope made him (as it appeared by his words) was, that they ſhould liue in peace with their neighbours, and that hee could not furniſh them with money, being not willing to make warre againſt any man, who deſired peace among all men.
               The ſayd gentleman carried a letter very ill written, which he ſayd to be the hand of the Ducheſſe of Lorreyne, mother of the Duke, contayning

thus much. I am very glad to vnderſtand the ſtate of your affayres, and I aduiſe you to goe forward, for neuer a fayrer occaſion was offered you to put the Scepter in your hand, and the Crowne vpon your head. This letter  gaue occaſion to them of the Counſell, to agree that this Gentleman ſhould be kept carefully, and brought to the King of Nauarre.
               
               The armie ſoiourning at Chasteauuilaine, the King with his great armie ſtayed about Montereau faut Yonne and Sens: but vnderſtanding the determination of the Germans, retyred with his armie into Berry beyond Loyre, there to ſtop the paſſing ouer to the King of Nauarre, and to giue them freer acceſſe betwéene the two riuers of Seyne and Loyre, where hée thought either to weary them, or by ioyning his with the armie of the Leaguers, at the tayle of them eaſily he might oppreſſe them. During this ſoiourne, the Baron Oneau brought the artillerie before the Abbey of Cleruaulx, which compounded to giue a certaine ſumme of money, and ſome quantitie of wine and meale: notwithſtanding, that capitulation did not hold, becauſe the ſayd Lord Oneau had not taken hoſtages for the performance of the ſayd conditions, contenting himſelfe with the faith of the Captaine which was within: but as the armie marched forward he kept not promiſe.
               The armie departing from Chaſteauuilaine, made foure dayes iourney to the riuer Seyne, where they arriued about the 2. of October, and paſſed ouer the ſayd riuer aboue Chastilion vpon Seyne, without enterprizing vppon the towne, becauſe the Lord of Guize had put into it the Lord Chastre with a certaine number of horſemen and footmen, which made a ſallie. The Lord Chastilion was commaunded to make the rereward with three companies of light horſemen, and ſeauen Cornets of Rutters, and three hundred Harquebuſiers.
               The Colonel Berbiſtroph was a little more toward the riuer to fauour the Lord Chaſtilion: which thing the Lord Chaſtre ſeeing, he made haſt with his horſemen (being fauoured with certaine harquebuſiers which hee had ſet in a coppes) to charge Berpiſtroph, who incontinently aduertized the Lord Chaſtilion, to the end he might cut off the returne of thoſe horſemen of the Lord Chaſtre: which thing he did. The ſeauen Cornets which were with the Lord Chaſtilion, followed him with a ſhewe of good will to fight: but cōming not in time, the Lord Chaſtilion (with the Frenchmen) began to charge the harquebuſiers of the garde of the Lord Chaſtre, who were all cut to péeces, and the horſemen followed vnto the gates of the towne. One of the Rutters on a ſudden forſaking his band, killed a French Launce with the ſhot of a piſtoll.
               From thence they went to lodge at Leyne, where they ſoiourned two dayes. The Germans complayned much of their lodgings. The Marſhalls could not denie but that they had oftentimes ill lodgings: but the

fault was in the deare yeare, as they among the principall Rutters could teſtifie, who in the yeares before in their former voyages, had béen well  lodged in the ſelfe ſame lodgings where they were now.
               In the ſame place dyed of ſickneſſe the Countie de la Mark, yonger brother to the Duke of Boillon, who had hetherto alwayes conducted the auauntgard about the third of October.
               From Leyne they remooued to Anſi le frank, & to Taulay, where newes came that the Duke de Mayne was in a Caſtle not farre off. The Baron of Oneau, who was lodged nigh the ſaid Caſtle, wrote about it to the ſaid Lord Chaſtilion, with a declaration of the good will which the Rutters had to aſſault him, if they would ſend them ſome number of footmen. And if the Duke of Guize would haue approached to the right hand of the ſaid Lord Chaſtilion, they would come to his ſuccour aſſoone as néede were. There was then a fayre occaſion (as it ſeemed) to enforce the Duke of Guize to battell: notwithſtanding, there was found ſome difficulties. For ſome of the countrey ſayd that the Caſtle was ſtrong: others, that it was a wood land fit for the harquebuſiers of the Duke of Guize, and diſaduantagious for the horſemen of the armie, and that it would bee hard in camping there to get victuals, and therefore they ſtayed not there.
               From Anſi the armie tooke courſe to the riuer of Yonne, and came to it the ſecond day after. About the fift of October the ſayd armie paſſed the riuer at Mally la vile, where alſo arriued the Lord Longa from the King of Nauarre, and willed them in the name of the ſayd King to direct the armie toward the head of the riuer Loyre, where he determined to receiue it. Many (notwithſtanding) thought that the Germans would hardly take that way, ſuppoſing that if they ſhould take yt courſe, many of the Swiſſers would diſband themſelues, drawing ſo nigh their countrey, conſidering alſo that with much adoo the artillerie would paſſe through the Niuernoys, partly by reaſon of the foule wayes, and partly for the great ſcarcitie of victuals which would be found in Niuernoys and Moruant. Vpon this incertitude, the armie marched forward, the reſolution of that matter being referred to the incident occaſions. This thing mooued the Germans to complaine, and to require another gouernment to be vſed in marching. The forme of marching which they deſired, was in forme of a triangle, ſo that the Rutters ſhould make one wing: the other wing toward the ſide of the enemie ſhould be of the Frenchmen, and the middle ſhould be the gard of the artillerie and the Swiſſers, which notwithſtanding was not ſo reſolued: then alſo began the diſcommodities to encreaſe in the armie.
               Thus the matters paſſing in that armie doubtfully, and without any reſolution vppon any expedient counſell, at length they determined to trye the paſſage at Charite, and for this purpoſe were choſen both horſemen and footmen: but the enterpriſe being delayed off one day for want of ſome

commoditie, the King had leiſure to ſend thether men of armes, who arriued there at the ſame inſtant when the armie did approach, which gaue occaſion to retyre without doing any thing. 
               
               The Lord Chaſtilion, with the Marſhall of the Campe of Rutters, and the Colonell Boke, with two thouſand horſes, drewe néere to Coſnes, partly to fauour them who were gone to ſeeke paſſage at Charite (if neede were) partly to ſeeke occaſion to ſee the enemie. There they miſſed the Duke Eſpernon but a little, who had paſſed the riuer at Neufuy.
               
               The ſame night the ſayd Lord Eſpernon ſet vpon the Campe of the footmen, but did very little preuaile, and after that returned to Coſnes, carrying away with him the Captayne Bonourier ſore wounded.
               In the meane while the King with his armie was on the other ſide of the riuer to oppoſe himſelfe to the paſſage: ſo that the day being come, the two armies could ſee one another.
               At euening al the army arriued at the riuer ſide, & that night the K. made great trenches at the foord of Neufuy, & fortifyed the ſame with a garriſon of Harquebuziers and Muſketters: and for to fauour them, cauſed 3. great boats well furniſhed with ordinance to bee brought. The riuer of Loyre was to be paſſed at foordin many places vntil that time, and there was yet in ſome places foordes, yet had they no meanes to paſſe, becauſe the kings armie kept the bancke of the riuer euery where. If that army had marched ſomewhat ſpeedily, it might haue paſſed well ynough in preuenting the kinges armie which came out of Paris ſomewhat late: for the king repoſed himſelfe vppon the aſſurance of the Duke of Guyze, who aſſured the ſaid king to ſtop the paſſage of that army, which thing he could not performe, and had not béen done, if the king had not oppoſed himſelfe to them at the banke of the riuer.
               The morrow after, the Lord Boyllon came to ſit in counſell at Neufuy. There the Lords Oneau and Huguerie made many complayntes in the name of the Germans, by reaſons of the ſafetyes and exemptions which were giuen as wel to ye popiſh gentlemen as to them of the religion, in fauour therof they receaued into their houſes ye goods of the vilages where ye army was lodged: and that was true indeede, and therefore required that there might be no more geuen to any man, or elſe that they might be taxed to pay money for the army. They requeſted alſo that they would take order for the paimēt of the Rutters for a moneth, which was promiſed them: and for lacke of the ſayd pay, they would goe no further, adding many difficulties concerning the paſſage of Loyre: beſide that the winter did draw neere, and that there was but two moneths to keepe the field. They were requeſted patiently to ſtay a while vntill they might aduertize the king of Nauarre to know his pleaſure. That in the meane tyme they would goe to ſoiorne in Beauſſe, where was great quantity of corne, and of

fodder for the hor
                     •
                  es, ſo that the armies might there eaſily berefreſhed. As for the pay, it was impoſſible to the French men at that preſent tyme to  furniſh ſo much money, and that drawing into Beauſſe and 
                     Ʋandomoys, there ſome money might be had.
               The Germans were contented with that, ſo that ſpeedily they would ſend to the K. of Nauarre with promiſe to ſtay vntil they might heare from him.
               They quartered themſelues the next day, and all the army was lodged vpon the lands of the Lord Chaſtilion, who offered it willingly, to ſhew example to others to preferre the publike commodities before the particular.
               The Lord Boillon lodged at Chaſtilion with other noble men, to aduiſe vpon the affaires of that armie.
               Some dayes before, Tilman colonell of the regiment of Bearne, departed through ſicknes. Bouſchet his Lieutenant wrote a letter to the Lord Cleruaut in the name of all the Swiſſers, that they had determined to let the king vnderſtand the cauſes wherfore they were come into France, and to that effect would ſend Ambaſſadours to the king. That reſolution ſéemed to many very dangerous: they ſent to him neuertheleſſe.
               The towne of Bleneau vpon Loyne aboue the towne of Chastilion had reſiſted the Baron Oneau: for which cauſe they forced them, and vpon that occaſion the army ſoiorned 2. dayes about Chaſtilion. In the meane time newes came that the Duke of Guyze did approach with his forces, and was to lodge about Chaſteau-renard, diſtant from Chaſtilion three ſmall leagues.
               The Lord Chastilion then opened them the meanes which he had, therein to encloſe the ſayd Duke of Guyze: but many difficultyes were aleaged, which did hinder his enterpriſe: Notwithſtanding, the ſayd Lord Chastilion went on horſebacke with twenty horſemen in company euen to the gates of Chasteau-renard, and there hauing taken ſome of that place, learned that Guyze was gone thence about one houre before, for to ioyne with his brother the Duke de Mayne, and that he had lodged in the towne with three hundred horſes onely, and before his going away, had put garriſons in the Caſtell.
               The ſaid Lord Chaſtilion brought with him about 25. Harquebuſters on horſebacke, whom he ſent to the Lord Boillon: by them he learned (as is aforeſaid) that the Duke of Guyze was gone to ioyne with his brother, & that all their Bands were ſo ſcattered here and there in the Vilages about. Some gaue counſell to turne the faces of the army agaynſt the Duke of Guyze and his brother; that it was an eaſy thing to force him to battayle, afore that hee ſhould approach neerer to the Kinges army, or to Montargis to fauour one an other: notwithſtanding ſome were of a contrary opinion:

and that it could not be done, but the Lord of Guyze would haue knowledge thereof, and then would hee retyre into ſome ſure and ſafe places,  which thing being done, their returning backe would bring great diſcommodities to the army: which by theſe meanes would be combered betwéen the riuers Yonne on the Eaſt, Loyne on the Weſt, and Seyne on the North; ouer whom they could not find paſſages when néede ſhould require it: and that if they ſhould do no exployt, they ſhould repaſſe that way which they came, where they ſhould finde all thinges eaten vp: which thing would encreaſe the diſcomodities, and the complaintes of the ſtrangers: this opinion preuayled, and therefore nothing was enterprized.
               They went to lodge about Montargis, leauing the riuer of Loyne at their right hand for to get the way to Beauſſe.
               
               They lodged at Landon and 
                     Ʋimory, and other Townes there abouts. This way is mooriſh, broken, foule, and full of quakmiers, where the wagons of the Germans and Frenchmen did ſo ſinke, that the Rutters were fayne there to lodge.
               The 27. of October, the Lords of Guyze, Mayne, Elleufe, Aumall, Barre, the young Ianuile, and the brother of the Lord Mercure, with other heads of the League and their forces, which were about fifteene hundred horſes, and fiue thouſand Harquebuſiers went to lodge at Montargis, and thereabouts on the Eaſt ſide of the riuer Loyne, which running betweene both, let the Germans to goe to them of the League: but on the contrary, gaue this aduantage to the Leaguers to paſſe to yt armies ſide when they would, becauſe they had the foordes and bridges at theyr deuotion. This aduantage, with the fauour of the Towne of Montargis, and of the Countrie, gaue them occaſion to enterpriſe to ſet vpon Vimory, where the Baron Oneau was lodged, with ſeuen Cornets of Rutters, that place being not diſtant from Montargis aboue a League and a halfe.
               The Enemies arriued at Vimory in the end of Supper about ſeuen a clocke at night. The Rutters (the alarum being giuen) do repaire to their Cornets with great ſpeede: and whileſt the enemyes were buſie in the ſtreetes to robbe, the Baron Oneau did oftentimes charge as well their horſemen as their footmen: the firſt onſet was vpon the Duke de Mayne, who with a good companie of horſemen made head to the Rutters. At this onſet the Rutters did ſo play the men, that many notable gentlemen were left dead vpon the place, as well of the companies of the Guyze, as of his brother de Mayne.
               
               The Cornet of the Duke de Mayne, with the gentleman that carryed it, Rowray of Burgondy was taken. There were two other Cornets taken, whereof one was of the Lord Bordeſiere. The Duke de Mayne receaued two ſhot of Piſtoll within his armor, whereof hee was ſo amazed, that hee came not to himſelfe vntil the morrow after about eight a clocke.

There is no doubt but the League would haue had much adoe, if it had not been for a great rayne, darkenes and thunder, which on a ſudden came and  parted the fight. The League loſt there aboue fortye gentlemen notable among them, among whom was the Marques d'Arques, eldeſt ſon to the Lord Liſtenay, and the Lord Cigoigne, ſonne to the Duches de Mayne, and others were ſore wounded.
               The Rutters loſt aboue fifty men, about one hundred ſeruing men, & three hundred wagon horſes: they loſt three Cornets of their ſeruantes, wherein were painted the Starre, the Horſe-comb, and the Sponge.
               The Baron Oneau receaued a blow with a ſword vpon the forehead, but he was ſhortly after whole.
               The Lord Chaſtilion was lodged three leagues from that place, who vnderſtanding of the alarum, went on horſebacke, as alſo others in other places, where the rumor came.
               The ſayd Lord Chaſtilion went into the Uillage where hee found ſome of the enemies wandering, whom he tooke there: he noted a great number of dead men, but more Frenchmen then Germans.
               The morrow after the Guyze ſent to aſke for the dead, which were aboue two hundred in number, he ſent alſo to know of the Rutters whether they would be content to exchaunge their Cornets and priſoners. They anſwered, that as for the priſoners, they would aduiſe vpon that matter but for the Cornets they would ſend them to the king.
               That day the Baron Oneau, who had kept poſſeſſion of their lodgings, ſending all night for the regiment of Lance-knights, went to preſent him ſelfe in battell aray before Montargis, where hee was more then an hower to draw the enemies to battell: but no man appeared, and therefore hee retyred.
               The ſame day the artillery in going forward, came within a league of Montargis, where it was in no ſmall danger, being ſo nigh the enemy, with a ſmall company: the which after the Lord Chaſtilion had found in that caſe, hee accompanyed the ſame vntill two howers within night: and not able to goe further, they vnſtalled it to ſend the horſes to baite in the next Uillages. The ſaid Lord Chaſtilion left fifty Harquebuſiers on horſebacke to keepe all night.
               The Lord Chaſtilion arryued at his lodging, learned by a Trompet which had béene in the kinges camp, the ouerthrow of the Duke Ioyeuſe, and of the proſperous ſucceſſe of the king of Nauarre in the battel at Coutras, whereof all the court made a great mourning.
               The 30. of October there was a great mutiny of the Rutters, partly for the loſſe which they had at Vimory, and partly becauſe they were denied to enter into Chasteaulandon, which was appointed for their lodging. The Baron Oneau had much adoo to pacify them: but when the Lord Chaſtiliō
                  
                  
was come, he was requeſted by the ſayd Baron Oneau to beſiege that Caſtell, for the which hee ſent his footmen, and in the meane time he went to  view the place.
               During which exployt, the Duke of Boillon, accompanied with many other Lords, came to the Rutters vpon their mutinie. There they ſayd that they would not paſſe further, and that they were lead to the ſlaughter, that they were lodged at the face of the enemie, without any Frenchmen to garde them. They alleaged that it was reported the King of Nauarre to bee dead in the ouerthrowing of Ioyeuſe, that they had loſt part of their baggage, that their ſeruants demanded their wages, and threatned to forſake them if they had no money. To be ſhort, they ſayd they had no means to followe, and therefore required to haue leaue.
               The Swiſſers did helpe much to appeaſe that mutinie, ſhewing the aliance which they had entred into nigh Chasteauuilaine, promiſing each other neuer to part aſunder vntill the warre were ended. This mutinie was pacified vpon promiſe of the Frenchmen, which was to make among them ſelues a ſumme of money, to horſe them which were ſpoyled at Vimory.
               
               When the Counſell had made an ende of their ſitting, there came a yong man names Pau, ſaying, that he had to ſpeake with the Lord Cleruaut, to whom he had heretofore brought letters from the King of Nauarre: this yong man had alreadie come three or foure times in the army, ſaying, that he would bring to them his regiment which he had in the armie of Guize, that hee had not aſſembled it for any other end then for the King of Nauarre his ſeruice, and that in taking his part he would doo him, beſide ſome peece of notable ſeruice in ſeazing vpon ſome place, and that he had good meanes in Bourgondy, but the armie had not fauoured him. That now they might take Montargis, as hee had informed them, when they camped at Chastilion. That he had his companie in the Caſtle, which the Lord of Guize had put in for his ſafetie when he lodged there: but now when the armie marched, the Duke of Guize went aſide of them ſtill on the other ſide of the riuer Loyne, and that he preſſed him with his company to come to méete him, and that he could not diſobey any longer: therefore let them ſpeedily take aduiſe.
               After ſome ſpeeches had on both ſides, the Lord Chaſtilion anſwered him, that all that came from the Duke of Guize was ſuſpected to him. Notwithſtanding, that if hee would doo as they would ſhewe him, they would ſend thether. Pau anſwered, that there he was to doo all that they ſhould commaund him.
               The matter being reaſoned, they determined to ſend the Lord Cleruaut with two hundred harquebuziers and two Cornets of Rutters to execute that enterpriſe. When they came to the place, the Lords Cleruaut & Chaſtilion, and others of the companie, called Pau vnto them, and after they

had ſent to viſite the Caſtle, they put fiftie harquebuſiers vpon the gate: and as they were about to enter in, one of the companie of the Lord Chaſtilion 
                   warned him that there was treaſon: vpon which occaſion he retyred ſpeedily his men: which thing the enemies ſeeing, and that they were diſcouered, they played their parts, and did blowe vp the gate and bridge through which our men ſhould haue entered. In returning from this enterpriſe, they who had auoyded ſuch daunger (for to haue beleeued a traytor of the League) gaue hartie thankes vnto God. Whileſt theſe things did ſo paſſe at Montargis, the Lord Boillon, with the reſt of the Counſell, had arriued at Chasteaulandon, and ſent the ordinance, hauing conſidered where it ſhould bee placed: but becauſe there were neither Swiſſers nor Launce-knights to garde it, the charge was committed to the Lord Chaſtilion, after his returne from Montargis, who began the batterie about two of the clocke. Then the heads of the armie arriued, and in the euening they ſhewed countenance to giue the aſſault. They within rendered themſelues with their liues ſafe.
               For to keepe the lodgings to the Rutters, and to auoyde confuſion, the Lord Chaſtilion would not ſuffer any companies to enter in, but ſent in ſome gentlemen to keepe it for the Rutters, and ſent to the Baron Oneau to come very early; which thing he did not. And becauſe the Lord Chaſtilion had to doo with Germans, Swiſſers and Frenchmen, he could not kéepe them from ſpoyling the Caſtle: but notwithſtanſting, what could be had in money from the Souldiers, it was giuen to the Baron Oneau for the Rutters. There was much ſpoyle in that quarter, for the Rutters put fire in euery village where they had lodged.
               From thence they went to lodge along the riuer which goeth to Eſtempes. 
                   Whileſt they were there, Bouſchet and others, who were ſent to the King by the Swiſſers, returned to the armie about the beginning of Nouember. Their anſwer was, that the King had commanded them to ſpeake to the Duke of Neuers, who had ſhewed them the wrong that they did to their ancient aliance which they had with the King, ſo to beare armes againſt him; he ſhewed them the danger wherein they put their Commonwealth to be troubled, by the occaſion which they had giuen him to remember their enterprize: but that they might eaſily remedie it, by retyring themſelues from ſo many diſcommodities and neceſſities whereunto they were reduced. Alſo, that if they would determine to retyre home, he would make meanes to the King in their behalfe to giue them money, with all the ſecuritie which they might aſke. Alſo, that after hee had ſo ſpoken to them, the ſayd Lord of Neuers brought them to the King, who ſhewed them a very angrie countenance, reproouing them very ſharply for the offence done againſt their aliance and their othes, ſo to arme themſelues againſt him. That it was he which was King of France, that he did weare

the crowne vpon his head, that hee was not a ſpirit, that it was hee himſelfe who ventured both his perſon and all his meanes againſt them who had imployed their forces: he thought that they had béene circumuented  vnder a falſe pretence, but now when they ſaw it they could not pretend any ignorance: hee aſſured them alſo that hee would ſee them purſued by the way of iuſtice before theyr Lords.
               To theſe things they are reported to haue anſwered, that they had borne theſe armes to ſupport the crowne of France, and to oppoſe themſelues to the wicked practiſes of the Leaguers, whom his Maieſtie heretofore both by words of mouth, and alſo by his edicts had declared his enemies. And that beeing euery way dulye informed of the truth of this matter, they could do no leſſe, then to ſatiſfy the iuſt requeſt of the King of Nauarre firſt Prince of the bloud, who was moſt faythfull vnto him, for to accompanie him in ſuch a iuſt quarell. They ſaid alſo, that they added all which they thought might haue ſerued for that purpoſe.
               Notwithſtanding whether they were amazed at the word of the King, whether they were already wonne by money, at their returne they chaunged the mindes of their felowes, who then openly began to mutiny, and to aſke two or three moneths wages, or elſe to haue leaue to depart.
               The Baron Oneau, with all the Colonels, emploied them ſelues very faithfully, ſhewing them what wrong they did to themſelues, and to their nation, to picke quarrels for to ſeparat themſelues from them, and the Frenchmen, which they could not do with a good conſcience.
               The morrow after the Duke Boyllon, with the Baron Oneau, and other Lords ofthe Counſel, went to the quarter of the Swiſſers, to ſee how to remedy that diſorder. The matter was pleaded with many wordes, but at that time there was nothing done. The Colonels and Captaines determined to ſend once more to the king, to haue paſportes to ſend to the king of Nauarre, to know to know of him whether he did beare armes againſt the crown of France: and that if he ſhould deny it, they would ſerue him for money: if to the contrary, they would take their leaue from him, with entreatie to be content with that which is paſt.
               This anſwer was receaued as wordes, for they themſelues were ſufficiently enformed of the good and right affection of the king of Nauarre towardes the king, his crowne, and eſtate: and though they had not knowen it, yet was it not time now to enquire thereof. This anſwere alſo was not regarded, but that they made this quarrell, mooued from ſome where elſe. The alleaged alſo their neceſſityes, and that without money they would not paſſe further.
               As theſe thinges paſſed in the army, they of Estempes made a ſally by night vpon the Swiſſers, but without any notable effect.
               At the ſame time the enemyes gaue an onſet vpon the footmen: but by

reaſon they were ſuccored by the Lord Chaſtilion, they did but a litle hurt, ſaue that they tooke priſoner the Lord Cormon, who was incontiuently brought to the Duke Eſpernon: they vſed him to bring to paſſe that whereby  the army was afterward diſbanded.
               The 15. of Nouember the army remoued toward Chartres, and there was put in queſtion whether they ſhould proceed further or returne backe: it was agreed that they ſhould make one dayes march yet further, to fauour the comming of the Prince County, of whom they had newes by the Lord Eſſars, who had ſeene him in returning from the king of Nauarre.
               
               The next lodging was within two litle Leagues of Chartres: the Duke Eſpernon with the kinges aduangard was at Bonauall, which was the only paſſage which reſted for the armie to paſſe, if they would haue gone further along the riuer of Loyre: from thence departed the Lord Chaſtilion by the common conſent of all to goe to receaue the Prince County, who came the 20. of Nouember to Prunay, where all the Nobles came to meets him.
               There they repreſented vnto him all the great diſcommodities which they ſuffered. For the king was on the one ſide vpon the border of Loyre, the Leaguers were on the right hand of them, and if the army would turne backe, they muſtrepaſſe the way they came, and fighting with the Duke of Guyze on the one ſide, they ſhould haue the kings army at their héeles. All reaſons wayghed, it was concluded to returne backe as ſpeedily as might bee, and with great iourueyes to recouer the head ſpring of Loyre.
               
               Some of the Germans thought good at midnight next folowing to depart, and propoſed it in the Counſell by Huguery
                        •
                     : but on the one ſide the way was not yetreſolued: on the other ſide they had no tyme to aduertize the whole army: and alſo it was not thought honorable to depart in the night, as though they had béen carryed away with terror. The departing therefore was deferred vntill the 24. of Nouember, and that it ſhould bee by day.
               Whileſt theſe thinges were a dooing, the meſſengers of the Swiſſers returned, and gaue to vnderſtand, that at this third time they had found ſome alteration in the diſcourſe hee had with them, and that the king had commaunded them to repayre to the Duke Eſpernon: ſo that it ſeemed by theyr diſcourſe, that they were aſhamed that euer they were entered into any negotiation with the King: ſo there was ſome hope to ſtay them.
               To the ſame end Huguerie was ſent to the Baron Oneau, to propoſe that it was neceſſary for the contentation of the Germans, to trye by all meanes to ſtay the Swiſſers: it was alleaged for a principall reaſon, that the ſame huge body going away, would cary with them ſome companies of Rutters, who might moue the others, and render them more vnwilling

to do that which they were requeſted.
               The matter being propoſed in the counſell, ſome thought theyr departure to be not greatly hurtfull, bringing theſe reaſons to verify their opinion:  firſt, that it was a bodie ſo heauy and ſo vnwealdye to remooue, that by this action the enemy might driue the whole armie into ſome diſaduantagious ſtreight. For without that heauie trou 
                     ••
                  they might more eaſily get the height of the riuer Loyre, which was the onely ſure way which the army could take.
               The other on the contrary ſhewed, that ſuch ſeparation could not be done with out great alteration in the reſt of the armie, and that if it were not let, it would bee the beginning of a diſſipation, which was like to haue an euill end, and that the Germans would do the like at the leaſt occaſion, and that with the Swiſſers they were able to beat the kings power: which thing they could not do without their aide. The K. of Nauarre had ſhewed what ſhould be done in ſuch extremity, to wit, to turne their faces toward the Duke of Guyze, to enforce him to fight, or elſe to encloſe him in what ſoeuer place he were: which thing did not ſeeme very hard, conſidering that he had no good towne to make his retrait vnto.
               That the Swiſſers would not refuſe to fight againſt the League, and vnto all theſe thinges aboue ſaid, would helpe much the proſperous victory which God had giuen to the king of Nauarre: but the Swiſſers could not be kept, hauing ſo far dealt with the king.
               They vpon the reſolution to depart, required their Rowles to be ſealed, to that end that the bodies being aſunder, the affections might remaine ioyned together: and that in ſo doing, they would be ſworne to promiſe to bring to the king of Nauarre two or three regiments of Swiſſers at the time and tearme prefixed.
               The counſell ſtood vpon a letter which the Baron of Oneau had written, by the which he warned them, that if they gaue aſſurance of pay to the Swiſſers, who contrary to their duty did forſake the ſeruice of their maſter, they ſhould put no difference betweene the good ſeruitors and the bad.
               The day for the army to depart, which was appointed the 24. being come, the Duke of Guyze either of his owne motion, or elſe by intelligences, marched all Night, and put certaine Harquebuziers into a Caſtell, which was at Aulneau, where certayne countreymen had repaired, and had agreed with the Rutters to furniſh them with all that they needed.
               The gardes of the Baron Oneau, who was lodged at Aulneau, a little towne encloſed, did not perceaue the ſaid Harquebuſiers.
               The Duke of Guize with the reſt of his troups, ſtayed till the day breaking, when the wagons of the Rutters began to goe forth, and the gardes were taken vp for to depart: that hower ſeemed vnto him moſt fit to ſurprize

the ſayd Rutters, whom otherwiſe he durſt not aſſault. Hauing geuen the watchword, they entered into the gates, which they found open, and  without any reſiſtance, becauſe that euery one was in his lodging, ready to take horſe. The Harquebuziers of the enemies going along the ſtréets, ſet on the firſt lodgings.
               The Rutters vppon the alarum, tooke horſe, and found the gate ſeazed vpon, and the ſtreetes hampered with their wagons, ſo that they could neuer ioyne together to take the field.
               The Baron Oneau with ſixe or ſeauen, being the firſt at the gate, pearced through them which came in. The gate was quickly ſhut. They of the Rutters which had got on horſebacke, ran about the walles to finde a way to get out: and when they found none, ſtanding on the horſe ſaddle, leaped vp the wall, and ſo threwe themſelues into the ditch, where ſome ſaued the Colonels Cornet, and fiue others: but all the Gentlemen of all theſe Cornets were for the moſt part taken, or ſlaine.
               The Baron Oneau with the reſt of the Rutters, ſtayed within halfe a league of the Towne. The Swiſſers repayred thether in battell aray, where alſo came the Lord Chaſtilion. There it was propounded to ſend for the reſt of the armie and ordinance, and preſently to compaſſe ye towne, where they might finde ſome yet buſie about the ranſacking; but there was no order to hearken vnto that: ſo the Duke Boillon & all the Counſell concluded vpon their departing. The Lords Cleruant and Chaſtilion were ſent to the Rutters to comfort them about their loſſe, and to cauſe them to followe the way. But the morrowe after the Colonels were mooued to mutinie, ſaying, that they would goe to the Swiſſers, and ſo with them into Germanie, and cauſe their wagons to turne that way. Theſe newes were brought to the Prince Countie and the Duke Boillon. Notwithſtanding, an houre after the Baron Oneau ſent for the Lords Cleruant and Chaſtilion, to returne to them, and that he had ſo wrought with them that they would come to the rendes vous. There it was ſhewed them that it would not bee honourable to them to retyre ſo vpon a ſudden loſſe, and that there was no ſafetie for them, if they would followe their determination, but that it was farre better to remaine with the Frenchmen, with whom they were able to fight againſt whomſoeuer, and that the way which they would followe, was the néereſt for them to returne into Germany.
               
               Vpon theſe perſwaſions they agreed to followe the next day to the rendes vout, where they ſayd they would ſee the Frenchmen, and that there they would entreate of all things.
               A certaine man, a friend of the Lord Chaſtilion, had ſent word vnto him from the Kings armie that he had waightie things to tell him. The ſayd Lord Chaſtilion had ſhewed the letter to the Lord Boillon and the reſt of

the Counſell, which willed him to ſend thether ſome faithfull friend: which thing he did. The meſſenger who was ſent, returned with the Lord Cormon, 
                   (whom wee haue ſayd before to haue been taken priſoner by the enemie) bringing offers from the King, that he would giue ſafe returne to the Frenchmen to repayre into Germany, or els to their houſes, with many reaſons which were alleaged, which could not bee preſently anſwered, becauſe the armie marched on.
               There was ſome aparance of danger, leaſt the armie ſhould be purſued by the King and the Leaguers ioyned together, which was the cauſe that it was propounded to the Rutters to burne their wagons, and to ſet as many as they could on horſebacke, promiſing that the Frenchmen ſhould doo the like. At the rendes vous it was ſhewed to the Rutters, that within twentie daies they ſhould be brought into the preſence of the King of Nauarre, or els they ſhould be ſet in place of ſafetie. That the Prince County, the Lords Boillon, or Chaſtilion, or other ſuch as they would chooſe, ſhould anſwer them for the ſumme which was due to them. And in caſe the King of Nauarre would not content them all, aſſoone as they ſhould come vnto the ſayd Lord King of Nauarre, they would yéeld themſelues their priſoners: this was an agreement by words, which ſhould haue béen put down in writing, and afterward ſealed on both parts, with aſſurance and promiſe giuen by them, that they would repayre to the King of Nauarre.
               
               The rendes vous on the next day was at Landon, foure leagues from Montargis, an vnfit place, by reaſon of a bridge which is in the middle of the Towne, where was great confuſion in going ouer. The Lord Chaſtilion was commaunded to goe to trye the paſſage at Gien: but many inconueniences let that enterpriſe, although he had gone part of the way. In the meane time the enemie aduaunced in ſuch ſorte, that the forerunners did charge the Launce-knights, and vnarmed about one thouſand or twelue hundred, did hurt a great many, tooke the artilterie and munition. About 25. horſemen did all that.
               The Launce-knights did retyre in good order toward Buiſſiere, as alſo the wagon men with their horſes, and other ſuch ſtuffe as they could ſaue. The Lord Chaſtilion went alſo to the ſayd Buiſſiere, who did incontinently ſende to the horſemen on euery ſide, for to take aduiſe what was to bee done; for they were like to haue the enemie very ſhortly on their backes: but the companies went to the rendes vous, which was appoynted at Bouuy. The Lord Chaſtilion hauing ſtood in battell aray at Buiſſiere, to receiue the Launce-knights who did paſſe in order, made the retraite, hauing not with him aboue three ſcore armed men, and ſixe ſcore harquebuſiers on horſebacke at the moſt.
               The ſame long ſoiorning which the Lord Chaſtilion made at Buiſſiere, gaue time to the enemie to followe him; ſo that in marching the high way

to Bouuy, the enemy appeared marching along the parke: at whoſe diſcouering  hee put his companie in battell aray foure and foure, by reaſon of the narrownes of the place.
               The Lords Morinault and S. Albine did leade the forerunners, who diſcouering that the enemie was of more then two hundred horſes, ſent word to the Lord Chaſtilion, who ſtrengthened them of ten men of armes which were with the Lord Byramont, and willed them to march a ſmall pace after the companies. But a little after they were ſo preſſed, that they turned their faces againſt the enemie with ſword in hand, who then ſtaied, and after in that manner followed the Lord Chaſtilion more than three leagues.
               The ſaid Lord Chaſtilion geuing to vnderſtand to the Prince County, that the enemy was at hand: the Duke Boyllon went backe to the ſaid Lord Chaſtilion, with 2. hundred horſes: and going backe to a litle brooke which they had left behind, thought good to ſtay there for the enemie: but the Lord Monluet (who alwaies had remained behind) gaue to vnderſtand to the Lord Chaſtilion, that he doubted ſomewhat: and for to know better what it might be, they went toward the enemies, and at the diſcouering of them, began to ſpeake either to ſtay them, or elſe to make them come nearer, but at length the enemy began to retire: vpon which occaſion the Lord Monluet and Chaſtilion preſſed them ſo farre, that they purſued, beating them beyond the Brooke, where they left dead of the enemie ſeuen or eight vpon the place.
               The Lord Chaſtilion purſuing the diſorder of the enemie, was aduertized by the Lord Boillon, that the Rutters were more then fiue leagues before with the reſt of the Frenchmen, & that the companies which he purſued was the whole power of the enemie, where were the Lords Eſpernon, Nemours, and Mercure, & that neceſſity required to march forward without any further delay: which thing ſtaied the Lord Chaſtilion, who in returning paſſed by a little wood, where he ſpied about foure ſcore Harquebuziers of the enemie, who hid themſelues in the ſaid Wood, whom the ſaid Lord Chaſtilion made countenance to charge, that in the meane time hee hee might retire his forerunners, whom the ſaid Harquebuziers made their rekoning to ſurprize in theyr returne: but they came againe without any damage.
               The truth is, that there was in all thoſe troupes but onely the Dukes Eſpernon, Nemours, and Mercure, who were greatly amazed when their forerunners ſo fearefully did caſt themſelues in their armes.
               That ſame day they went to lodge fiue leagues from thence, and the next day they began to enter into Moruaut, which is a wood land, and ſo thicke, that with much adoo they could not goe aboue two and two.
               They appointed the rendes vous for the chiefe of the army, to heare what

commiſſion the Lord Cormon had brought: which was, that the King would geue ſuch ſurety vnto the Germans as they would, to retire into Germany, and to the French men Papiſts (who would liue Popiſhlie in  their houſes) ſafetie with their goods. Others of the religion which would retire out of France, might enioy their goods, ſo that they would beare no armes againſt him: requiring furthermore in token of their obedience and good intentes, by the which they had declared to haue borne armes onely for his ſeruice, that all the French men ſhould ſurrender him their Cornets and Colours.
               All theſe thinges being debated on both ſides, it was aduiſed not to diſpiſe theſe offers, but for the ſureties and enſignes to take further aduiſe.
               The reaſons which induced them, were the great amazednes wherein the whole armie was, and to that feare there was ſuch negligence ioyned, that there was no more meanes to keepe any order, neither among the Germans nor Frenchmen. Many French gentlemen had and did dayly reſort home: there was no aſſurance that any great number would ſtay any longer. There was no reſolution to fight againſt the enemy: the wayes were full of ſtuffe and armes, as well of Germans as Frenchmen, the Horſes were weary, they had to make long iourneys to goe farre from the enemy: when they came, they found no guide to lead them the way to the Vilages, ſo that they trauelled ſome time one or two leagues after they were arriued at the rendes vous for to take their lodginges. The moſt part of them remayned either in the woods, or elſe in the firſt houſes which they met: men without bread; horſes without fodder: many horſes were tyred for lacke of ſhooing. There was foure daies iourney to goe through woods.
               The Harquebuziers and footmen did diminiſh on both ſides: all the regimēt of the Lord Villeneufue had diſ
                     •
                  anded themſelues not paſſing thrée daies before, becauſe the maſter of theyr campe was priſoner: there was almoſt no men left in the regiment of the Lord Mouy.
               
               They whom the Lord Chaſtilion had brought out of Languedock, for lacke of horſes could not follow, or elſe for to follow in ſo long iourneyes were inforced to caſt away their armors: moſt of them had no powder, nor meanes to recouer any. Their Peeces were either broken or vnprofitable for lacke of workemen to mend them. There remayned not aboue two hundred Harquebuziers.
               They which reſted of Launce-knights, being about two thouſand, were vnarmed: all theſe reaſons made them conclude, that it was better to ſaue the men to do ſeruice another time, then to looſe them and geue the praiſe to the enemy, to haue wholly deſtroyed that army.
               Vpon theſe deliberations, they diſpatched to the king the L. Cormon:
               
               
                  
In the meane while the army went forward, followed ſtill by the Lord Eſpernon, accompanied with ſeuen or eight hundred horſemen, and with  as many Harquebuſiers as he could put on horſebacke, and was then with in a league of the army.
               The Armie marched fiue daies iourney vnto the towne of Lancy in Maſconoys, where the rendes vous was geuen. The Rutters and Frenchmen aſſembled themſelues the 6. day of December. The Lords Cormon, Liſle, and Moriuault came from the Lord Eſpernon: there the heads and the troupes being aſſembled, conferred together of the things which were to be entreated.
               The king fearing greatly that the remnant of that army ſhould eſcape into Viuarets and Languedock, & ſo into Gaſcoyne to the king of Nauarre. Therefore they inuented ſurmiſes to increaſe the terror and impoſſibility, to diuert them (if it were poſſible) from going that way, which they ſaw was the eaſyeſt and ſafeſt to eſcape the danger into the which they did caſt themſelues, and to cauſe them to accept of diſauantagious offers.
               The Lord Liſle Moriuault (being ſent by the Duke Eſpernō) opened a rowle, in the which was read how many companies of armed men and regimentes of footmen were in the forreſt countrey to ſtop the way to the armie, if they ſhould take their iourney to Viuarets: he reported alſo how Mandelot was enforced to retire his armie, by reaſon of the great Snowes which were fallen there, ſo that there was no meanes for them to paſſe: this thing diſcoraged the army greatly.
               Vpon this deliberation appointed to determine what was to bee done: the Lord Chaſtilion ſhewed that the hardeſt & moſt dangerous part of the Forreſt was paſt alreadie, that within foure daies they could bee in a place of ſafetye, and ſhewed them to the eye the mountains of Viuarets, where within 24. howers they might haue the Lord Chebault with fifteene hundred Harquebuſiers: that he knew well the meanes of Mandelot, how that he could not gather ſuch companies as could be able to ſtop their way: he warned them to take heed of rumors which were ſpread abroad by the enemie to terrify them: offered vpon his life to conduct the companies into 
                     Ʋiuarets without danger. The meanes which he propoſed, were to deuide the army into two partes, to put one halfe of the Rutters and Frenchmen in the vaungard, with as much of the ſtuffe as was neceſſary, & that which they could not ſpare, and to cut off all the reſt, but ſpecially all the tired horſes which ſerued for nothing but for lets.
               The other halfe of the armie ſhould march after, and that they ſhould reſolue themſelues to fight againſt whomſoeuer would oppoſe themſelues in their way, either afore or behind. And that in ſo doing he truſted by Gods power, that they might ouercome all impediments which might be proffered: conſidering that God had plucked the armie, as if it were by

the hand, out of more and farre greater daungers, then they which remayned behinde. Thereunto he added, that the Lord Eſpernon was left a long dayes iourney behinde the armie, Guize thrée dayes iourney, the King  was beyond the riuer Loyre, and that before the armie there was nothing which might doo hurt. He ſhewed furthermore, that there was no cauſe to accept the diſaduantagious and vnhoneſt conditions which were offered, vnworthie to bee accepted of them who profeſſed the true Chriſtian reformed religion. On the other ſide, he ſhewed the ſmall aſſurance which they might haue of the Kings proffers, and the impoſſibilitie to returne home in ſafetie the way which they determined to take.
               For firſt, the King did offer ſafetie to retyre whereſoeuer they would, with aſſurance of enioying their goods, as well to them who would repayre to their houſes and liue according to the Romiſh religion, as to others who would retyre out of France, to liue in freedome of conſcience without bearing of armes. He did offer alſo ſafetie to the ſtraungers, to repayre to their countrey with their Cornets and Enſignes, requiring onely the Colours of the Frenchmen. But now he altereth theſe conditions, and will giue no ſuretie to returne home, nor libertie to enioy their goods, but onely to them who will liue after the Popiſh manner, or would promiſe neuer to beare armes, except by his expreſſe commandement: and beſide aſked all the Cornets and Colours indifferently as well of the Germans as Frenchmen.
               This alteration made him thinke that there was ſome falſe dealing euen in the armie it ſelfe, which gaue occaſion to the King to reuoke his former proffers, and to offer harder: conſidering that it was not vnknowne that the Lord Eſpernon hath not at this preſent time fiue hundred horſes, and not ſo many harquebuſiers on horſebacke: ſo that if he would ſtay for them which be had on foote, he would neuer ouertake the armie going forward. But if he ſhould come with them which he had, he would be ſtill the weaker, and himſelfe as wearie, as the armie in danger ſtill to be well beaten: hauing no reaſon that hee ſhould doo ſo now, ſeeing that hee durſt not doo it when he had greater forces néerer the armie, and in a countrie fauourable to him euery way. He concluded therefore, that there was nothing ſo ſure for the armie as to paſſe the Loyre.
               
               He ſhewed alſo, that it was impoſſible to returne into Germany ſafely: for to goe thether they ought to paſſe the riuer Saoſne, and that ſtill vpon bridges, becauſe it cannot bee paſſed by foor
                     •
                   any where. He ſhewed that the bridges and boates were in the power of the Duke de Mayne, and that if the Saoſne might be paſſed, yet muſt they go through the enemies lands, ſo that they muſt needes commit themſelues into the Leaguers mercie, whoſe crueltie he knewe the King himſelfe were not able to ſtay. Many Germans and others ſhewed that they approoued well this aduiſe as the

ſureſt way. But this is to be confeſſed, that God would not vſe the means of this armie, and that he would wholly ſcatter it. For although they ſawe  and approoued the moſt expedient reaſons, yet they could not follow them. Others thought, that they who would returne into Languedock, would haue others to followe them for to aſſure their way. Others alleaged the impoſſibilitie by reaſon of the Snowes: others, the barrennes of yt countrey, where they ſhould finde foode neither for men nor horſes. The Rutters thought vppon the loſſe of their horſes, when they ſhould paſſe the downefalls of the mountaynes of Viuarets, where the countrey men alone were able to reſiſt them: ſo that eaſily they were withdrawne from that voiage. For then the common ſort of them without their Colonels flocked together, to heare what the Lord Liſle mariualt would ſay, who (perſwaded to diminiſh ſomewhat of the conditions) propoſed vnto them, or els to carrie away their Cornets, and ſweare neuer to returne into France, except it were for the Kings ſeruice, or the Emperour: or els to ſurrender their Cornets and to goe with libertie, and to returne when they would.
               Upon this propoſition, the Lord Chaſtilion breaking through ye preace, ſhewed that the Lord Liſle mariuault had no authoritie nor writ to treate with them, nor that could binde the King to entertaine that which he propoſed: he ſhewed alſo, how in all that there was no ſecuritie, and that the Kings offer was as good as nothing, in offering to men of warre & Souldiers conditions ſhamefull and vnreaſonable, and ſuch as could not bee accepted, without forcing both their religion and honour. But the tumult encreaſing (as is commonly ſeene in ſuch diuerſitie of opinions) the Germans concluded to accept one of the two proffers, and that ſame day at euening they would ſhew which of them. Upon this reſolution, the Prince County with his white Cornet ſeparated himſelfe, and went to lodge at a Caſtle not farre off. They made ſome proffers to the Lord Chaſtilion, to diſſwade him from his returne into Languedock, amplifying the great daungers which did attend him, if hee ſhould hazard that voyage. Notwithſtanding, he went to the Lord Boillon, and (hauing made a diſcourſe of the dangers whereinto he did caſt his life and ſtate vpon the feare which he conceaued) ſhewed him 
                     •
                  ow this delay of reſolution would giue leaſure to the enemie to ſtop his paſſage: and taking his leaue from him, tooke his way to his troupes which ſtayed for him. This being done, there came 25. or 30. Rutters after him to call him, ſaying, that they had ſomewhat to ſay to him. Then hee began to miſtruſt them, as that they would areſt him: and being in the middle of them, vnderſtood that they talked among themſelues, that they had no ſecuritie for their payment, & that the French men ſhould giue them aſſurance. There ſome of the princi
                     •
                  alleſt of them ſayd vnto him twiſe in the eare, my Lord goe your way, fearing the mutinie of the common Souldiers. The Lord Chaſtilion then ſpeaking to the

companie of the Rutters, it is reaſon ſaid he, that you ſhould haue ſecuritie of your paiment, and for my part I am ready to bind my ſelfe, & to de what you will. But ſaid he, I muſt haue the Lord Boillon, whom I goe  to fetch to you.
               And vpon theſe words 
                     •
                  urned bridle, and making roome tooke the galop to the forefront of his troupes, the which (with ſword in hand) tooke their way with a ſoft pace about two miles, and thence got eaſily to S. Laurence where was the rendes vous.
               
               The ſaid L. Chaſtilion (through great daungers) with his company arriued the 11. of December at a Caſtell in Viuarets, called Retortou, where was a garriſon of them of the Religion, the fift day after his ſeparation from the army.
               The Lord Chaſtilion ſo retired from that armie, the Rutters and others who remayned among them, concluded the capitulation with the Lorde Eſpernon, as appeareth by the articles which were brought to the King▪ and afterward by his commaundement ſent into the Prouinces and gouernments of his realme, whereof the tenor followeth.
               Articles and capitulations, concluded by the Lord Eſpernon, with the Lords, heads, and guides of the armie of ſtrangers, Baron Oneau, Col
                     •
                  
                  nels, Captaines, Writmaſters, Lords, and Knights, &c.
               The Frenchmen who are in the armie, ſhall render their Cornets into the hands of the Lorde Eſpernon, to bee ſent vnto his Maieſtie, to whome the King giueth libertie to enioy their goods in ſafetie in their houſes, ſo that they obey the Kings edicts. They alſo ſhal make promiſe to him, ſigned and ſealed with their hands, neuer to beare armes, except it bee for his ſeruice, and by his expreſſe commaundement, except it be out of the realme. They of his ſaid ſubiects, who will retire out of the realme without obeying his edicts, and yet will make the ſaid promiſe, the King doth graunt them libertie to inioy their goods, and ſecuritie to returne with the ſtrangers out of the realme: but they who will promiſe nothing at all, they ſhal only haue ſafety to retire out of the realme with the ſtrangers, without inioying any of their goods. And for as much as ſome of the Captaines may make doubtes to ſurrender their Enſignes, the King will that ſuch ſhall not at all enioy the benefit contained in theſe Articles.
               As for the ſtrangers, the King dooth graunt them paſſeport vnto the Frontiers of his eſtate, on that ſide where they are now neareſt, vpon condition that the ſaid Colonels, Captaines, & Writmaſters, ſhall promiſe to the King, neuer to carrie armes in France againſt the King, being thether called by his ſubiects, without his expreſſe commaundement: and ſhall lap vp their Enſignes, in returning to their Countrey.
               Alſo they ſhal not take, nor carrie away any priſoners of the Kings ſubiects, without his expreſſe licence, neither ſhall commit any act of hoſtilitie

in his realme, in which dooing, the King ſhall prouide them neceſſarie things for the performing of the premiſes the 8. of December. 
               
               This was the end of this armie, by the which God did euidently ſhew to his children, that it is hee onely, vpon whome they ought to caſt their eyes in their afflictions, & that other meanes are altogether vnprofitable, except that he will further them, neither will he further them, except they be well vſed, with an vpright minde and intent.
               This ſeparation of the army tooke away from the enemies of Gods people, all occaſion to ſwell of the victorie, which they may not attribute to their valour, who durſt neuer looke them in the face, and in ſkirmiſhes the enemy had alwaies the worſt, except at Aulneau onely, where through their negligence they were ſurpriſed.
               Now Chriſtian Reader, conſider well the vſe of this diſſolution of the Army. The King prepared great power to oppoſe himſelfe to it, vſed great pollicy to drawe it into that ſtraight whereinto they wilfully did caſt themſelues, for not following the good counſell of the K. of Nauarre, who would haue them to paſſe aboue the head of Loyre. But as men deſtitute of vnderſtanding, heedily went into a manifeſt miſhap, and knew not wherefore, as to cloſe vp themſelues betweene ſo many riuers, whoſe paſſages they knew well to be holden by the enemyes.
               And as the king vſed great pollicie in ſnaring them that way, ſo he tooke great care & labour to diſunite them, that without blowes he might throw them downe: and at length beeing by themſelues weakned, ſent them away to the ſlaughter, vnder the ſhadow of a paſport. If the King had béen ſo long at ſchole with Salomon as he was with his mother (the onely furie that hath beene theſe many ages) hee could haue learned that it was an vnſeemly thing for a king to ſpeake a lie.
               But marke the fruit that he receaued thereby, all this redounded to his vndooing: for of euill can no good bee done by man. The Duke of Guyze as he had turned all his actions heretofore to his viſcredit, ſo did he this: for he cauſed certaine horſes which he had taken of the Rutters at the ſkirmiſh at Vimory in Gastinois, & at the ſurprize at Aulneau, to be lead ſome into one City, and ſome into another, almoſt through all France, by his horſecorſers and riders with this ſong, Saul hath killed a thouſand, and Dauid ten thouſands, as it ſhall be ſhewed in his place: So he made the world beleeue that he had been the onely inſtrument, by the which that armie had receaued all the harme which they receaued. And whereas the Kinges onely pollicy had vndone that army, yet made he the world beléeue by his horſecorſers, whom he ſent to walke the ſaid. Dutch horſes, whom bee vſed for ſowers of falſe rumors, that not onely the king had willingly let them to eſcape, but alſo had geuen them the meanes to retire, ſome into Germany, and ſome into Languedock, and from thence to the king of Nauarre,
                  
ſo that the pulpits of Fryers and Ieſuits in Paris and other cities, did ſound nothing elſe but of theſe newes, extolling the valour, wiſedome, and glory of the Duke of Guyze, with procuring to him much popular  authority and good will, and making the King hatefull among the Catholikes, for gloſing and diſſembling with them, and fauouring the heretikes, to that end, that when oportunity ſhould be offered, the ſayd Duke of Guyze might eaſily bring to paſſe his enterprizes, and the king ſhould not be able to let him.
               Now let vs know what became of the fragments of this armie.
               Firſt, the promiſe was not obſerued to them, for a great number of thē were ſlaine, robbed and ſpoyled in dyuers places. The Duke of Lorreynes eldeſt ſonne, called Marthuis de Pont, accompanyed with the forces of the League, ſet on them in diuers places, and enuaded the county of Montbeliard, where hee committed horrible cruelties, putting all to the ſword, with execrable whoredoms and abominations.
               Many dyed in the way, many dyed when they came in place of ſafety, euen of the cheefeſt noble men.
               The Lords Boillon, Cleruaut, and Vau, with many other noble men retyred to Geneua, where after ſo many labours and greeues they dyed in the Lord.
               The like happened to the Swiſſers, whoſe Colonels and Captayns (who were the authors of the firſt parley and capitulation with the king) were puniſhed by their ſeignories, ſo that few either of the Germans or Swiſſers returned home, or eſcaped vnpuniſhed.
               It is ſaid before, how that France in this yeare was groaning vnder the burthen of ſeuen great armies, beſides many particular aſſemblies: wherof it is ſaid how Ioyeuſe and his armie was made ſure at Coutras, and their reduced carkaſſes were left in perpetuall infamy, not for their death, but for the cauſes of it.
               The Germans haue made ſhipwracke vppon the Rockes of Lancy in Moſconoys the eight of December, and after.
               The kinges armie was broken againſt the banke of Loyre, and from thence ſcattered euery man home.
               The Leaguers are excluded out of Daulphine, where the Catholikes and they of the reformed religion (after much bloodſhed) at length agreed to liue like good fellow cityzens vnder the lawful gouernment of theyr king: and ſo the yeare is ended, and Chriſt raigneth for euermore.
               The end of the fourth Booke.
            
            
               
               THE FIFT BOOKE.
               
                  THis yeare is notable; not ſo much by reaſon that it was holden by the Mathematicians to bee fatall  to the world, as by reaſon of the great and tragicall euents, which happened to many great and Noble perſonages. For this yeare dyed the Duke of Boillon, and other Nobles at Geneua: The Prince of Conde at Saint Ihan d'Angelye: The Duke of Guyze and ſome of his partakers: The inuincible armado of Spaine intending to haue inuaded England, was beaten both by God and man: And laſt of al, the famous enterprize atchieued by the French King Henry the third, with the famous victories of the Church of God in the principality of Boillon, againſt the conſpirators and enemies of mankind of the League.
               It is ſaid before, how after the capitulation of the King, with the army of Germanes, at Lancy in Maſconoys, the Duke of Boillon, the Lordes Cleruaut, Vau, and others, retired to Geneua, where theſe three eſpecially dyed.
               Not long after their aryuing there, the Prince of Boillon fell ſick, & the 27. of December (feeling in himſelfe his end to be at hand, & that he had to paſſe to a moſt bleſſed life, carefull for the ſtate of the Church of God) gathered in his Soueraigne principalitie of Boillon, diſpoſed of his affayres as followeth.
               He made his ſoule heire generally of all his goods holden, as well in Soueraigntie as otherwiſe: the Lady Charlote de la mark his ſiſter, vpon condition yt ſhe ſhal neither alter nor innouate any thing in the ſtate, nor in Religiō, the which there ſhe ſhal maintaine as it is eſtabliſhed. Alſo that ſhe ſhall not marrie without the aduiſe of the King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, and the Prince Monpenſier her▪ Uncle, vpon paine of forfeiting the right of thoſe Soueraignties, from the which (in caſe ſhe ſhould otherwiſe doe) he vtterly excludeth her. And in caſe the ſaid Lady of Boillon ſhould deceaſe without heires, the Prince of Monpenſier her Uncle is ſubſtitute as next to inherit: and after him the Prince Dombees his ſonne, conditionally that they ſhal change nothing in the ſtate nor Religion, vpon paine of the like forfeiture: And in caſe the ſaid princes ſhould make there any innouation, he doth ſubſtitute the King of Nauarre, and

in like caſe the Prince of Conde, in caſe the firſt ſhould fayle in the performance of the premiſes. 
               
               The ſaid Lord Boillon made executor of his Teſtament, and the Lord la Noue: the which done, the firſt of Ianuarie he was deliuered out of this mortall li
                     •
                  e, to enter into the full enioying of the ſocietie of God, being the day of his natiuitie and the 25. of his age.
               This was a Prince of great auncient and famous nobilitie, iſſued by the father ſide out of the ſtock of that renowmed Argonante Godfrey of Boillon, who was crowned King of Ieruſalem, a noble and vertuous man, his Mother was one of the moſt vertuous women of our age, daughter vnto the Prince Monpenſier, and ſiſter vnto this Prince, now at this yeare liuing: her vertue, godlines, and conſtancie in the confeſſion of the true doctrine, ſhall be in an euerlaſting remembrance. For ſhee being very oftentimes requeſted by her Father (a great & deuout Catholick) to forſake the Goſpell, and to returne to poperie, at length ſhe agreed vnto him, with this condition, that if the popiſh Doctors could bring better proofes for their religion, then the miniſters of the reformed would for hers, ſhee would fulfill his will. Whereupon a diſputation being obteyned at the hands of King Charles the ninth, and the matter being reaſoned betweene two Doctors of Sorbonne, and two Miniſters of the Goſpell, for many dayes in her preſence, her owne huſband ſitting as moderator, it fel out, that in ſtead of that which her Father looked that ſhe ſhould haue been conuerted to popery, ſhe was confirmed in the trueth: by whoſe ſingular wiſdome and ſpeciall care, afterward the Churches of the Soueraigntie of Boillon were reformed.
               This Principalitie of Boillon is a ſmall countrey, holden in ſoueraigntie, yet commonly vnder the protection of the Crowne of France, between the riuers Moſe and Moſelle, a part of the auncient Nation, called Eburones, hauing on the Eaſt ſide Lorreyne and Ardenues, on the Weſt Henault, on the North Liege, on the South Baroys and Champaigne: it hath two ſtrong places, Sedan and Iamets, and many other ſtrong holdes and Caſtels, the Countrey is Woody, Mooriſh, and ſtrong, lying altogether vpon the banck of the riuer Menſe. This Countrey ſince it had imbraced the Goſpell, and become the Garden of Eden, hath been the place of refuge for them of the reformed religion of the Nations, which doo lie betweene the riuers of Marne, Seyne, Moſſelle, and Saoſne, a place moſt fit to retire vnto, in time of perſecution.
               There were two bretheren, the Duke of Boillon, and the Countie de la Mark, two Noble young men of great vertue, valour, and godlines, who had from their cradle, as if it were ſucked the true religion and vertue, with the milke of their vertuous and godly Mother: They ventured all that they had, liues, goods, and ſtate, for the defence of the Crowne of France
                  
and true religion, and oppoſed themſelues againſt the conſpiracies of the Leaguers, not as Merceuaries, but moued with a true zeale and loue toward  both.
               Theſe two noble men were called out of this life, vnto that which neuer decayeth, and to inioy the inheritance of the Saincts in light, whoſe names ſhall be in the euerlaſting remembrance of the righteous. The one, to wit, the Countie de la Mark, dyed at Lancye, about the beginning of October, as is ſaid before: but the eldeſt, to wit, the Prince Boillō
                   at Geneua, the firſt of Ianuarie, as is ſaid.
               It is ſaid before, how the Duke of Guize ſet vpon the Rutters at Vimory, where many were ſlaine and taken on both ſides, and the Duke of Guize tooke alſo about three hundred wagon horſes, and in like manner tooke ſome more in the ſurpriſe, which he did enterpriſe vpon them at Aulneau in Beauſse. This man being poſſeſſed with a legion of vncleane ſpirits, named Ambition, this vncleane ſpirit did ſo torment him, that it made him to thinke an houre a day, a day a yeare, and a yeare an olde mans age, ſo he longed to ſee the royall familie rooted out, and the crowne of France to fall to his lot: hee aduiſed therefore himſelfe of this point of policie, to make his name ring ouer all France, his victories ſung out, and to ſtore vp the loue and admiration of the people toward him, and to procure hatred and en
                     •
                  ie to the King. He deuyded theſe horſes and armour which hee had taken from the Rutters at Vimory and Aulneau, into ſundrie companies of horſecorſers and riders, tranſported with affection, and factious malcontents and vnquiet, to make a progreſſe through the realme into thoſe Prouinces, whereunto they durſt venture, and into thoſe Townes and Cities, ſpecially which were fauorable to him. There theſe horſecorſers carried (as if it were in a triumph) through the cities the Germaines ſpoyles, horſes, weapons, and all other aray. And when the people were flocked together in great troupes, to ſee theſe new ſhowes, there were the Orators ready among them. The number of the dead, horſes and Enſignes taken, were increaſed by the figure of multiplication, one killed a hundred, and a hundred ten thouſand, as Pyrgopolinices in Plautus: the manner of the fight was made very difficult, and dangerous for the conquerours. They ſhewed alſo, how not one of the Guizes Souldiers were found wanting: to be ſhort, vanitas vanitatis.
               
               Then they applied their ſhowes, how that the Duke of Guize had atchiued himſelfe all the difficulties of the warre, and either ſlaine or taken the choſen and valiant Captaines and Soul
                     •
                  iers thereof, and if hee had been aſſiſted by the King, he would haue gotten ſuch a victory, as neuer the like had been heard of in France. For hee knew the meanes how to haue made ſuch a ſlaughter of them, as not one had been left to tell the newes in Germanie: all the realme might haue inioyed the commodities of ſuch a

victorie. But the King he retyred beyond Loyre, as though he had beene vnwilling or afeard of them, for he would or durſt neuer ſhew his face, or draw his ſword againſt them, and for to ſhew ſome outward countenance,  or for ſhame when the enemie were alreadie vanquiſhed, and that the Duke of Guize had left the ſmall remnant, who were but pages and ſcullions, ſo hurt, wearie, and ſick, that they could not flie, truſting that they would haue been diſpatched by the King, they were followed ſo ſlackly, that not onely he gaue them leaſure to eſcape without running, but alſo helped them to ouercome ſo many diſtreſſes wherunto they were driuē by the ſaid Duke of Guyze, & alſo vnder colour of a counterfeit yeelding and ſubmiſſion, he granted vnto them their liues, horſes and furniture, and to ſome of them their goods, and by theſe meanes they came all to their iourneys end, and ſafely arryued to the King of Nauarre.
               
               Now the concluſion of theſe infamous reports, was left to euery man to inferre, that eyther there was not in the King ſuch princelike vertues as ſhould be in him, or elſe that hee was a fauourer of heretikes, and a diſſembler with the Catholikes. Then what ſhould wee doe with ſuch a King: Let vs haue another. And whome ſhould we haue, but him that hath done ſuch exployts, and deliuered France from ſo manie daungers and terrors.
               By theſe deuiſes, hatred and contempt was no leſſe procured againſt the King, as, gloria in excelſis, prayſe, loue, fauour, and authoritie to the Duke of Guyze.
               
               The Ieſuites and Friers on the other ſide tooke theſe lyings and ſlaunderous reportes for a theme to diſcourſe vpon in the pulpits, he that was of a timorous minde cryed, that the King was a betrayer of the Catholikes, he was become either a cloſe and deſembling heretike, or a fauourer of heretikes, and that it was to be feared ere long hee would forſake the catholiciſme, and ouerthrow the Catholike Religion in France: Others which had a more warlike ſtomack, diſcourſed vpon the other common place, that the K. had a timorous mind, durſt not look few (Pages and Scullions halfe vanquiſhed) in the face, and that was the cauſe that many attempts vpon the heretikes had come to ſmall effect, becauſe the warres were not purſued by men neither of courage nor wiſedome. But the Duke of Guize, that noble branch of Charlemaigne, the deliuerer of France, the onely protector of the holy Church, was the onely man to whome they owe their religion, their liues and goods, the onely hope of the Realme. Thus the frogges that roſe vp out of the bottomeleſſe pit, did dayly in their pulpits crie croake, croake, croake.
               There was great hope that the ſundry lamentable euents which did beate the one and the other part in France by the ſcourge of warre, and execution of armours as well in the loſſe of the battell at Coutras, in the

death of notable men, as in the oppreſſion and hauock which the armies did cary with them, would haue aſſwaged the rage and paſſion which caried  away many, would haue ſtayed the perſecutions againſt them of the reformed Religion, and would haue made a way to ſome reaſonable agreement: but the Leaguers and other enemies (without any remorſe of conſcience, & without feeling of their owne priuate or publike griues) ſo much the more made haſt to worke the vtter ſubuerſion of the ſayde religion, oppreſſing with greater crueltie the profeſſors thereof than they did before. Sathan therefore (the captaine of murtherers of the Saints) deuided his forces, one part to aſſault the remnaunt of the Church left in the popiſh prouinces of France, and the Churches of the principalitie of Boillon, which we will in order recite.
               As after the breaking of the armie of the prince of Conde in Vandomoys, in the yeare of our Lord 1585. they thought that with the ſame Prince al their hope had been gone; which thing made them increaſe their crueltie: euen ſo did they after the diſſipation of the armie of the Germanes, ſuppoſing that they ſhould ſhortly ſee the end thereof.
               The authors of theſe perſecutions, were the King, the Leaguers, the Biſhops, the Ieſuytes, the Fryers, the Monkes, the pariſh Prieſts and Magiſtrates. In theſe aſſaults appeared the cowardlines of a great many of them who had profeſſed the true religion, who looking more on the euents and preſent dangers, than to the end of ſuch ſkirmiſhes (where we ought to ſhew a proofe of our fayth, and with pacience to expect an happyend) for feare were caried away to vnlawfull things againſt their conſcience.
               But the Lord (as at all other times) left not his truth without witneſſes: for many in diuers parts of the Realme being cruelly perſecuted, ſhewed their conſtancie in maintaining their faith and religion, whereupon it ſeemeth me, not to be out of purpoſe to make mention of the conſtancie which God gaue to a man of baſe condition, in defending of his religion, who in this reſpect ſhewed the way to many, which in the ſight of the worlde had greater meanes to doe it than he had.
               There was in the towne of Marchenoyre in Beauſſe a poore man borne in Boyſgencye vpon Loyre, named Francis Tixier: (as if wee ſhoulde ſaie weauer) this man by his occupation was a maker of packſaddles, who (by reaſon of his family) had not departed out of the Realme according to the Kings Edicts, neither had obeyed the Kinges commandement in conforming himſelfe to the Popiſh religion, but had alwayes conſtantly remained in the profeſſion of the true religion, praying dayly in his houſe, & often times ioyning himſelfe ſecretly to others to the ſame effect, and to ſing Pſalms, as it is vſed among thē who do profeſſe ye reformed religion.
               He viſited alſo them who were ſicke, and ſtrengthened them: and if any

were which ſtoode in neede, by the meane of ſome ſmall collections which was made among them ſecretly, hee helped them, as he was wont to doo  when the reformed Church did aſſemble at Orges, in the which he did beare the office of an Elder.
               God bleſſed that zeale in time ſo hard and difficult: for ſome of the villages thereabous, by the meane of that ſmall exerciſe, without feare of the perſecution, forſaking the Romiſh Church, ioyned themſelues to the pure religion. But this courſe was not continued long: for by the watches and ſearches of them, who in the former aſſaults & alarumes could get nothing vpon this man, he was at length diſcouered and complained off to the Magiſtrate. So that the King paſſing through Marchenoyre, the accuſers addreſſed themſelues to one of his Aulmoners, and inſtructed him of certaine accuſations againſt that poore man, to wit, that hee had not obeyed the Kings edict, but on the contrarie did perſeuer in his hereſie and dogmatize: ſo they kindled the Aulmoner in ſuch a ſort, that they agreed altogether to put a complaint to the King: they made alſo a booke of others of the religion, which they cauſed the ſayd Aulmoner to preſent to the King. For his cuſtome belike was ſo to beſtowe the Kings almes.
               The King commaunded that they ſhould bee apprehended: Tixier as the moſt hatefull, was firſt taken, and with great ſolemnitie brought before the King, who was deſirous to ſee him, for he was informed that hée was a Miniſter. The King himſelfe examined him (when he had appeared) with great aſſurance. When the King had aſked him whether he was an Hugonet, and wherefore he had not gone out of the Realme being one, (as he did confeſſe) and whether he would goe to Maſſe once or twiſe, and ſo to eſcape from puniſhment. The poore man anſwered, that he had not the meanes to auoyde, and that he would not goe to Maſſe, nor alter his religion which he knewe to be the trueth.
               When the King perceiued his conſtancie, he ſent him to Bloys, with letters to his Iudges, there commaunding them ſtraightly to make his proceſſe, according to the rigour of his edicts. There in the Kings preſence he was greatly reuiled by the Lords, Courtiers and Clawbackes.
               Being carried to Bloys, there he was aſſaulted by three manner of enemies, the Iudges, his friends, and the reſt of priſoners. Firſt the Iudges had him in hand, and after they had gone about to withdrawe him from his religion to Poperie, with ſuch bald reaſons as they could affoord, he made them a plaine anſwere, that he knewe the true Catholike and Apoſtolike Church, and that hee was one of the fellowe citizens of the ſame; but for the Romiſh Church he neither knewe it, nor cared to knowe. When theſe great Deuines had ſpent all their reaſons euen to the bottome, they began to drawe out their threatnings to hang him, and to giue him opprobrious words. The poore man deſpiſing their reaſons and the dregges thereof,

made them a flat anſwere, that as he had liued in that religion, which they call hereſie, ſo was he readie to dye for it, if ſo it were Gods will. 
               
               And after many examinations all about on thing, to wit, whether hee would goe to maſſe, one aſked him of whom he held his religion, and who had taught him: he anſwered, that hee held it of God who had taught him by his holy ſpirit.
               Vpon this anſwere, one Saint Seuerine an Italian replyed: my frend, thine holy ſpirit will hang thee, if thou come not to thy ſelfe. The Lord reproue the ſpirit of blaſphemy.
               This was the miſerable ſtate of that realme then, that the moſt vile, ſaucy & blaſphemous Atheiſtes, were rayſed vp by the Q. Mother to high and honorable dignities.
               Saynt Paul had learned the Phariſaiſme at the feete of Guualiel: but this lewd Italian had learned Atheiſme at the Popes feete in Italy, and is welcome in France by them of his religion to teach Atheiſme, and to ſhew the way to the Frenchmen how to blaſpheme a l'Italiane. Many other ſuch like trifling talke they had with the pore man, more fit for gatherers of old ſhooes and ragges vppon the dunghil of Bloys, then for magiſtrates.
               The Priſoners did greatly afflict him with their continuall brabling, and brawling with him, with few popiſh vnreaſonable reaſons, which they tooke out of certayne Sermons of popiſh Frierly Doctors, which they had among them, and not onely did daily complaine vppon him to the magiſtrate, but alſo were ſome time ready to ſet vppon him to mur
                     •
                  her him, and the more hee was feruent in prayers, the more they did moieſt and vexe him.
               The third ſort of enemies who did aſſault him, were they which profeſſed friendſhip, who oftentimes came to aduertize him in the priſon, that the Iudges had concluded to condemne him to die: and that it were high time to looke about, perſwading him to auoid the danger, to goe to Maſſe once or twiſe, and after he could make ſome ſhift to get him out of the way: but he refuſed all that counſell.
               So he made his will, fully determined to die, which hee ſent to his wife: yet the Iudges muſt haue a fling more to trye what he would do, or otherwiſe reſolue to condemne him, & made him ſit vpon the ſtoole, whereupon they that are condemned of capitall crimes are vſed to ſit when they do receaue ſentence of condemnation.
               But behold, on a ſudden they changed their mynds, and ſent him againe into priſon. The King had written, and ſet his owne hand to a letter commaunding them to make his Proceſſe with all 
                     •
                  igour of the lawe. The Iudges were cruell Papiſts and Leaguers: the Italian was an Atheiſt, contemner of all religions, but a notorious & blynd enemy of the trueth. The opportunity of the time might haue encouraged them to vſe all extremity.

But the Lord (to the comfort of his children) did put a ring in their Noſtrels, and after a long impriſonment, the eight of Aprill they pronounced ſentence agaynſt the ſayd Tyxier, by the which they baniſhed him  out of the realme for euer, and commaunded him vpon paine of death within two moneths to auoyde: his goods were forfaited to the King. Which ſentence was ſignifyed vnto him the ſame day by the ſecretary of the ſame Court of Bloys.
               
               It is ſayd, how the two noble Princes of Boillon, and his brother the County de la Mark, dyed, the one in the Moneth of October at Lany, and the other in Geneua in Ianuary.
               The death of this noble Prince being publiſhed abroad, the Leaguers tooke it for a preſage of their good ſucceſſe, and occaſion to encreaſe their power.
               As for to enterprize any thing againſt Guyenne, or the king of Nauarre, the bad ſucceſſe of de Mayne, and the death of Ioyeuſe at Coutras, did not counſell them. There was as little hope in other Prouinces, where they of the reformed were ſtrong in armes and fortes, as in Languedock, and Daulphine, where now of late an aſſotiation vpon the defenſiue was made betweene the Catholikes and them of the Religion.
               To attempt the old plat agaynſt the kings perſon, the time was not yet come.
               On the other ſide, they did greatly feare the tempeſt which did threaten them on the ſide of Germany, by reaſon of the fires which they had kindled in the County of Montpeliard, and the execrable outrages by them there committed, where (as is aforeſayd) they charged the Rutters in them retyring homeward.
               This feare cauſed the Duke of Lorreyne to ſend to the king for ſuccour, for they thought that it would be greatly for their aduantage, if the King in defending them on that ſide, might haue procured the hatred of the Germans, and with all conſumed his forces in defending and iuſtifying theyr vilanies: and ſo all by one meanes ſhould ſpoyle himſelfe of the amity of his neighbours, and of his owne forces, in being after more eaſy to be oppreſſed by them.
               Therefore among ſo many difficultyes, nothing ſeemed vnto them more commodious to beſtow and exercize their forces, and by little and little to encreaſe their power, then to inuade the ſaid principallity of Boillon, ſuppoſing that to be of an eaſy executiō (conſidering the opportunity proffered it ſelfe) thereby preparing the way by eaſy thinges to harder and more difficult matters.
               The oportunity ſeemed vnto them very fit, to wit, the death of the two bretheren, the amaze which fell vpon the ſubiectes in the territory of Sedan and Iamets. The weakenes of the yong Princeſſe fatherles, in tears

and mourning, by reaſon of the death of her two brethren, a mayd euen vnder age, deſtitute of men, armour and Captaines, and as if it were diſdayned  of the world, forſaken of her friends, not through vnfaithfulnes, but being themſelues hampered and buſied in the ſelfeſame daungers that ſhée was in.
               Other friends of the contrary profeſſion durſt not ſhewe her any fauourable looke, for feare to be heretikes, or fauourers of hereſie, and ſo to prouoke agaynſt themſelues the bloodie power of the League. And that which is more, ſhe being accounted an hereticke for profeſſing of the trueth, and therefore accurſed by the Pope, proſcript by the League, and as it were dead to the world, by the articles of Nancy, whereof it ſhall be ſpoken hereafter at large.
               And to that ende they might the better both to inuade that yong Princeſſe and reſiſt the Germans, whom they feared, by reaſon of the villanies wherewith they had prouoked them, as is aboue ſayd, they had ſuccour of the Duke of Parma, Italians, Spanyards, Wallons, Legeoys & Germans, vnder the conduct of the Baron of Sarexenbourg, to the number of ten thouſand men in all. All theſe occaſions, opportunities, cauſes & forces, mooued the Duke of Lorreyne to lay the ſiege before the Towne of Iamets, next of the principalitie, which lyeth nigh the borders of Lorreyne, about the 20. of Ianuary.
               In the meane while, the Princeſſe cauſed the inhabitants to ſweare fidelitie to her, and gaue the gouernment of her affayres vnto the Lord Nueuile, vntill ſhe might vnderſtand of the Prince Monpenſier her vncle, appoynted Warde, and of the Lord la Noue, executor of the Will of her brother, but ſpecially of the King of Nauarre, whoſe counſel ſhe deſired greatly to followe.
               The companie which ſhe had were the Princeſſe her ſelfe, the Princeſſe Bourbon, and the Lord Laual, a young child the heire of the Lord Laual, who dyed at Taillebourg the yeare 1586. in Aprill, as is aforeſayd.
               The forces were the inhabitants of the countrey, and a certaine number of Frenchmen exiled out of their countrey, by reaſon of the perſecution of the League.
               The Duke of Boillon being dead, the King of Nauarre was certified thereof from Geneua, and alſo from Sedan an expreſſe meſſenger was ſent to the ſayd King, to let him vnderſtand the ſtate and neceſſitie of the affayres.
               The King of Nauarre vnderſtanding the ſtate of Sedan, the iniuries and violences of the League, ſent thether the Lord Reaulx, and from thence to the King, to put him in mind of the protection which he did owe to the ſayd Princeſſe, and of the ſeruices done by her predeceſſors to the Crowne of France: but ſpecially to ſhewe him the importance of the places which the

Leaguers did intend to inuade, to make much for the ſafetie of Mets.
               
               She ſent alſo to her vncle the Prince Monpenſier, who promiſed her all aſſiſtance to his power. 
               
               The Dukes of Sweibrook ſent her word, that they would doo what lay in them to diuert thoſe forces from her.
               The King not greatly regarding the ſuit and protection of the ſayd Ladie, for hatred of the reformed religion, ſent backe againe the Lord Reaulx to the Duke of Lorreyne, where he taried ſo long that all things were burned and ſpoyled before he returned to Sedan. And at his returne he deliuered a commiſſion from the King, to be receaued as Lieutenant generall for the King, and protector of the Princeſſe: and that after being receaued when they had giuen their oth, then he would declare what order ſhould be taken.
               They made anſwere, that it was a newe thing, and that the ſoueraigne Lords of Sedan had neuer receaued ſuch charges, and therefore they could not accept them, conſidering that they had giuen their oth vnto the Prince Monpenſier her vncle and Warden, to doo her lawfull and faithful ſeruice, and to keepe the places againſt all men, vnder the protection of his Maieſtie: who would (as he hoped) bée contented with the aſſurance which the Prince Monpenſier would giue him.
               About the ſame time, the Lord Nueuile gouernour of Mezieres, came to Ioram nigh Sedan, ſeeking by fayre promiſes of friendſhip to haue that Lieutenantſhip: and propounding certaine captious articles, was ſo anſwered, that if he had come into Sedan, there was not of his kinne enough for halfe the women of Sedan: for euen they who mooued the matter firſt ſtood in ſome danger.
               The Prince Monpenſier ſent diuers times to viſite and aſſiſt her, and went to the Court to obtayne the continuance of her protection. But nothing was obtayned; for the King ſought nothing els, but to put in ſuch as he thought would fulfill his deſire to oppreſſe and ſcatter the Church, and to haue in his poſſeſſion that Princeſſe, to nouſſe her vp in Poperie, that there might not be any hope left hereafter to reſtore the Church.
               Whileſt the Duke of Lorreyne beſieged Iamets, the Duke of Guize ſent to Sedan to proffer them great friendſhip, and to preſerue them in all libertie of conſcience and religion, if ſo that there might a mariage be made betwéene the Princeſſe and his ſonne.
               The Duke of Lorreyne vſing all manner of hoſtilitie and villanies that could be poſſible, made ſuite to haue the ſayd Princeſſe in marriage for his ſonne the Lord Vaudimount, both with flattering words, & alſo by thundring of the double Canon.
               The weaknes of this Princeſſe cauſed the enemy to be very ſecure and careleſſe, which encouraged them which were beſieged at Iamets, dayly to

make ſturdy and ſtout ſallies vppon the enemies, geuing them no aduantage, not ſo much as to approach to place their peeces, and compelled them to trench themſelues in the Vilages, where they were charged by them  within the towne dayly: and this continued vntill the beginning of Aprill next following.
               During theſe two Moneths of February and March, and the continuance of the ſiege of Iamets, the Lord Reſne, with certayne troupes of Italians, Germans, Wallons, Legeoys, and Lorreins, to the number of 7. or 8. hundred horſes, with certayne regiments of footmen, did ſcowre the countrey about Sedan, where they fired all thinges: ſo that in all the principality of Boillon there remained in a maner but aſhes and calamity, beſides Sedan and Iamets.
               
               Their outrages and cruelties were ſuch that the like were neuer heard of. For all maner of whoredome, rauiſhments, violences and woorſe, were committed by thoſe infernall helhowndes, villaines, and ſauage robbers: beſides, they put all women, maidens, and children to raunſome as many as they could take: ſuch violences they continued vntill the latter end of March, thereby to terrify this yong and deſolat Princeſſe.
               Whileſt the Leaguers (as fire brands blowne out of hell, ſubiect vnto no law, gouernment, nor power, do proffer iniuries vnto all maner of perſons, without any reſpect, about the beginning of February, while they tryed by al means poſſible, both by faire words & open violēce, to ſeaze both vpon the perſon and ſtate of the Princeſſe of Boillon: the chiefeſt of them aſſembled at Nancy in Lorreine, where they continued in counſell vntil the middeſt of Februarie, in the which aſſembly they concluded many articles againſt the Kings perſon and ſtate, alſo they tooke order to continue the eiuill warres, which they had kindled, and that ſtill vnder the 
                     •
                  olour of popiſh religion, they might win by little and little, and ſo make themſelues way to the ſtate, by the vndooing of whome ſoeuer.
               And for as much as they were out of hope to preuaile againſt them of the reformed religion in Guyenne, or other where, they aduiſed themſelues by policie, to giue the King no reſt, by hampring him into new troubles, in propoſing to him vnreaſonable requeſts, and ſtill vnder colour of Catholickiſme.
               For there they framed articles which haue three principal finall cauſes, to deſtroy the King, the nobilitie, and to ſaue themſelues.
               The firſt is, either to ſhorten the Kings life by ſome lot of warre, or elſe at the leaſt to weaken him, and make him odious to the Church-men.
               The ſecond is, to kindle and entertaine the warre immortall, that the nobilitie may be deſtroyed by mutuall blowes and woundes.
               Thirdly, to ſaue themſelues from blowes and charges, and to keepe themſelues in authoritie, vntill the opportunitie which they watched for

ſhould proffer it ſelf: theſe things are euidently ſeen in ye articles following.
               But here firſt before wee come to theſe articles, marke well (Chriſtian Reader) the turkiſh hearts, who contemning all that is named God and  Iuſtice, they haue extinguiſhed in themſelues all humanitie and reuerence of ſuperioritie. For contrarie vnto all humanitie, they went about to rau
                     •
                  ſh away that noble Princeſſe, iſſued of noble race, left deſolate, fatherleſſe, brotherleſſe, and friendleſſe, and alſo to lay hand vpon her ſtate. Now haue they deſpiſed the ſuperioritie ordayned of God, when they deſperatly and imperiouſly dare giue lawe to their Soueraigne, euen ſuch law as is altogether vnreaſonable, contrarie to the duetie of ſubiects. But now let vs come to the articles.
               Firſt, they ſay the King ſhall be requeſted to ioyne himſelfe more openly to the League, and ſhall put away from him, and out of his ſtrong holdes, and out of all ſtates and offices of any waight, ſuch as ſhall bee named vnto him.
               Here firſt they will haue the King, to take vpon him all the ſhame, diſhonour, and hatred of their deteſtable actions and iniuries, which they doo intend 
                     Note
                   to proffer to all manner of men, vnder the name of the League, which they will the King to take vpon him in theſe words, that they wil haue him to ioyne with the League.
               Secondly, whereas they ſeeke to diſplace from about him ſuch as they would, their intent is to depriue him of his authoritie, forces, and faithfull friends, to put him vnderward, that he may raigne at their diſcretion, and no longer then it ſhall pleaſe them.
               The ſecond article is, that the King ſhall cauſe the counſell of Trent to be publiſhed, authoriſed, and receaued in his dominions, onely the execution to be ſtayed for a time, concerning the reuoking of certaine exemptions and priuiledges of ſome Chapters, Abbeys, and other Churches from their Biſhops.
               This article they doo ſet foorth to bee the ſeede of immortall warres, knowing well that it cannot be publiſhed without the ſound of the trumpet 
                     Note
                   and double Canon.
               The third article is, that the King ſhall eſtabliſh the holy inquiſition of Spayne, at the leaſt in good townes, which is the onely way to roote out hereticks, and ſuſpected, ſo that the officers of the ſaid Inquiſition be ſtrangers, or at the leaſt be not borne in the places, where they may haue neither kindred, friends, nor alyaunce.
               This is the meanes to execute the decrees of the counſell, which in the former article they haue giuen to the kingdome of France for a law▪ that by 
                     Note
                   that law all the inhabitants of the realme, who ſhall be to the Inquiſitors, either hereticks, or ſuſpected: for who will not be ſuſpected if it pleaſeth maſter Frier the Inquiſitour.
               
                  
Secondly, the inquiſitors muſt needes be either Lorreines or Spaniards, two nations delighting in the blood of Frenchmen, as the Wolfe  in the blood of Lambs, or elſe they may not haue any kindred, ſay they: that is, that neither blood, duetie of nature, nor friendſhip, may let thē from euill doing, and from ſubuerting the french nation. The ſumme of this article is, that the french nation may bee deſtroyed without mercy or compaſſion.
               The fourth article is, that the King ſhal grant licence vnto the churchmen, to redeeme at any time the Church goods, and landes which they haue ſould, of whatſoeuer quality the ſaid goods and lands be, or they that haue bought them. And that the King ſhall compell the beneficed men to make ſuch a redemption within a certaine time that ſhall be prefixed to them, according to the abilitie that they ſhall be found to bee of, by them that ſhall be appoynted to ſee the ſtate of their reuenewes and lands.
               The Leaguers haue made the churchmen to blowe the Trompet of 
                     Note
                   ciuill warres, vpon that condition that they ſhould not fight themſelues, but pay money to them that would fight for them, and ſo haue made them ſell their church landes. Now they will enforce the poore Prieſts to buy againe their church lands, that they may ſell them againe when the Leaguers haue neede of them.
               The fift article is, that the King ſhall put into the handes of ſome of them, certaine places of importance which ſhall bee named to him: In the which it ſhall be lawfull for them to build Fortreſſes, and put in men of warre, as they ſhall think good, and all at the charges of the townes, cities and countreys: the like alſo they ſhall doe in the places which they hold at the time of the making of theſe articles.
               The leaguers doo thinke that the King had too great a portion in the 
                     Note
                   laſt deuiſion of his kingdome which they made with him in Iuly 1585. and that the King was too ſtrong for them yet. Therefore by this article they doo call him to a new deuiſion, wherein they goe about to doo three things.
               Firſt they would haue more ſtrong places, and ſuch as they themſelues ſhall appoynt. It is to be thought that they will not make choyſe of the worſt. For if the King ſhould put them to their choyſe, I dare affirme that they would chooſe Paris, Calis, Anious, Reymes, Bologne, Newhauen, Caen, Roan, Orleans, Tours, Naunts, Poytiers, Bourdeaulx, Limoges, Perigeulx, Tholouſe, Bayone, Narboune, Marſeilles, Lyons, Dijous, Auxone, Langaes, Seus, Mets, and other ſuch which they doe meane by places of importance.
               Secondly, they would haue the King this to doe for them, as to ſuffer them quietly to build citadels, and therein to put garriſons, which they gently call fortes, and men of warre to keepe out the King, if at any time

he ſhould change his mind and call for his owne.
               The third is, that the king and his poore ſubiectes ſhall beare the charges of fortifiyng and keeping theſe places from his obedience, that thence  they may eaſily oppreſſe him when they ſhall ſpie time, and tyramze his ſubiects.
               The ſixt article is, that the King ſhall giue pay to men ofwarre, to be maintained in Lorreyn vpon the borders of Germany, to let the entrie of the 
                     Note.
                   ſtrangers their Neighbours, and for that ende ſhall cauſe out of hand the goods of herelikes, and others which be aſſociat with them to be ſould.
               The cauſe of this article was feare of the vengeance which their conſcience repreſented continually before their eies, for the great enormityes, iniuries, & execrable abominations by them committed in the County of Noubeliard: for they perceauing their weaknes in ſtrength and wealth againſt that hot, vindicatiue and mighty nation of Germany, would haue the King to defend them, and ſo doing, iuſtify their vilanous actions, and thereby to begger himſelfe, and procure the hatred of that Nation, which had beene alwayes at amity with the Crowne of France.
               
               Secondly, whereas they require the goods of heretikes, and their aſſociats (by the which they do vnderſtād the Princes of the bloud, the Duke Mommorency, Noble men) and other qualities of men, which ſhall pleaſe them to be ſold.
               I maruell when they will go into Guienne and other Prouinces to pluck ſheaue with them, it will be hard for them to get y• ſheaue out of their hand: yet the king muſt do all this to iuſtify the murthers, whoredomes, Sodomi
                     •
                  ryes, and other abominations committed agaynſt the frendes and alied of the Realme of France.
               
               The ſeuenth article is, that al they who haue beene heretikes, or holden for here
                     •
                  ikes, euer ſince the yeare 1560. of what degree ſoeuer, may bee taxed to the third or fourth part of their goods.
               A reſearch muſt be made of the ſpace of 28. years paſt, and all liberty geuen 
                     Note.
                   ſo oft, by the Kings & proclaymed by their edicts muſt néeds be made cōyne. Euen they who were reunited by the laſt edi
                     •
                  t of July 1585. made at their owne diſcretion, muſt be called to account: and this is to make the warre immortall, vntill they attaine to the marke they ſhoot at, if they do not catch a fall by the way.
               The eight article is, that the Catholikes ſhall pay the tenth part of their reuenues euery yeare. And that commiſſioners be appointed to make the ſallies and taxes, as well of eccleſiaſticall, as lay perſons: others notwithſtanding then officers of the Soueraygne courts, that all things may be executed more ſpeedily and with leſſe charges.
               In this article, firſt the Leaguers ſpare neither friendes nor foes, but 
                     Note.
                   that they are ſomewhat more fauourable to the Catholikes then to the heretiks.

For whereas they were promiſed at the firſt ryſing of the league to be eaſed of all impoſt: now three years after they are taxed to pay ye 10. part of all their goods, vntil they be diſcharged of all taxes and impoſt. And if  they ſhould complaine of it, no doubt they ſhould heare the anſwere of the Wolfe to the Crane: goe thy way, thou maiſt be glad that thou haſt not loſt all.
               Secondly, they will not put in truſt about their tirannous deuiſes none of the kinges faithfull officers and ſeruants whom they ſuſpect, but ſuch Commiſſioners as be of theyr owne making, of their owne qualities, and ſuch as will ſay to all their dooings Amen.
               The ninth article is, that the friendes of heretikes which are of their aſſociate, ſhall be enforced by all meanes poſſible to buy their goods, in abating vnto them the fifth part of the value: and when they ſhall be ſold to others, vpon their refuſing, they ſhall not be receaued afterward to haue any action to recouer them.
               Here be two thinges full of wrong and Turkiſh oppreſſion.
               Firſt, that any man ſhould be compelled to buy other mens goods, ſtandeth 
                     Note.
                   vppon no reaſon.
               Secondly, that the ancient law of aguation, grounded vpon the ciuill law of the Romanes, and vſed in the Realme aboue one thouſand yeares (by the which the next of kindred might recouer the land of his kinſman alienated, in repaying the money within a certayine time) ſhould be altered by new men, who within a mans age had no more to do in the realme then they haue this day in Turkie: that law I ſay, that the Kinges of France neuer ſought to alter, neither had been able to do it if they would.
               The tenth article is, that the firſt ſummes of money that ſhall be made of that ſale, ſhall be beſtowed to pay the moſt needfull debts of the heads of the League, and the ouerplus ſhall bee put in the handes of ſuch as ſhall be named, with condition that they ſhall not be emploied otherwiſe.
               In this Article wee may obſerue two prety ſhameles tokens: for firſt, theſe beggerly Lords, iſſued out of the cauerns of the beggerly mountains 
                     Note.
                   of Lorreine, do imitate the beggerly Friers in their Sermons, who do exhort their good Dames to geue to their couent: ſo theſe Lordes being 12. in number (hauing ſpent their goods, and other mens alſo, partly in practiſing conſpiracies againſt the ſtate, partly in riots, whoredoms, and exceſſe) now put vs in remembra
                     •
                  ce to fell our landes and goods at what price ſoeuer, for to pay their debts, for theſe good lawes which they ſend vs out of their vilage of Nancy.
               
               Secondly, order is taken that the ouerplus of the ſale of our goods and landes be put in ſtore in ſuch hands as they ſhall appoint for them, leaſt they ſhould lacke to finiſh their courſe which they haue begun. But what

ſhal we do when ye is done? for all wilbe but a gnat in an Elephants mouth: wee muſt begin to ſell againe, and for lack of goods and lands to ſell, wee  muſt ſel our own bodies to be ſlaues in the Galleys, leaſt theſe men ſhould lack money.
               The tenth article is, that the life of any priſoner of the enemie, meaning the hereticks, as they tearme them, be not ſpared, except he wil abiure, and put in good ſureties to liue Catholickly, in paying preſently the iuſt value of his goods, if they haue not been ſold alreadie. And in caſe they haue béen ſold, he ſhall renounce all right which he may pretend hereafter, and ſhall binde himſelfe to ſerue three yeares and more in any ſeruice that he ſhall be imployed, without receauing any wages or paye.
               This is the law wherewith Mahomet the falſe Prophet did ſtrengthen his tirannie and ſuperſtition, for thus hee ſpeaketh 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , 
                     Note.
                   if any man ſhall ſpeake againſt Corran, either the ſword or bondage. The only difference is, that Mahomets lawe is ſomewhat more fauourable, in as much as it is but onely againſt the ſpeakers againſt his religion, but not againſt them who ſhall be taken in warre.
               But this dooth violate the lawe of Nations, and right of ſuppleants, which alwaies haue been kept inuiolable: and the violating thereof had been alwaies accounted among all Nations, worthie to be reuenged with fire and ſword. By this lawe of Nancy they will make this Nation ſo famous in the praiſe of humanitie, more ſauage than the very barbarous Nations.
               Secondly, life here is redeemed onely with abiuration and violating of conſcience, which is more than the Turke, or any other Nation on the earth dooth practiſe.
               At laſt followeth bondage, which muſt indure as long as it ſhall pleaſe the Lords and Senators of Nancy. This is the nature of this monſtrous lawe borne at Nancy.
               
               The effects of this ſtrange new law were to roote out the Fren
                     •
                  h Nation. For it maketh the Catholicks without any hope of remiſſion, to murther the Hugonets contraius gentium & ſupplicum: and it inforceth the Hugonets, lege talionis, to deſtroy the Catholicks for the violating of the right of Nations and Suppliants. And thus we ſhall be well recompenſed for the ſelling of our goods & lands. Theſe articles be ſuch, as if a Lord ſhould offer them to his ſlaues, it were lawfull for them to vſe all meanes poſſible againſt him. But theſe new Gods on earth dare preſent ſo vniuſt, ſo vnreaſonable, ſo vnreuerent conditions and lawes vnto one of the greateſt Monarkies in the World: but what is it that theſe ſhameles men dare not preſume for aduauntage?
               Theſe articles agreed vpon by theſe wiſe Senatours and Law-giuers in Nancy, the Metropolitan vilage of Lorreyne, were brought to the King

to be approued by him: but there was ſome delay in the approbation. And as for ſuch as made for the ſuppreſſing of the reformed religion, hee did accord  with them, but to the reſt he could not by any meanes condeſend, knowing with a good iudgement, that they tooke religion for no other pretence but to couer their ambition, and by theſe meanes to weaken his authoritie, and to rid him out of the way, by whatſoeuer meanes, and alſo all them whom they knew, were able and willing to hold plea for the Crowne againſt them: which thing cauſed that theſe articles of Nancy, but ſpecially ſuch as touched the Kings ſtrong places and holdes to bee deliuered to them, could not be approued by the King.
               It is ſaide in the firſt booke, how the Guyzes making all haſt that they might to vſurp the Crowne, thought good to rid out of the way Monſieur the Kings only brother, and how at Nancy, the ſhop of al the treacheries in theſe perilous dayes, they hired one Salcedo a Spaniard to haue diſpatched him one way or another, and for to bring that to paſſe, they deliuered him for an earneſt at the beginning 6000. Crownes. Now in like manner theſe Senators of Nancy doo propound in their counſell to ſearch out, and how to take away the impediments which may let them to come ſpeedilie to their intended purpoſe: it was found ſpeciallie to bee the King, and the Princes of the bloud, but among them chiefely the King of Nauarre, and the Prince of Conde. Therefore they muſt bee made away by one meanes or another: and whereas warre and violence were neither the ſafeſt nor the ſureſt way, they concluded that poyſon muſt bee tried. But to bring this to an happie end, they muſt haue the helpe of the Q. Mother, ſhe muſt be one inſtrument to commit parricides: for it is to be thought, that if ſhe would not ſpare her owne Sonne Charles the 9. ſhe would not ſpare them whome ſhe neuer loued: for ſhe neuer cared what ſhee did, ſo that ſhee might not doo good, ſhe is therefore eaſily won, to doo that which ſhe greatly deſired.
               Poyſoners are hired, they haue their drougges and inſtructions with them: ſome are ſent to miniſter their Phiſick to the King of Nauarre, if by any meanes they could. But howſoeuer it be, either that they which were hired to poyſon the King of Nauarre did altar their mindes, or had not the meanes to execute ſo vilanous an act, ſo it is, that his death was bruted in Lorreyne, and at the Court about the ſame time that the Prince of Conde dyed. But it hath pleaſed the Lord to haue deliuered him from their ſnares, to puniſh them in time, according to the meaſure of the treacheries and innumerable enormities by them committed.
               As touching the Prince of Conde, they had their mindes vpon him, for at length, the diuel furthering their treacheries, procured ſome of his owne houſhold ſeruants to bee wonne to take the matter in hand, and among others, one Brillant and a Page (vpon whome he had beſtowed great benefits)

to giue him poyſon the third day of March at ſupper, he fell ſick of a great paine of the ſtomack, about an howre an a halfe after ſupper: that  paine was followed incontinentlie with great vomiting, comming at ſundrie times with continuation of the ſaid paine, and with a great thirſt: hee was aſſiſted by Nicolas Poget, his maſter Chirurgion. At the ſame houre was called Maſter Bonauenture de Medicis, Doctor of Phiſick: which conſidering the accidents, did helpe the vomitings following therein, the motions of nature. The ſicknes notwithſtanding continued all the night, hauing inuaded the inferiour bellie with ſwelling and hardnes of the ſame, with ſuch difficultie to take breath, that he could not lie in his bed, but was faine to ſit ſtill in a chayre.
               The morrow after were called to counſell Lewis Bontempts, and Ihan Pallet, Doctors of Phiſick, who altogether did indeuour to helpe his Excellencie with all diligence and fidelitie, by all the meanes which they iudged fit, according to the accurrant accidents.
               The fift day of March, and ſecond of his diſeaſe, about three a clock in the after noone, all things went from worſe to worſe, ſo that there came a ſuffocation of all the famolties of nature, in the which he rendered his ſoule to God, halfe an houre after.
               In the death of this Prince, God did ſhoote an arrow of his wrath againſt the vngratefulnes & peruerſitie of this world, but ſpeciallie againſt France, in plucking this Noble Prince out of ſo many labours, into the ſocietie of the inheritance of his Saints in light.
               
                  Henry Bourbon, Prince of Conde, Sonne vnto Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, whoſe famous name ſhall bee in the euerlaſting remembrance of the righteous, was borne and brought vp in the Church of God, whoſe preſeruation was as deare vnto him as his owne life, God had endued him with noble vertues, he was faithfull vnto God, duetifull in the true worſhip of God, true vnto his King, louer of his Countrey, and of the libertie and honour of this realme, enemie vnto the perturbers of the peace of the ſame, and of them all whome he knew to be coniurators againſt the King and ſtate. His generoſitie und valour, with the greatnes of courage had been ſhewed in many noble exploytes, done by him, but ſpeciallie in ouercomming many aſſaults, labors, perils, and miſeries, during theſe miſerable ciuill warres: to be ſhort, God hath plucked him in all the courſe of his life, out of many daungers.
               His death was the more to be lamented, becauſe it was vyolent, and in the flower of his age, which happened the fift day of March 1588. at S. Jhan d' Angely in Xainctonge, to the great griefe of all men, among whome from age to age, the remembrance of him ſhall be honorable. For the death of this Prince was hurtfull to all France, but gainfull onely to him, who chaunged a vaine and paynfull life into one onely true and ſtedfaſt life, immortall,

quiet and euerlaſtingly bleſſed, in the aſſurance of the which hée died in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. 
               
               This ſudden and vnlooked for accident, gaue occaſion to the ſayd Doctors, Phiſitions and Chirurgions, to thinke that this ſickneſſe came thorowe ſome extraordinary and vyolent cauſe.
               For the ſayd Phiſitions gaue out vnder their hand and ſeale, as followeth.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           After his departing about two houres, there began to iſſue out of his mouth and noſtrels a froth thicke and white, which gathered by little and little to the bigneſſe of ones fiſt, and out of the ſame place a little after did iſſue yealowiſh water in great aboundance. On the Lords day being the ſixt of March, by the commandement of his Counſell, we Phiſitions and Chirurgions haue beſide called Peter Meſnard, & Focault Chotard, both Maſters Chirurgions of S. Ihan d' Angely, to make the anatomie of his bodie, and to ſearch altogether the cauſes of a death ſo ſudden.
                           And firſt wee haue found all the body blewiſh and leadie, the bellie in a ſtrange manner ſwolne, ſtretched and hard. In the opening of the body, we found in the lower bellie all the parts thereof with the inwards, blewiſh and blacke, and the hollowneſſe of his bodie full of yealowiſh waters. After ſearching diligently the ſtomack, we haue alſo found it blewiſh, and in the right and vpward part of the ſame an inch or thereabout vnder the Orifice of the ſayd ſtomacke, we haue found a round hole eaten through, and through that hole had fallen the waters and liquours which we found within the capacitie of the inferiour bellie. Then hauing diligently taken vp, viewed, cut and emptied the ſayd ſtomack, we haue ſeene euidently the whole bodie of the ſayd ſtomacke as well without as within, ſpecially on the right ſide blacke, burned, vlcered and gangrened in diuers places, but notably about the hole aboue ſayd. So that wee cannot iudge that it could bee done otherwiſe, then by a notable quantitie of burning, vlcering, and cauſtick poyſon, which had left euident markes of his paſſing in the Oeſophage. The liuer alſo in the place ioyning to the ſayd hole, was found altered and burned; the reſt of the ſubſtance of the ſayd liuer blewiſh, as alſo the lights. There was no part of ye bodie of his Excellencie which was not of a very good conſtitution and very healthfull, if the vyolent poyſon had not corrupted ye parts aboue ſayd. All the premiſes are according to trueth: and for the certitude of the ſame,
                           
                              wee haue ſealed this report with our hands andſeales at S. Ihan d' Angely 
                                 the 6. day of March. 1588.
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Medicis.
                                    Bontemps.
                                    Pallet.
                                    Poget.
                                    Meſnard.
                                    Chotard.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
About the ſame time the King of Nauarre came out of Gaſcoyne, who being aduertized of his death, commaunded that ſuch as were ſuſpected of  that villanous fact ſhould be purſued. Whereupon a page ſuſpected, ſaued himſelfe by flight: many more were apprehended. The proceſſe was made vnto many, with all the ſolemnities requiſite thereunto: whereof within a while after, the condemnation of one Brillaut enſued: the page alſo was condemned vpon centumacie, & executed in Picture. Brillaut was drawne vpon a hurdle through all the ſtreates of S. Jhan, and in the chiefeſt place of the ſayd towne was torne in peeces with foure horſes.
               Now we ſee how the Leaguers when they haue not been able to deſtroy the Princes by valour, haue vſed treacherous procéedings. For firſt, hauing treacherouſly ſhortned the life of the Duke of Alençon by poyſon, as it is ſaide in the firſt booke, and ſeduced the Cardinall of Bourbon, making him dreame of a kingdome in his old doting age, and to oppoſe himſelfe to two Kings, to wit, the King, and the King of Nauarre, and to all the houſe of Bourbons, out of which God had made him that honour as to haue iſſued one of the chiefeſt, as is ſayd in the ſecond booke. They alſo haue condemned the King of Nauarre to dye by their Italian figges, and there uppon proclaymed his death (which they had promiſed to themſelues) both in Lorreyne and in the Court, and in Townes and Cities of their fauourers: but God hath diſappoynted them of their murtherous purpoſe. At length (by the long ſuffering of God) to plague France, they haue preuayled agaynſt that good godly, vertuous, & famous Prince of Conde, and that vpon ſuch a day as hath béen fatall to the houſe of Guize to work miſchief, murther and rebellion.
               The death of this noble Prince amazed all men in Xainctonge, knowing that God had ſome heauie iudgements to execute vppon France, and that GOD had taken that noble Prince, leaſt he ſhould ſee euill dayes, as the Prophet Eſay ſaith.
               It is ſayd before, how the Lord Lauerdine (who was maſter of the Campe) ſaued himſelfe by flight out of the ſlaughter of Coutras, & betooke himſelfe to the towne of Niort, to the Lord Malicorne his vncle, where hée ſoiourned as his Lieutenant.
               Here (Chriſtian Reader) wee haue to obſerue, that although the King and the Leaguers hated in wardly one another, and in outward appearance did deepely diſſemble their affections; yet wee doo ſee, that as Herode and Pilate did excerciſe priuie hatred betweene them, and at length in perſecuting Chriſt did well agree as friends: ſo in men of like degrées and in like actions the like affections are boyling in their hearts. For the rumour of the death of the King of Nauarre and Prince of Conde, (which the Leaguers (hauing ſet ſome ſecret price vppon their heads) had promiſed vnto themſelues) did cauſe the King and the Leaguers in outward apparance

to be great friends, and to promiſe vnto themſelues an vtter rooting out of them of the religion, and a ſure ſubduing of all things beyond the riuer of Loyre. With ſpeede therefore they ſent eight or nine regiments conducted  by the Lord Courbe, to the Lord Lauerdine, Lieutenant of his vncle the Lord Malicorne at Niort in Poytow, who with al the forces which he could gather both in the lowe and high Poytow, the 16. day of March about two a clocke after midnight, deſcended into Marans by boates through the mariſhes of Beauregard, and with fiue hundred footmen ſeazed vppon the houſe and farme of the ſayd Beauregard, hauing found no reſiſtance, but onely of two of the inhabitants of Marans, with a little boate who were gone to diſcouer the Iland Cicoigne: theſe two diſcharging their peeces vpon the enemies, retyred to the trenches of Beauregard, there they found but fiue or ſixe Souldiers, as well of the inhabitants as others, who alſo diſcharged certaine ſhot vpon the enemie, who notwithſtanding aduanced and came to land. The cauſe why the Lord Lauerdine ſubdued theſe Ilands ſo eaſily, was, firſt the certayne newes of the death of the Prince of Conde, and the rumours bruted abroade touching the ſuppoſed death of the King of Nauarre; which thing cauſed great amaze and diſcouraging among all men. Secondly, the ill order and prouidence of the gouernour: for if he, his troups and inhabitants had done their duetie, Lauerdine had not entered that Iland at that price, or els had been chaſed out to his diſhonour and loſſe. The Lord Iarry had béen aduertized three dayes before of the enterprize of Lauerdine, and might haue put into the Ilands forces ſufficient to reſiſt the enemie: for the companies of the Lord Trimouille conducted by the Lord Boyſduly, returning from Cotaudiere were very nigh him, to wit, at S. Radagond, Champaigne, and Puyreneau, who deſired nothing more then to enter into Marans. But the gouernour and the inhabitants fearing the preace of Souldiers (which was exceſſiue indeede) would not admit them, but ſent to Rochel the Captaine Plaute, Lieutenant of the Gouernour, to requeſt them of Rochel to ſend them about fiftie Souldiers, whom they would entertayne, vntill they might ſee what the enemie would doo: which thing they of Rochel could not doo for that time.
               Notwithſtanding this refuſe, and that the gouernour was well aduertized, that he had not ſufficient forces to let ye enemie to take land, yet the companies of the Lord Boyſduly paſſing through the Brault, were ſent further as farre as Eſuand, through foule wayes ouerthwart the Marſhes, whereas they ſhould haue been ſtayed, to be vſed as the neceſſitie had required. They ſent notwithſtanding the ſame day at euening to the ſaid Boyſduly: but arriuing not before ten or eleuen a clock in the night, was the cauſe that ſuccour could not come in time, although that the diligence of the ſayd Boyſduly and his companies was wonderfull; for without any

leaſure to lodge, and without any reſpect of the indignitie proffered him and his troupes the day before, they departed preſently, and repayred to  the fort Brune one houre and a hal
                     •
                  e before the enemie tooke lande at Beauregard. But whileſt the gouernour and the inhabitants made ſome difficultie to let in all his troupes, (being not willing to receaue aboue 50. or 60.) the enemie on the other ſide entred at Beauregard (as is ſayd) ſo that the entrie into Brune was not opened to the ſayd Boyſduly, nor his troups, afore that the enemy had already gotten the farme houſe of Beauregarde. There had beene meanes to driue back the enemie, if ſpeedely the troups (who were entred at Brune about three a clock after midnight) had gone to meete the enemie, as ſome did giue their aduiſe to doe. For the L. Lauerdine was not yet well accompanyed, and it had beene an eaſie thing to cut the way to the reſt of his troupes which came in ſmall boates. But becauſe the Souldiers were marueilouſly wearie, they tooke incontinently their lodgings: the Captaines alſo did not think good to aſſault the enemie by night, before they had diſcouered him.
               By this delay, the Lord Lauerdine receiued his footmen with leaſure, to the number of fiue hundred, without any horſemen, whome hee ſet in battell array in Beauregard, and placed about foure ſcore of them in the Farme houſe of Lommeau. The day being come, to wit, the 16. of March, the Lords Boyſduly and Iarry, and others Captaines, to number of three hundred footemen, and about three ſcore hrſemen, went to ſeeke out the enemie, who put his men in battell array, in fauour of the Farme houſe of Beauregard, and durſt not aduance vpon our men, fearing our horſemen, although they were twiſe ſtronger in footmen. Our men on the other ſide durſt not charge them, hauing ſuch aduantage as they had, but for that time were content to chaſe them, who were put in the Farme houſe of Lommeau, who retyred to their fellowes in good order, as men reſolute. Our men on the other ſide, retyred to the towne, where euery one refreſhed himſelfe, intending to charge the enemie in the euening, but there was noted in our men much confuſion, but ſmall reſolution.
               The ſame day about three a clock in the after noone arriued from Rochel the Lord Noyſe, with twentie braue ſouldiers, vnder the conduct of Captaine Ozanneau: it is certaine that it theſe ſouldiers had arriued the day before, and had been placed at Beauregard, with ſome more forces which might haue been geuen them, part of the inhabitants, & part of the ſouldiers of the gouernour, the L. Lauerdine had not put foot on land ſo eaſily as he did. For although the Lord Lauerdine had gotten much (as is ſaid) yet he had beene enforced to retire, if it had not beene for the treathery committed in the forte of Baſtile, which commanded the captayne Enſigne of the gouernour and ſome others, who were ſo frighted by a countrie man, ſent vnto them by the way of aduertizement from Perrerio
                  
with threatnings, that if they did ſuffer themſeues to be beſieged, they would be hanged as others were at Cotaudiere: that there upon they ſtated not for the enemie, but abandoned their fort, their armour and munition,  and ſaued themſelues in the Marſhes.
               The Lord Lauerdine hauing intelligence of this fact, immediatly ſent for his horſemen, who were three long leagues off: they arriued about 5. a clock in the morning: he put all his men in battell array, and marched toward the towne of Marans.
               
               The Lords Boyſduly and the gouernour, with other gentlemen and ſouldiers, prepared themſelues to goe to ſeeke the enemie, whome about ſix a clock they diſcouered with his horſemen, which made them conclude that without doubt the Baſtile was in their power: for it was vnpoſſible that their horſemen had entred any other way.
               Notwithſtanding, they which were in the towne, went foorth to receiue the enemie to the fartheſt houſes of the high towne, where they fought a ſkirmiſh, in the which the Lord Boyſduly, Noyſe, and ſome others who followed them, with ſome of▪ 
                  Rochell, did what they could: but at length being charged with horſemen of the enemie, were forced to giue place, and to retyre into the Caſtell ſpeedily, ſo that the enemie ſeazed vpon the high towne, and thereupon afterward became maſter of all the reſt.
               All the Gentlemen with their horſes and Souldiers, and ſome of the inhabitants retyred into the Caſtell, to the number of three or foure hundred. Within that place there was no prouiſion of victualls, ſaue ſome ſmall ſtore of meale, which the Souldiers in retyring therein could carry away with them. There was neither ſhouels, mattocks, picaxes, nor any other tooles, to remoue the earth if neede ſhould be: there was ſmall prouiſion for horſes, and no good ſtore of powder.
               Notwithſtanding, the Lord Boyſduly, with the gouernour and other Gentlemen, determined to hold out for certaine dayes, hoping to haue ſome ſuccour either by the comming of the king of Nauarre (who was not yet returned out of Gaſcoyne) or elſe by them of Rochell, or if the worſt ſhould fal out, yet they would make ſome honourable compoſition. With this reſolution they prepared to keepe the court of the Caſtel, which was in a manner trenched, and the dungeon hauing one piece which was little or nothing worth to them.
               There they were incontinently beſieged by the enemie, who ſeazed vpon all the conuenient places round about the Caſtell, and did commaund the court of the ſayd Caſtell: they trenched themſelues where it was conuenient for them.
               They who were beſieged in the Caſtell did likewiſe their endeuor▪ ſo that without any loſſe of men they killed many of the enemies. The Lord

                  Iarry Gouernour was hurt in the foot, which made his perſon afterward vnprofitable.
               But the enemy preſſed them within ſo narrowly, that there could no  meanes be deuyſed to vnderſtand any thing during the ſiege.
               The 18. of March the King of Nauarre haſting before his company, which followed him contrary to the opinion of many, came to Rochel with the Prince of Soyſſons, and ſome other noble men in good deliberation to ſuccour Marans.
               
               Afore his arryuing to Rochel, the inhabitantes thereof had ſent a good number of Harquebuziers, vnder the conduct of Captaine Gargoleau, and others, for to enter into Marans: but they vnderſtoode by the way, that the enemy poſſeſſed the Iland with the chiefeſt fortes, and had beſieged the Caſtell: for which cauſe they returned to Rochel. The Citizens of Rochel alſo had ſent two ſhippes with the barke of Captayne Courtault, and certayne Culuerings, vnder the conduct of Captayne Boyſſeau, and other Souldiours and Captaynes. They entered into the riuer boldly, ſeazed vppon the forts of Brault and Clouſie, in the ſight of the enemy whom they preuented.
               The King of Nauarre informed of all thinges paſſed at Marans, the 19. day very early tooke his iourney to Charon, and from thence to the ſaid fortes, where he put men and munition a
                     •
                   occaſion ſerued. He cauſed alſo the ſhippes whereon the Culuerings were to approach the town of Marans: the Culuerings did beat the houſes of the Towne called the boats houſes.
               The enemy hauing ſeazed vppon the whole towne, and trenched himſelfe in the market houſe, ſeeing the preparing of the Shippes, preſented himſelf to withſtand the landing of them that came from Rochel, and with two field Péeces compelled the ſhips to deſcend lower: there were flayne ſome Souldiers of Rochel.
               
               The King of Nauarre gaue all the ſignes that could be poſſible (as by the ſounding of Trompets, ſpyals, or other meanes) to let them who were beſieged vnderſtand of his comming. One of his ſpyals was hanged: but they within could not perceaue any thing, ſaue onely of the comming of the Ships, whom they ſuppoſed to haue béene the Rochellers only, but he could not conceaue any hope to be able to ſuccour them.
               The enemie in the meane while increaſed his forces, which repayred into the Iland out of euery ſide. Hee had alſo meanes to make fortes and trenches in diuers entringes of the Iland, to ſtop the ſuccour which might come to them within the Caſtell, and in the meane time preſſed them hard. The King of Nauarre on the other ſide receaued ſome forces, as well them which had followed him out of Gaſcoyne, as other who repayred vnto him out of Poytow, and Xainctonge. All theſe companyes

together were fayre; and diſpoſed to do well: & although the forces of the enemy were no leſſer, notwithſtanding he determined to enter into  the Iland. But hee found in the place (which he thought to be moſt eaſie) which before hee had viewed himſelfe, that the enemy had ſo entrenched himſelfe there, that it was impoſſible to force them without great loſſe of men; conſidering yt the moſt part of the way to come to the ſayd trenches, the Souldiers ſhould haue waded in the water to the waſt, & the horſes to the ſaddle. The enemy alſo had ſet ſome Peeces vppon the bancke of the marſh, by the which they might greatly haue endamaged them that would haue gone about to paſſe: they had broken alſo ſome bridges to make the entring difficult.
               All theſe diſcommodityes conſidered, the King of Nauarre choſe rather to ſaue his men to a better opportunity, thē ſo dangerouſly to hazard them, without any helpe to them that were within the Caſtell, who might ſaue themſelues ſome other way: ſo he tooke his forces from Clouſy, and gaue it ouer.
               Hee kept onely the fort of Brault, the paſſage into the low Poytow, which notwithſtanding two or three dayes after came in the power of the enemie.
               The enemy waxed ſtronger and ſtronger dayly, becauſe the caſtell refuſed parley, and harkened to nothing but to defend themſelues, ſeeing no Ordinance.
               At length the Lord Lauerdine had three Pieces brought from Niort, which he ſet againſt the caſtell the 24. of March. The firſt battery was agaynſt a rownd tower, which maketh one of the corners of the Caſtell toward the towne: and with ſhot did ſo enlarge a window which was garniſhed with a Lattice of Iron, that he enforced the Rochellers to forſake it: they ſhot alſo agaynſt the tower of the gate, and in other places here and there without hurting any man, although that place be very ill for the ſhot of Ordinance.
               They which commaunded in the Caſtell, and many Souldyers lacked no courage (although they wanted many thinges neceſſary to aſſiſt themſelues in defence of a naughty place) but as the affections are diuers, ſpecially in a company confuſed, as that was within the Caſtell: ſo one gaue counſell one way, another another way: at length they came to that iſſue, that they would ſurrender the place, but vpon ſuch tearms and conditions as ſhould not be diſhonorable vnto them.
               The reaſons of this reſolution were, that they had promiſed, and ſo ſent word to Rochel that they might hold eight dayes and no longer without ſuccour. The tearme was expired, they had no more bread but for two dayes, and yet was not there ynough for all. Many of their horſes were dead for hunger, which did infect them with the ſtinke: there happened alſo

that ſome horſes for lacke of fodder had eaten the tayles one of an other, euen to the bones. They had no ſalu
                     •
                  s to dreſſe them which were wounded, they had no tooles to fortify them ſelues, hauing among them all but  one ſhouell and a ma
                     •
                  tock. The dungeon beeing very little, the fall of the walles did quell them, and that which was woorſt of all, they heard no newes of the King of Nauarre, but onely what Lauerdine told them, who made them beleeue that he was ſtill in Gaſcoyne: and although they beleeued not the wordes of the enemy, yet did they ſee nothing to perſwade them to the contrary.
               The enemy on the other ſide fearing to be forced by the king of Nauarre, offered them honeſt and good ſuretyes for the performance of the offers, ſo that they did chooſe rather to take him in that mood (ſeeing that they muſt yeeld) then to expect greater extremity which might 
                     •
                  ender the conditions harder, hauing done already that which good ſouldiers & men of war might do: therefore they yeelded vp the caſtell vpon theſe conditions.
               That there ſhould goe forth all gentlemen, Souldiers, and inhabitantes, with their armor, horſes and ſtuffe, and ſhould be ſafely conducted whither they would, which was faithfully kept by the Lord Lauerdine, in the taile: notwithſtanding, ſome ſouldiers were ſpoiled of their good, but few.
               The Iland of Marans being ſo reduced into the hand of the Leaguers, the Lord Cluſeaulx, otherwiſe called Blanchard, obtayned the gouernment of that place, which he kept about two moneths.
               About the ſame time that theſe things did ſo paſſe in the Iles of Maran, to wit, the 25. of March, not farre from thence, to wit, in Britayne, vppon the North ſide of Loyre, as at Naunts, and other places thereabouts happened an earthquake, as a preſage of ſuch commotions as haue happened, & do continue there ſtill: which was teſtifyed by Lewis Viuant doctor of Phiſike in the vniuerſity of Naunts to Duke Mercure, gouernour of Britayne, as followeth.
               Theſe are to let your Lordſhip vnderſtād, yt on Fryday being the 25. of March about 11. a clocke in the morning, the weather being calme, the wind at Southweſt, at the time of the celebration of the high Maſſe, was heard throughout all the citty a great noyſe, roaring and groonting with a great ſhaking and quaking of the earth for that ſmall time that it did continue, ſo that the people which were in Churches, with great multitudes were af
                     •
                  ard of that ſudden noyſe, except ſome which thought it to haue béen carte loaden & drawen through the ſtreets. Other doubted it had béen the Myne of the gate Sauuetour that had kindled: they which were in houſes, thought that the fire had ſuddenly caught the Chymnies, hearing ſuch noyſe as when a Chimney is fyred. This noyſe and earthquake not onely was in the Citty and Suburbs, but alſo at Nozay, Eucenis, Oudon, Mauues, Calquefou, S. Erbline, S. Stephen, B
                        •
                     oys, la Hay, the low Goulene, and

high Goulene, chiefely where the Countrey people were ſo amazed in thoſe quarters, that they forſooke both the Maſſe and the Prieſtes that ſaide it: the riuer alſo was ſeene bubling at the ſame time. 
               
               This token dooth preſage many calamities, and a wonderfull alteration in this eſtate: this earthquake doth admoniſh vs to ſearch the right knowledge of our offences, as alſo of late we haue been warned by fiery men, which haue been ſeene by the watermen about Tours and Saumur to fight in the ayre. Thus farre Doctor Viuaut to Duke Merceur.
               
               It is ſaide before how the Duke of Lorreyne both beſieged Iamets, and alſo aſked the Ducheſſe of Boillon in marriage for his Sonne the Lorde Vaudimount: the Duke of Guize did the like for his. This Noble Princeſſe abhorred their aliaunce, partly for their falſe religion, or rather atheiſme, which was couered with zeale of popiſh religion, as with a Maſke, partly for their treacherous intents, which ſhee knew they had againſt the Crowne of France. Yet theſe petty Lords of Lorreyn, muſt needs haue her whether ſhe will or not: but her they may not haue before they take Sedan, the chiefeſt towne of her principalitie, which they had terrified all this moneth of March, by the barbarous inuaſions of the Lord Roſne. It is ſaide alſo, how the beſieged in Iamets haue kept off the enemies, and had cauſed to trench themſelues in villages thereabouts, where they were dayly aſſaulted by them of Iamets. Now in the latter end of March, the armie before Iamets was greatly increaſed inforces, ſo that all things being readie, Iamets is preſſed and beſieged more narrowly then before, and after many ſkirmiſhes betweene them, the ar
                     •
                  illerie is placed for the battery.
               There remained to them of Jamets for hope of ſuccour, (after mans iudgement) the towne of Sedan, in the which vnder the au
                     •
                  hority of the Ducheſſe commaunded the Lord Nieuile, a Gentleman famous in counſell, valour, and experience: he had within Sedan a ſmall number of Gentlemen and good Souldiours. The army which was before Iamets, deſirous to cut off all hope of ſuccour from Sedan, ſent part of their horſemen, Frenchmen, Italians, and Spaniards, with a number of Harquebuſiers about Sedan, to ſpoyle and to ſeaze vpon all places and high wai
                     •
                  s, by which they of Sedan might come to ſuccour Iamets, and among others they tooke Vaudelincourt, Balan and other places. Their courſes were raging, and their rage ſpared nothing: the contempt which they had of ſo weake an enemie, made them (as the manner is) both inſolent, ſecure, and careles of their ſafetie, which was the cauſe, that diuers times, and in diuers places they were charged by them of Sedan, who iſſuing out fiercely, made great ſlaughter of them, as the time and ſmall meanes which they had ſuffered them: ſo that they were ſhamefully driuen out of their villages of Vaudelincourt and Balan.
               
               But to preuent ſuch inconueniences, the Lorde Roſne and other Captaines,

who conducted the turkiſh troupes of the League, determined to lodge hereafter more cloſely, then they had done before: and for that cauſe, the fourth day of Aprill, the greateſt part of the horſenien and footemen  which were on the eaſt ſide of Menſe went to Bemily, ſituated on the weſt ſide of the ſayd riuer, where the L. Roſne lodged, and the reſt of his companies lodged at Aucourt, Haracourt, and Raucourt, leauing on the eaſt ſide of Menſe, the Baron of Saraxenbourg, with foure companies of horſemen, to wit, his owne, and the Lord Anthony Vize a frenchman, a great friend of the Duke of Guyze: the third was the company of the Lord Tilly, a Lorreyne, and the fourth was conducted by Captaine Carlo an Italian. Theſe companies placed themſelues within the towne of Douzie, belonging to the principalitie of Sedan. That towne they determined to fortifie, by reaſon of the ſituation which is good, being ſituated vpon the riuer named Chize, flowing from Iuoy, and within a quarter of a league beneath Douzie falleth in the riuer Menſe, which cānot be paſſed by foord in winter: the ſayd Douzie lyeth directly from Sedan to Iamets, ſo that hauing Douzie, they be maſters of the way from Sedan to Iamets.
               
               Nigh vnto the village of Douzie beyond the bridge at the ends of the meades, at a place called Marie, were two companies of horſemen lodged, commanded by Ihan and Thomas Albaneſes, there they were ſet to ſuccour Douzie, for by the meanes of the bridge lying betweene them and the towne, in a moment they could recouer the towne. The companies which had paſſed the riuer Menſe, vnder the conduct of the Lorde Roſne, were gone to beſiege Raucourt, appertayning to the Soueraignety of Sedan. They beſieged it when it was altogether vnprouided of all neceſſary things, for which cauſe the Lord Nieuile determined by the aduiſe of the couſell to furniſh it with all neceſſary things, as well with prouiſion of victuals as munition of warre, and by the way to charge three companies of light horſemen, which were lodged in Haracourt, and to that ende hee departed out of Sedan about eight a clock in the euening the tenth day of Aprill, accompanyed with foure ſcore horſes and foure hundred Harquebuſiers: but there fellout ſuch a terrible tempeſt and violent rayne, that they were enforced to retire, ſaue onely they victualed Raucourt.
               
               The twelfth das of April, the Lord Nieuile aduertized of the diligence which the Baron of Saraxenbourg vſed in fortifiyng Douzie, he conſidered that the longer he ſhould delay to charge him, the greater the difficulty would be, and that the ſooner the better, without giuing hun leaue to fortifie himſelfe in that place, which did ſo preſſe Sedan, and tooke from him the meanes to ſuccour Iamets: he therefore called the counſel, and propounded them two enterprizes which bee would willingly attempt, the 
                     ••
                  e was to goe to Haracourt, the other to Douzie: whither it was concluded that they ſhould martch the ſame night. They departed about ten

a clock at night, with foure hundered Harquebuſiers, and foureſcore and twelue horſes, commauuded by the Lorde Arſoune, and Falayſes. It was  alſo ordered that the footemen ſhould goe three diuers waies, to wit, that the Captaines Dorys and Parramentier, with one hundred H
                     •
                  rquebuſiers, ſhould goe to get the bridge of Douzy, vpon the riuer Chize, to ſtop the ſally of them who were within the towne, and by the ſame meanes to let the companies of the light horſemen, who were at Mary, diſtant onely from Douzie the ſhot of an Harquebuſh (betweene that place and the towne, nothing being but the meades and the riuer) leaſt they ſhoulde goe into the towne to ſuccour their fellowes.
               Captain Cheuerdery, Lieutenant to the Lord Caulmont, ſhould aſſault the lodging of the Lord Saraxenbourg, with 50. Harquebuſiers: the Captaines Framond and Maſſart, with their troup
                     ••
                   ſhould charge vpon the trenches, through the which, the horſemen ſhould iſſue foorth. The reſt of the footemen commaunded by Captaine Villepoys Seriant Maior, ſhould ſtay with the horſemen, for to helpe where neede ſhould bee, and to fauour our horſemen when they ſhould ioyne with the enemie.
               The thirteenth day, about three a clock in the morning, the troupes of Sedan did charge Douize, and they who had the charge to ſeaſe the bridge, came ſo fitly, without finding any great reſiſtance, that quickly they were maſters of the bridge.
               But it was not ſo at the barritados, whom the Captaine Framond and Maſſart did charge, for there our men were violently reſiſted by the Barron of Saraxenbourg himſelfe and the Lord Anthony Vize, & Dom Ihan Romeroa Spanyard, who made a ſalley with fiue and twentie or thirtie horſemen, who notwithſtanding were receaued ſo coragiouſly by our footmen, who had charged the Barricado, that being beaten back, they were faine to retire within their trenches ſo confuſedly, that our footemen in beating them before, entred with them, and ſeazed vpon the barricado. In this ſkirmiſh were ſlaine many notable Captaines and men of warre, among whome were Anthony Vize and his Lieutenant, the reſt of their horſemen, that then for haſte and terrour could not get on horſeback, would haue auoyded by the bridge, which was ſeazed on before, but they found it ſtopped, & were ſo rudely ſeton by our footemen, that the moſt of them were ſla
                     •
                  ne, ſome taken priſoners, a great number caſt themſelues into the riuer and were drowned, the Baron and few with him, by the goodnes of their horſes, auoyded the danger, and moſt of them in their doublets, and without bootes, the way to Iuoy.
               
               The fight hauing indured one houre, the reſt of the enemies retired into a Fort, which they had made within the village, and there ſtayed for the canon. The Lord Nieuile by hap had cauſed two meane pieces to be brought with his troupes, wherewith they ſhot two volleys againſt that

Fort: that diſligent exployte ſo amazed them within the Fort, that without any bargening, they rendered themſelues at the diſcretion of the Ducheſſe, with promiſe of their liues. The agreement made, the Captaines  
                  Carlo & Maruile rendred their Enſignes to the Lord Nieuile, who being entred into the Fort, found therein about two hundred able men, as well borſemen as footemen, whome he cauſed to be brought forth, and bee lead captines to Sedan. The chiefe men of them were the Captaines Carlo, Maruile, & their Lieutenant and Enſignes, Captaine Romero a Spanyard, who commaunded ouer a companie of horſemen. There were alſo a number of Gentlemen of the companie of the Baron, and many light horſes Italians: there were found more then ſeauen ſcore ſlaine vpon the place in that flight, beſides them who were drowned and hurt. There were taken more then two hundred horſes, among whome were found twentie or fiue and twentie of the faireſt in all the armie, and many of them had coſt the Baron one thouſand crownes a piece: hee eſteemed the loſſe which hee had ſuſtained in that charge, in horſes, plate, money, and mony worth, at more then thirtie thouſand Crownes.
               Of our men it is moſt true, there dyed but onely two, the one was a Souldiour of the companies▪ and the other a Citizens Sonne of Sedan, named the Febure, there were ſome hurt▪ but verie few.
               The enemies did holde a ſtrong houſe, named Lamcourt, ſituated betweene Douzie and Sedan, which the Lord Roſne had battered with nine and twentie ſhot of Ordinance. The Lord Nieuile in returning to Sedan, cauſed his artillerie to take that way: that houſe was kept by fiue & twenty Souldiours, who when they had ſeen the canon, yeelded themſelues vpon the ſame conditions that they of Douzy had done. The companies which were beyond Menſe, commaunded by the Lord Roſne, tooke ſuch fright by the ouerthrowe of them of Douzy, that they could neuer clawe it off after: for the night following, they repaſſed the riuer Menze with great alarum, and retired with the reſt of the armie before Jamets, ſo that there remained not one of them vpon the Land of Sedan. This was the light of 
                     •
                  eliuerance, which God reſerued to this fatherles and comfortles Princeſſe, and the confirmation of his promiſe that hee raiſed vp himſelfe for the poore, which is afflicted without a cauſe, and that hee will pull downe with ſhame and confuſion the high lookes of the haughtie. The Papiſts, in whome there was ſome ſparke of reaſon and iuſtice, did holde infallibly, that ſome horrible vengeance did hang ouer the head of that armie full of villany and bloud.
               The Ducheſſe of Boillon hauing receaued the newes of that vnlooked or victorie, accompanied with other Ladies of calling, who were exiled for the teſtimonie of the truth, and ſoiourned at Sedan, went to the gate called Meſuil, to giue thankes to the Gentlemen and Captaines, for the notable

ſeruice which they had done to her, and to gratifie the Souldiours in al that ſhe could. 
               
               The Lord Nieuile preſented her two Enſignes, & two Cornets which they had gotten, which ſhe receaued thankfully, & incontinently the whole companie with the people went to the temple, where thankes were giuen to God for this happie ſucceſſe: this was about noone.
               This ouerthrowe did not quench the fire, but rather did kindle the violence of the army which was before Iamets, ſo that they doubled their rage, labour and battery, which they had continued from the ninth day of Aprill, and neuer ceaſed to thunder, vntill the ſixteenth day of the ſame moneth, 
                     ••
                   which time they were willing to giue an aſſault, and they doubled the battery more furiouſly then euer before, in the which for the ſpace of fiue dayes they had employed the greateſt pieces they had, which did carrie 45. or 48. or 50. bullets. As they without prepared themſelues to giue the aſſault, ſo they within prepared all things neceſſarie, with courage to receaue them: it was not poſſible to doo more valiantly, then botl, Captaine and Souldiours did; the more worthie praiſe, that in the middeſt of armes (which they acknowledged of themſelues but vncertaine and weake) they put their whole hope and confidence of their preſeruation onely in God, the vpholder of the oppreſſed, and the defender of their iuſt quarell.
               Such hope did not deceaue them, for the enemies hauing done their batterie, to the number of twelue volleys of Ordinance, the ſame day in a moment they cloſed themſelues in battell aray, and headlong ſet as wel on the breach, as on the curtine toward the tower, called the Cat, where they planted a great number of ladders, with a full aſſurance to carry the towne away by one way or other: but they were ſo couragiouſly receaued, that after a long fight they were ſo beaten, driuen backe, and ouerthrowen, that the Towne ditch remayned full of a great number of dead & wounded: few were taken priſoners by them of the towne, for they did driue them before, ſtill beating them vnto their trenches, ſo that no man was able to repaſſe the heate and furie of the Souldiers following the victory: one halfe of theyr army was there wholly deſtroyed.
               Of them of the towne were not aboue ſixe ſlaine, and eight hurt: a thing very ſtrange and yet moſt true. God for to magnify his power in taking vengeance vpon tyrantes and haughty perſons, oftentimes doth ouercome as well with a ſmall as with a great number: and ſo was that the onely vertue and force of his arme, to whom the victorious gaue the glory: for after the retire from the fight they gaue publikly thankes to the diuine goodnes of God, who ſo mightily had deliuered them.
               Afterward, that proud ſinke of filthy ſlaues did nothing worthy to bee reported, but grew alwayes leſſer and leſſer: they attempted afterwards ſome ſtratagems, but without any effect, which cauſed them to conclude

not to hazard further, but to preſerue the reſt in certaine Block howſes, which they made about the town vppon the high wayes, ſuppoſing by that means to compell them in tyme through hunger to yeeld. 
               
               It is ſayd before, how the Duke of Guyze ſent his horſe courſers and riders, with his Oratours to bring in triumph, and to ſhew the horſes, armor and ſpoyle of the Rutters, taken from them at 
                     Ʋimorye and Aulnea
                        •
                     , by Montargis and Chartres, not onely with amplifications of his victoryes and great valiantnes, but alſo with deprauing and debaſing the Kinges dooings, with calumnies, lies, falſe reportes and ſlanders, into ſuch Prouinces and Citties, where theſe ſycophants did venture to goe: for ſuch were the graces and ornaments of their rhetorike, wherewith theſe Oratours did beautify their demonſtratiue orations.
               It is ſayd alſo how the King of Nauarre, after the proſperous iourney at Coutras, ſent Ambaſſadors to the King to ſearch the meanes of peace, & offered him his and the Germans forces to be reuenged of the Leaguers, his ſecret enemies. Alſo, how by what pollicy the good hope of this Ambaſſage was preuented and made of none effect by the Leaguers, ſeeking to nouriſh diſſention and warre in the Realme.
               Furthermore, it is ſayd, how after the diſſipation of the Germans, the King retyring to Paris, and hearing of the proceeding of the Duke of Guzye againſt his perſon and honour: and what great diſcredit he had procured him among his ſubiects, too late hee ſaw his error, in hauing reiected the proffers of the King of Nauarre, and neglected opportunity of reuengement, which he doth purpoſe to dilay, and referre it to another time, ſuppoſing this to bee his beſt courſe; firſt to repayre the fault committed: For ſeeing the communalty addicted altogether and affectionated to the Duke of Guyze, hee determined to doo ſome thing plauſible to the Commons, to recouer their good wils and affections.
               In the twelfth Chapter of the Actes, there it is ſhewed how a King killed Iames, ſeeing that it pleaſed well the people (to get their loue to the vttermoſt) tooke Peter alſo, intending to kill him like wiſe: ſo this King (with dutiful reuerence of the ſoueraigne power be it ſpoken, in comparing the counſels and actions, not the perſons) determined to recouer the loue of his ſubiects by the ſlaughter of the King of Nauarre, Nobility and people, which follow the example of Peter, and imbrace the ſame forme of doctrine which he hath deliuered. Hee concludeth therefore to make warre agaynſt them of the reformed religion.
               The King therefore paſſing the latter end of Winter in the meditating of theſe enterprizes, in repairing and renuing his forces, an expedition was publiſhed abroad agaynſt them of the reformed religion, whereunto the K. in his owne perſon would go the next Sommer.
               The Ieſuits fearing leaſt the colde of the Winter and the ſweetnes of

the ſpring next following, would both coole and quallify that heat and bitternes, which did ſo boyle in the Kings minde, importunatly by their outcryes and tumultuous Sermons did preſſe him forward, their Pulpites  ringing of nothing elſe but fire, fire, burne, burne, kill, kill, the heretikes: to ſharpen and fleſh him to goe about his buſineſſe more eagerly. They daily aſſured him, and ſhewed him certayne argumentes of Gods wrath againſt the heretikes (as they tearmed them) promiſed him an aſſured victory, and bleſſed iſſue, deſcanting ſpecially vpon the fatall yeare 1588. ſo much ſpoken of by the Aſtronomers. Yet for all theſe helliſh Frogges crying croak, croake: the King made no great haſt to his voiage in Poytow, either doubting of ſome new rebellion of the Leaguers, or elſe miſtruſting the euents.
               But whileſt the thinges aboueſayd do ſo paſſe in the Soueraignty of Sedan, the king hauing opportunity geuen him, by the death of the Prince of Conde, and the good ſucceſſe of Lauardine in ſubduing ſo ſpeedily the Iles of Marans (which he thought to be a good beginning to bring vnder his obedience the reſt of Poytow and Xainctonge, and at length to force Rochel) began earneſtly to reſolue himſelfe vppon his expedition of Guyenne, and thought good to vſe ſome ſpeede and celerity in inuading Poytow and Xainctonge, as the neereſt of them which did embrace the Goſpell. Therefore he prepareth all things, and deuyſeth all the means poſſible to deſtroy the King of Nauarre, to take the Ile of Rhe, to Blocke in Rochel, to get the towns of Talmond, Ganach, and Fontenay: and gyrdeth about his loynes to goe in his owne perſon to that voyage: there to fill the meaſure of his prayſes and victories, hoping thereby to winne agayne the harts of his loſt ſubiectes.
               On the other ſide, the maſter of the league perceiuing himſelfe to haue crept deepely into the hearts of the people, and to haue diſlodged the K. from thence, forgetteth the heretikes, and the defence of the holy Church, which he had heretofore pretended, and beginneth to diſcouer the ha
                     •
                  red againſt the King, which had lyen hidden in his breſt a long time, cryeth out that the warres ſo often times mooued againſt the king of Nauarre, had vaniſhed away without profit, the onely fault is the kings intelligences with the heretikes, but the ſupporter of the king of Nauarre being once diſpatched, with leſſe labour ſhall he be ouerthrowne: hee dreameth that Germanie and England are ſo angry with the king of Nauarre for the diſſipation of the Germane armie, that he can hope for no more ayde nor ſuccour from thence. As for the K. he is weary of warre, his good Souldiers are ſpent & worne out, the reſidue weary of the tediouſnes of this war, or elſe for want and neede doe onely deſire quietnes and peace. Hee doth enholden and incourage himſelf vpon the fauours which he had at the court, of the chiefeſt about the kings perſon, & concludeth that the king may eaſily

be oppreſſed, and the king of Nauarre cannot defend him
                     •
                  elfe long: and in the meane time he determined to try what miracles the ſlubberſawce  figges of Italy can doe as is afore ſayd.
               Of all the armies which were prepared the yeare before againſt the K. of Nauarre, remayned none but onely the Leaguers companyes: ſuch as were together were occupied at the ſiege of Iamets, and in waſting the teritory of Sedan, who in token that there they had been, they left their accurſed carkaſſes for gage for the moſt part,
               The maſters of the League hauing receiued the foyle before Iamets, and at Douzie, in the principalitie of Boillon (as is afore ſaid) conſidering that their counſells ſucceeded not, their forces were greatly diminiſhed, and that they had opened diuers wayes, at diuers times, but nowe ſpecially their intents too euidently: and conſidering alſo that a ſmall hole in ſuch a dangerons conſpiracie, would in a little ſpace turne to a great breach, (which bloweth abroad the counſels, weakneth the authority, & mollifieth the courages) tooke aduiſe to remedie ſpeedily thoſe daungers which might enſue thereof: for their goods, their honours, and liues ſtoode thereon. They knew alſo that their counſells and treaſons had peareed ininto the kings cloſet, who might diſſemble, but neuer forget it.
               Firſt therefore in haſting the execution of their conſpiracy, neceſſitie compelled them to put feare aſide, and reſpect of all authoritie vnder foote.
               Secondly, that in ſuch extremi
                     •
                  ie, none but a violent remedy would ſerue.
               Thirdly, that the execution could not much increaſe the puniſhment of ſuch a dangerous conſpiracie.
               Laſt of all, Fortune would helpe their valiaunt courages, and that high enterprizes could not be brought to paſſe, but by diligent exploytes. Theſe are the reaſons which made them haſte the execution of their enterprize.
               The meanes to exempt their purpoſe, was to ſeaze vpon Paris, the che
                     •
                  feſt towne in the realme, and there (with the helpe of their partakers) to kill, or take the King therein, and by the ſelfe ſame meanes to deſtroy the Pinces of the blood (as many as ſhould come within their reach) and all other the Kings faithfull ſeruants and officers of the Crowne, with all others as ſhould oppoſe themſelues to their purpoſe.
               As for the prince of Conde, they had diſpatched him out of the way by their paltry pills.
               The Cardinall of Bourbon was the Tree, vnder whoſe ſhadowe they did worke all their conſpiracies.
               The King of Nauarre they made no account of, aſſuring themſelues of his life by one meane or other.
               
                  
To bring this proiect to a perfect, wiſhed, and bleſſed end, they needed two things; to ſtreng then themſelues, and to weaken the King. 
               
               Their forces were diminiſhed greatly by reaſon of the Baſtinados which they receiued at a maidens handes at Iamets and Douzie, in the teritory of Boillon, yet was it eaſie with a ſhort warning, to repaire them ſufficiently. Therefore the Duke of Guyze ſent into thoſe countries and Prouinces, which fauoured him, to warue his partakers to bee in Paris with horſe, armour and furniture at the beginning of May, and there to attend vpō his Maſterſhip, for he had a miſtical may-game to play, wherin he had neede of their ſeruice.
               For the weakning of the king, they vſed this Dilemma, we will ſo work that the king will ſend his fores into Picardy, whereby he will weaken the ſafety of his owne perſon, and ſo ſhall he be eaſier to be ſurprized. (or hee will not ſend) If he ſend and recall them to Paris, to preuent the danger which we will prepare him; then will it be a good occaſion to the factious citizens to pick a quarrell, and to make an vprore againſt him, and ſo by open violence of many againſt few, he may eaſily well be diſpatched.
               If the King ſend not his forces from about him into Picardie, it may be wreſted out of his hand, and in courſe of time the next Prouinces will followe, and yet will wee ſo prouide that in Paris he ſhall be able ſcarſe to defend himſelfe. Now let vs conſider how they executed euery part of this dilemma.
               
               The Duke d' Aumale, with all thereſidue of the forces which ſuruiued their companions at Iamets and Douzie, with other complices of ye 
                  Guize, who were in the countrey of Pycardie, were ſent into the ſayd countrey of Picardie to make warre, not againſt the Hugonets, for there were men to oppoſe themſelues agaynſt the Leaguers, but agaynſt the hereticks of the Romiſh Church, who will remayne faithfull to their King: they therefore moſt furiouſly did warre againſt the Kings Cities, Townes & Forts; all was reduced from the Kings obedience ſaue Calis and Boloigne, which was beſieged & greatly diſtreſſed. They in Boloigne were worſe hereticks then Rochel, although they did worſhip our Ladie, with all the Saints and the Saints of heauen, and ſome diuels alſo among them with greater deuotion then euer they did worſhip God. The like did he in Normandy, and in all thoſe countreys, the Catholikes without changing of their olde ſuperſtition were on a ſudden become heretickes: the King by many degrées worſe then an hereticke. The King of Nauarre had béen of good religion, if he would haue caſt his lot among them, and haue had a common purſe with them, and gone with them to ſhed innocent bloud.
               About the beginuing of May (by the ſecret aduertiſements of the Duke  of Guize) there repayred into the Citie of Paris out of diuers parts of the Realme, Gentlemen, and of all qualities, beſide men light headed, raſh,

malcontents, and deſirous of nouelties, aboue 15. thouſand. Beſides this great number of ſtrangers in Paris, moſt part of the citizens, and an infinite multitude of ſottiſh and raſh people deſirous of nouelties, who had  moſt villanouſly conſpired the kings deſtruction, and to that intent ſecretly had giuen the hand of aſſociation, and oath of obedience to Guize, great maſter of the League in France. This accurſed multitude was greatly incouraged by the ſtraungers, who altogether would haue made a mightie armie, and had béen able to match with the Turke both in number and qualities. All theſe were ſwimming in that citie as in a large and wide ſea, being not perceaued nor knowne but by their partakers.
               On the other ſide, the King liued in ſecuritie voyde of any ſuſpition of treachery of the people of Paris, who made his right hand of thē, as whom he had alwaies cheriſhed & loued as himſelf, and more regarded in a manner then all the reſt of his kingdome.
               But as counſells which doo drawe after ſuch haughtie euents cannot long bee kept cloſe, but doo take winde; ſo the déepe prouidence of the maſters of the League could not take ſo good order, (being not able to execute any thing alone) but diſtruſt began to riſe in the hearts of many men who were faithfull to the King: ſo that after diuers mutterings, ſundrie aduertiſements were giuen to the King, that there was ſome great matter in hand againſt his perſon and eſtate. And although they could not tell him expreſſedly that which happened afterward; yet experienced of long time in the anatomie of the hearts and counſels of them of Guize, began to miſtruſt the matter, & determined to remedie it by all gracious waies grounded vpon reaſon.
               The King in the latter end of Aprill, hearing of the commotions of the Duke Aumale in Picardie and Normandy, ſendeth the Duke Eſpernon into Normandy with part of his forces, and ſome part into Picardie, there to defend his authoritie.
               The Duke of Guize hearing how he was expected in Paris, both by the mutinous citizens and ſtraungers, who vpon aduertiſements giuen them, had flocked thether out of diuers parts of the Realme: and vnderſtanding that the King had ſent his forces into Picardie and Normandy, reſolued himſelfe to goe to Paris with a ſmall companie for to auoyd ſuſpition, yet aſſured to finde there (as in a little world) a number of partakers, prouided of all neceſſarie things, and in readines ſufficient to ſurpriſe a great King.
               The King informed of this deliberation of Guize to come to Paris, and deſirous (as is ſayd before) to preuent all their attempts by gracious waies, about the eight day of May ſent the Lord Belieure to the ſaid Duke whom he met at Soyſſons, to informe him of his will, that his comming to Paris would not bee agreeable to his Maieſtie; willing him in the Kings

name for that time not to come to Paris; and beſide, the king commaunded the ſayd Belieure, that in (caſe the ſayd Duke would néedes continue his  purpoſe of comming thether) plaine termes he ſhould tell him, that it was againſt his Maieſties will, and that in ſo doing he held him as a Traytour and author of all the troubles and diuiſions of the Realme, and therefore iuſtly to deſerue his diſpleaſure.
               The Lord Belieure gaue notice of all the Kings will and intent vnto the ſayd Duke, as he was charged to doo. The Duke ſubtilly gaue him a doubtfull anſwere, not declaring whether he would goe or not: but as the water being ſtopped waxeth ſtronger and more violent; ſo the prohibiting of him encreaſed his heate; and ambition by nature impatient, and made him thinke that the delay was an irreuocable loſſe.
               So that at one inſtant after the departing of Belieure out of Soyſſons, the Guize tooke horſe and his way to Paris, and followed the ſayd Lord Belieure ſo nigh, that the one arriued the Monday about nine a clocke, and the Duke likewiſe arriued at Paris the ſame day about twelue a clock, accompanied with eight gentlemen, hauing in all not aboue fifteene or ſixteene horſes that could be ſeene: and being there arriued, he ligh
                     •
                  ed at the lodging of the Q Mother, at the penitent Siſters, the 9. of May.
               The King being aduertiſed of the Dukes comming to Paris, tooke great diſcontentation therof, & conceaued a great diſpleaſure againſt the ſaid Belieure, as though he had not faithfully deliuered his commandement, and in the ſame tearmes as he was charged, to the Duke of Guize.
               
               This ſolitarie comming of the Duke of Guize encreaſed the ſuſpitions and miſtruſt, making euery man that knewe him and his pompe, thinke that ſuch extraordinarie comming had ſome myſterie, which ere it were long ſhould be reuealed. For if it had been ſimple and without fraude, a cooling of the partakers had enſued (as commonly they who doo obey doo frame their actions, according to the manners of them which doo command) ſo that ſuch a tumult had not inſued it as did.
               A little while after the arriuing of the Duke of Guize, the Q. Mother cauſed her ſelfe to bee carried to the Loure to ſpeake with the King. The Guize with a ſmall companie to ſee too, followed the Q. Mother on foote: and it is to be noted, that by the way the Lord of Guize going through the ſtreates of Paris with the Q. Mother, the people flocked in great companies to bid him welcome, and among others, a gentlewoman ſtanding vppon a bulke, plucking her maſke downe, ſaluted him with theſe words, Good Prince ſeeing thou art come we be ſafe.
               The Q. Mother and the Guize arriued at the Loure together, entered into the kings chamber, who then ſat nigh his bed, and did not ſtirre out of his place for the comming of the ſayd Duke, who ſaluted the King with a fayre and humble countenance, making a courteſie almoſt his knee to the

ground. Fewe would haue iudged by this interuiew, that there had been ſo dangerous vlcers in their hearts: the King greatly diſpleaſed at his comming,  ſhewed neither to his mother, nor to the ſaide Duke, any other welcome, but aſked him thus: Coſin, wherefore are you come: He anſwered, that it was to purge himſelfe of the calumnies and ſlaunders that hee was charged of, as though he were guiltie of the crime of treaſon. In making this anſwer, he ſeemed very much moued, and pale, as though he had feared that the King euen then would take puniſhment of that contempt, wherewith he had deſpiſed his commaundement.
               The King relyed, that he had ſent him an expreſſe commaundement, that he ſhould not come for that time. The Duke made anſwer, that it was not told him in ſuch ſort, as that hee had occaſion to feare that his comming ſhould bee ſo diſagreeable to him. The King then turning his ſpeach to the Lord Belieure, aſked him whether he had not commaunded him to make him vnderſtand his intention. When Belieure would haue recounted, in what ſort hee performed his meſſage, the Duke of Guize interrupted him, and ſaid to the King, ſpeaking by Belieure, that he had tolde him more.
               Vpon this, the Q. Mother beginning to talke with the King a ſide, the Duke of Guize drew nere to the Queene, raging and talked together with her, during the parley of the Q Mother with the King. The Guize a little after went away, being neither accompanied nor followed by any of the Kings ſeruants. The King being aduertized a new, how Paris was full of armed men, repleniſhed with faction and madnes, and that there had reſorted, and howerly did reſort a number of ſtrangers of all qualities, and that the Duke of Guize was the adamant ſtone, which did draw the yr
                     •
                  n of that commotion, began to double his miſtruſt, & thought it was high time to take order to aſſure his affayres, and prouide both for the ſafety of his perſon, and the ſtate of the Citie. And firſt to aſſure his forces about his perſon, ſent for two thouſand and fiue hundred Suiſſers which were in Picardy, for the companies of his guardes, and ſome regiments which were extraordinarily ordayned by him, for two companies of Suiſſ
                     •
                  rs, to fortifie his gardes, and three companies of Frenchmen.
               The tenth day he commaunded the Eſcheuins, that is the Aldermen, and chiefeſt men of the Citie, to make ſearch through the Citie in all houſes, of all ſuch men as were to be found, without any lawfull buſines: they diſſembled the matter, as though they had good liking thereof. He cauſed alſo notice thereof to be giuen to the Duke of Guize, who had no great liking of it, but tooke it for a token which haſted him to doo his feate: this order was taken, but not executed vntill the morrow after.
               The ſame day, the Maſter of the League, that is the Duke of Guize,
                  
came to Loure, accompanied with thirtie or fortie horſes, and accompanied the King in his walking to the artilleries, and there conferred together  verie friendly about the warre of Guienne againſt the King of Nauarre.
               
               The 11. day, the ſearch being a making through the Citie by the chiefeſt of the Magiſtrates, and certaine Knights of the order of the Holy Ghoſt, commonly called the Kings order, to countenance the matter, gaue great occaſion of miſtruſt: whereupon the King cauſed the ſearch to ceaſe.
               The 12. day very early, the Suiſſers and the French companies, being 12. Enſignes of footemen, entred into Paris through the gate Saint Honore, the King and his nobles being there on horſeback to receaue them. At the arriuing of them, the Pariſians gaue themſelues the alarum, and faigned great feare, as though the great Turke had entred the Citie with an hundred thouſand men, euery man ran into his houſe, ſhut vp their doores and windowes many cried that they were loſt, vndone, and would be all murthered. It had been an eaſie thing for the King if he had had an euill intent againſt them (as afterward they made themſelues beleeue) to haue let the attempt, which they did that ſame day, in raiſing and trenching themſelues againſt their King. But the King was accuſtomed to vſe patiencie and long delayes, euen in the middeſt of miſtruſt.
               The Kings forces being entred the Citie, were by his commandement vnder the conduct of the Lord Byron, diſtributed into diuers plares of the Citie, not to enterpriſe or to offend any man, but there to holde faſt, leaſt that any mutinie ſhould riſe in the Citie, as all things ſeemed apparantly to bée diſpoſed by the comming of the Duke of Guize. Part of thoſe forces were appoynted to be about the King, to fortifie his gardes: and another part was placed at Saint Ihan de Greue, before the common houſe of the Citie, vnder the conduct of Marſhall Haumont, the Prouoſt of Marchants, and other of the chiefeſt of the Citie, who knew the Kings intent. Likewiſe, part of the ſaide forces were ſet vpon the little bridge, vnder the commaundement of the Lorde Tinteuille. There were alſo alſo ſome of them placed at the new market, vnder the conduct of the Lorde Dampieore, ſome were alſo at Saint Innocent, and many other places.
               This diuiſion of the Kings forces was well made, for that end to the which it was done, but it was not vniuerſall, nor in ſome ſpeciall places, where the neceſſitie did ſpecially require. For in the place Maubert was no body placed. And that place was of ſuch importance, that being ſeazed vpon, it might be the meanes to recouer all the others: but yet if it had béene prouided with one hundred Pikes, and thirtie Harquebuſiers, they had béen ſufficient to let them for a time, who would ſtirre. The Lord

Byron was warned of it, and himſelfe was not ignorant of it, but for lack of men, hée prouided not to it: beſide, that theſe words were not looked to. 
               
               The Duke of Guize, conſidering that his treacherous intents were already too manifeſt, kéepeth his bedd that morning, to diſſemble the matter more kindely, and ſuppoſing that all this preparation was for him, whileſt the King ſhould make his proceſſe, he thought to preuent the worſt: therefore by ſecret meſſengers he ſent to his partakers to flock together, to ſeaze vpon as many places as they could, to ſtrengthen and to Barricado themſelues, afore the watch woord be giuen, and that he may ſweare that it was not his doing, he was a ſléepe ſtill.
               About eight a clock in the morning, behold the Eſcheuins, whether they were terrified by threatnings, or acceſſaries to the rebellion, in a moment of one ſide they began to vaniſh away, and to deſcend from the vniuerſity: on the other ſide, the people flocking together, ſeazed vppon the place Maubert, & Barricados were planted within ten paces of the Suiſſers, who might eaſily haue let it, and immediatly they began euery where to trench themſelues with Barricados, from thirtie to thirtie paces, the chaynes alſo immediatly were drawne: their Barricados were well flanked, and well furniſhed with men to defend them, ſo that it was no more time to goe through Paris any where without watch word, paſſeport, or particular billes from the Captaines, or Colonels of the wardes.
               The Duke of Guize vnderſtanding that the Kings forces were ſeuered a ſunder, and diſpoſed in certaine places, knowing his partakers to bée ſtronger, and more in number without compariſon, trenched with Barricados, hard by the Kings Gariſons, ſet in diuers places (as is before ſaide) euen with thirtie paces one from the other, and perceauing that all this while a ſléep, he had incloſed vp the Kings forces on euery ſide: how much more can he doo, awaking out of his bed, if he would beſtirre himſelfe about his buſines: now ſéeing that it reſteth no more, but to charge and to diſpatch the Kings forces, that deſtitute of all ſuccour, more eaſily he may be had out of the Loure dead or a liue, reſteth therefore but the watch word to begin the may game.
               All things being in a readines, two ſorts of men are appoynted, the one to giue the watch word, the other to giue the firſt blowe. The watch word was giuen by interpoſed perſons, who went about the Citie, reporting that the King would eſtabliſh new Gariſons in the Citie, and executt one hundred of the chiefeſt inhabitants, and many other noble men at the ſuggeſtion of the Duke Eſpernon, who had intelligences with the King of Nauarre.
               
               Others were interpoſed among the Kings French Souldiers, who did bid the inhabitants to lay cleane ſheetes in their beds, for the ſame night

they would lye in their houſes. On a ſuddaine therefore the fire was ſet to the myne, in a moment Paris was fired into an horrible and confuſed  commotion, and as if there had been queſtion to run vpon the enemy, euery man doth prepare himſelfe to ſet vpon the Kings gardes, and the reſt of his forces.
               The others (who were appoynted to beginne the fray) were Briſſak, Boyſdauphin, Chamoyes, and other partakers of Guyze, who at the watchword geuen, began to charge the Swiſſers, whereof ſome were killed, ſome vnarmed: the like was done to the other companies of Frenchmen, many were ſlaine, and all vnarmed.
               The Duke of Guyze wayting a ſleepe for this beginning, ſtarted vp (as he ſayd) out of his ſleepe, ranne to the fray, ſhewed a double dilligence, did endeuor to ſhew outwardly to the world, that hee enterpriſed nothing, and that he was vtterly ignorant of all theſe thinges: and to that end hee might haue witnes, he cauſed the ſlaughter which was made of the Swiſſers to ſeaſe, cauſed the armes to bee rendred to the Kinges companies, who had béen vnarmed: but after ſuch a maner as did ſhew how much greater regard they of Paris had of him then of the King, and what intelligences hee had with them, whereof hee did ſhew himſelfe not diſcontented.
               In that commotion ſome would haue killed the Marſhal Biron, and the Lord Belieure, which thing this King of the may game miſliked, & would not ſuffer. Such occaſions did content him greatly, for by ſuch actions he confirmed himſelfe in the truſt and confidence which he had in that people: he would alſo haue them whom he ſaued from the ſlaughter, to beleeue that he had no ſmall part in France: & beſides that he bound them to him in as much as their liues were woorth. To be ſhort, no man was in danger of ye rage of the people, who either was with him, or was commended by him.
               The Duke of Guyze, after the vnarming of the Kinges compan
                     •
                  es ſet themſelues as priſoners vntill the euening, and within a little whyle after theſe thinges were done, they made their approches by litle and little, to the Loure where the king was.
               The King being aduertized of all which was a dooing, did not ſhew himſelf mooued therwith at all. But the 2. Quéenes were greatly amazed, ſpecially the Q Mother, which all the dinner tyme did nothing elſe but weepe, with great aboundance of tears. And immediatly after dinner ſhe tooke her coach to goe to the houſe of Guyze, where the ſayd Lord of Guyze had retyred, after hauing taken priſoners the Kings forces, to do her beſt endeuor to paſſify the commotion, but it was without any effect: for they who heretofore had in admiration her deuiliſh craftines, as a diuine wiſedome, did now when they had the vpper hand account it a deceitfull Italian diſſimulation. So that old Ca
                        •
                     ye is no more regarded then ſhe deſerued.

For ſhee her ſelfe with much adoo could paſſe through the ſtreates ſo thicke trenched with Barricados, that ſhee was enforced to forſake her Coach and be carryed in a chayre: and euery varlet would preſume to bid  her ſtay, what will you haue? whether goe you? and opening the way only for her chayre, did bid her goe her way.
               As the ſeditious made all thinges in a readines to beſiege the King in the Loure the next day, the Duke of Guyze went out of his houſe to purchaſe to himſelfe ſome good will of the Maſter, by ſhewing ſome curteſy to the ſeruantes, and came to the place where the Kinges forces were ſtayed and vnarmed, in the euening cauſed theyr armes to be rendered them. He ſent one Saint Paul (who had growen from a latrey to be a great man, and greatly fauored by the Duke of Guyze) to go before the Kings gards, leading them as captiues in a tryumph, and commaunded them to be turned out of Saint Anthonies gate, and to ſhift for themſelues.
               The night following, the Rebels beſieged the Loure, where the King was, ſet their Barricados nigh the gace, ſtopped the iſſues, ſkirmiſhed with them that came foorth: and yet all thinges are ſo diſguiſed, that to beſiege the King and kill him in his owne houſe, to execute it dilligently, and that without ſparing the life of any man, at the commaundement of Guyze, is to obay the King, to defend the King and the countrey, to fight for liberty, to expoſe valiantly their liues for their tempels, their altars, theyr wiues and children.
               The morrow after, as the tumult increaſed, the King had aduertiſement from two ſeuerall places (the firſt by one who was familiar, and houſhold ſeruant to the Lord of Guyze: the ſecond by a gentleman of good calling) that the ſayd Guyze, and they of Paris his partakers, had determined to bring foorth the night following fifteene or ſixteene thouſand men by the new gate, and other gates of that ſide of the Citty, to beſiege him without, there to ſtop all paſſage, and to force him in his houſe.
               The King receaued confirmation of the ſame determination by one of his faithfull ſeruants, a man of honor and vnderſtanding, who labored much to cauſe one of his ſeruantes to ſtep to the Loure for that purpoſe, who could not haue brought it to paſſe if it had not béene by the helpe of one of the Captaynes of the wardes of the City, who conducted the meſſenger to the Loure.
               
               The King did ſtep aſyde to receaue this meſſage by the mouth of him which brought it: which when hee vnderſtood, iudged the miſchiefe and daunger to be greater then hee had thought, and began to be amazed (ſeeing that which hee would neuer haue expected of the Pariſiens) without ſhewing any token of diſmay.
               He was alſo aduiſed at the ſame inſtant, to get him out of Paris, though he ſhould goe foorth alone, if not he would be vndone, and that when his

perſon ſhould be without, he might find many ſeruāts & faithfull ſubiects.
               The K. did not refuſe that counſell, for he ſaw the danger to encreaſe euery moment, and yet he made no great ſhew to follow it. But on ye contrary  encreaſing the aſſurance of his countenance, did ſeeme to promiſe ſhortly to remedy it.
               He ſent the Q. Mother to the Duke of Guyze once again: ſhee with much a doe, hauing acceſſe to him, exhorted him to bring of his owne ſo much as he could to pacifie that commotion, prayed him very inſtantly to come to the king with great proteſtation of aſſurance, that he would bee well pleaſed thereof, proteſting of his good will and confidence which he repoſed in him.
               The King delayed his departing out of Paris, meditating reuengement vpon the head of this rebellion, and had ſent his mother to the ende to haue drawen him within his reach, ſuppoſing that the head being off, the members would coole and waxe weake.
               The Q. Mother hauing done all that euer ſhe could with her Italian Rethorick, could not perſwade the Duke of Guyze, hauing learned by t
                     •
                  e ſimplicitie of them of the reformed Religion, and by the tragedies which through his counſell he had cauſed the King to play vpon them of the religion, how little credit was to be giuen to Kings faith, and to her fayre promiſes, but ſhewed himſelfe very cold in that matter, and contemptious towards her perſon: for he feared that he ſhould not be able to execute his enterprize within the Loure ſo well as without, miſtruſting to be preuented, if he had entred therein.
               The Q Mother ſeing that he was not moued by her wordes, ſendeth his anſwere to the king, by the ſecretary Pinart.
               
               The King being aduertized of the hardnes of the Duke, & out of hope to execute his will vpon him. To preuent a farther miſchiefe which hee ſaw to be at hand, commaunded his companies to retire, and determined to goe out of Paris, and to take his farwell of the Loure, at the perſwaſions of many officers of the Crowne, who gaue him counſell to giue place to that deſperate conſpiracie, and to retyre into a place of ſafety: he ſent his houſehold to the place called the Tuilleries, and leauing the Q. Mother there in the Loure, went foorth out of Paris on that ſide which was moſt ſure for him, to wit, through newgate with a walking ſtaffe in his hand, as though he went (according to his cuſtome) to walke to the Tuilleries with as ioyful countenance, as in the moſt ioyful day that could ſhine vnto him.
               When he was out of the gate, he turned his face toward that citie, caſting foorth certaine ſpeaches of indignation, with proteſtation againſt their ingratefulnes, treachery, and treaſon. When he came to the Tuilleries, he tooke his horſe with them of his trayne, who had meanes to get

horſes, they who had none either ſtayed behinde, or elſe followed him on foote. Many great Lordes went after him on foote, vntill they had the meanes to get horſes. Many great Lordes and gentlemen of the Kinges  ſide went out of Paris in great haſte, ſome without bootes, ſome deſtitute of all things, euerie one vnder the ſhadowe of ſome friend, ſuch as they met withall in the middle of the confuſed preaſe.
               The King that night, went to Trappes, and lodged in the houſe of Danuile, brother to Mommorency, and alyed to the Duke d'Eſpernon. The flight of ſuch a great King, ſo vngratefully dealt with all, by them whome he had ſo greatly fauored, was lamentable.
               The Duke of Guize hauing remoued the Kings power from him, partly by killing, and partly by ſending others another cleane contrary way from the King, ſuppoſing that the ſaid King had beene ſtill in the Loure, and knowing that there reſted nothing more to doo, but to haue his perſon for a gage of the Crowne, determined to beſiege the Loure, and to bring out of hand the Artilery before the gate. But vnderſtanding that he was iſſued out, and gone already a great way of, hee remayned Maſter of Paris, ſéeing that the Maſter and the ſeruants had yeelded him the lodging.
               Hetherto wee haue conducted the King to Trappes, and his forces are ſent packing, and the Duke maketh merrie in Paris, in hope likewiſe to be Maſter of all the reſt.
               The Duke and his partakers, perceauing how the King had giuen the ſlip, and auoyded their bloudie hands, doo ſcratch their heads, and ſee their error: for although the ouerthrow was great, yet the victorie was not full, the enterpriſe not well executed, and the King being not taken, the iſſue thereof was doubtfull and full of perplexitie. For their conſciences doo repreſent before their eyes, the perfidious rebellion which they had committed, as to haue not onely diſpoſſeſſed him of his houſe, of whome they holde all that euer they had, but alſo to haue ſought to murther him whom God had conſecrated, to repreſent before their eyes, the image of his Soueraigne iuſtice, to deſtroy their Prince, who had loued them ſo tenderlie; their benefactor, who had cheriſhed them as a Father his owne naturall Children. They accurſe their negligent folly, in that they had not beene more watchfull to attend vpon his perſon: feare ſeazed their hearts, when conſidering the greatnes of their offence, doo alſo knowe, that yet hee will haue meanes inough to bring their dooings to iudgement, and to take reuengement of them, according to the haynouſnes of their offence. To be ſhort, they are very ſory, not for that which they had done, but for that they haue not done worſe.
               But the Duke of Guize conſidering well that the ſtincking fame of his villanous fact would flee abroade vnto the eares of forraine Princes, who

will thinke themſelues intereſ
                     •
                  ed in this iniurie, and that they will not forſake ſuch a mightie Prince in his diſtreſſe, hee thought good that the execution done this day, might be reported vnto Princes, neighbours, and  friends of the Crowne, in ſuch a manner, that whatſoeuer was therein, moſt odious and damnable, might bee either concealed or elſe coloured. Therefore among others, he forgot no courteſie, and honeſt offers to the Lord Ambaſſodor of England, to whome he ſent the Lord Briſſak, accompanied with ſome others, to offer him a protection, and to pray him not to bee diſmayed, and not to remoue thence, with aſſurance of ſafetie. The Ambaſſador anſwered, that if he had been as a priuat men in Paris, hee would haue gone to proſtrate himſelfe at the feete of the Duke of Guize, for to giue him moſt heartie thankes for his courteſies and honeſt proffers, but being there nigh the King, for the Queene of England his Miſtreſſe, who had ali
                     •
                  unce and couenant of amitie with him, he could not, nor would not take any protection, but of the King onely.
               The Lord Briſſak ſhewed him, that the Lord of Guize was not come to Paris, to enterprize any thing againſt the King or his ſeruice, but that hee hath reſolued himſelfe vpon the defenſiue, and that there was a great conſpiracie againſt him, and the Citie of Paris, and how the towne houſe, and other places were ful of gibets, whereon the King had determined to hang a great number of the Citie and others. The Lord of Guyze prayed him to aduertize his Miſtreſſe of all theſe things, to the end the worlde might be informed of the trueth▪
               
               The Ambaſſador anſwered, that he could eaſilie beleeue that he ſaide as he thought, but that hauty and hard enterpriſes, oftentimes doo remayne incommunicable, and cloſely ſhut vp in the hearts of them who doo enterpriſe them, which alſo when they thinke good, doo produce them forth with ſuch colour, as they iudge moſt fit for their aduantage. And that he would ſay freely, that whatſoeuer had paſſed in Paris, would bee iudged very ſtrange and wicked, by all the Princes of Chriſtendome, who were intereſſed in it, and that no colours, were they neuer ſo fayre, could make it to ſeeme good, being the ſimple duety of a ſubiect, to remaine in the iuſt obedience of his Soueraigne.
               And that if there were ſo many gibets prepared, it would bee beleeued more eaſily, when the Lorde of Guyze ſhoulde bring them in ſight. And graunt that ſo it were, yet is it a hatefull thing, and intollerable, that a ſubiect would let by force the iuſtice which his Soueraigne will execute with ſtrong hand. He promiſed him, that willingly he would aduertiſe the Queene his Miſtreſſe, of all that which he tould him, but to ſerue him as an interpreter of all the conceites of the Duke of Guyze, and of them of his part, it was no matter belonging to his charge. The Queene his Miſtreſſe being wiſer then hee to beleeue, and iudge what would pleaſe her

Maieſtie vpon that which he would write vnto her.
               The Lord Briſſake ſeeing that neither by fayre offers, words, nor prayers, the Lord Ambaſſadour could be mooued to allowe their actions, ended  his ſpeaches with threatnings, ſaying, that the people of Paris had a quarrell to him, by reaſon of the crueltie which the Quéene of England had ſhewed to the Quéene of Scots. To this word of crueltie the Ambaſſadour anſwered. I areſt you vpon this word of crueltie, my Lord: no man euer named a iuſtice well qualified, crueltie. Moreouer, I beléeue not that the people of Paris haue any quarrell to mée, as you ſay: for vpon what occaſion? ſeeing that I am here a publike perſon who neuer moleſted any bedie.
               Haue you any armour? (ſayd the Lord Briſſake) If you did aſke it me (ſayd the Lord Ambaſſadour) as as of him who hath béen ſometime friend and familiar of the Lord Coſſe your vncle, it may be I would tell you; but being that which I am, I will not tell you.
               You ſhalbe ſearched here (ſayd Briſſake) ere it belong: for it is thought here is armour, and it is to be feared you will be forced. I haue two gates in this houſe (ſayd the Ambaſſadour) I will ſhut and defend them as long as I may, that it may appeare to the world, that vniuftly in my perſon they haue violated the right of Nations.
               To that Briſſak replied; but tell me in good friendſhip I pray you, haue you any armour? The Ambaſſadour anſwered, ſeeing you aſke me as a friend, I will tell you as a friend: If I were 
                     •
                  ere as a priuate man, I would haue armour; but being here as Ambaſſadour, I haue none other armour then the right and faith publike. I pray you (ſayd Briſſak) keepe your doores ſhut vp. I ought not to doo it (ſayd the Lord Ambaſſour) for the houſe of an Ambaſſadour ought to be open to all goers and commers, conſidering that I am not in France to dwell in Paris onely, but to bee nigh the King whereſoeuer he be.
               We haue recited (in as good order as ſuch a deformed confuſion could be reduced vnto) thoſe things which paſſed in Paris in that damnable commotion.
               Now the King being at Trappes, conſidering the treacherie of that houſe which he had fauoured and honoured more without compariſon then the houſes of his owne bloud, the perſon alſo whom hee had loued and vnited to himſelf more then any other, the ſauagednes of his ſubiects and familiar houſhold ſeruants; repreſenting to himſelfe the rage of the people, whom he had alwaies tendered almoſt more then all the reſidue of his Realme, the ingratitude of that Citie which had béen alwaies his delights, and to the which he had neuer denied any thing that he could do for the peace, preſeruation, eaſe, riches and greatnes of the ſame, calling to minde the tumuits, rage and violence attempted and executed againſt him their benefactor;

reaſoning with himſelfe how that they were Catholikes, of his owne religion, and that they had béen his right hand in perſecuting them of the reformed religion, how they were his fellowes & followers in committing  the moſt vile and ſauage murther that euer was heard of in the world.
               Calling to remembrance the long and daily warning geuen him by the King of Nauarre, the Princes of the bloud, noble men, and gentlemen of all degrees, and of many forreine Princes of the Guyzes intent againſt him, his crowne, and ſtate.
               Pondering in his mind the token which his eies had ſeene, his eares had heard, and all deſpiſed and contemned, and withall in ſtéed of looking to his ſecurity againſt ſuch practizes, he had from tyme to time hardned his hart agaynſt Chriſt, and to ſhed innocent blood, and vnder the colour of defending the Catholike religion, had countenanced, ſtrengthened, and armed his enemies agaynſt himſelfe, whereby he hath receaued that foile, ſhame and confuſion this day. Euery man may iudge in what diſtreſſe of minde this great King paſſed all that night full of iuſt indignation of ſorrow, which although in outward apparance it might be kept cloſe, yet inwardly inhart it could not be diſſembled.
               The ſelfe ſame day of the tumult in Paris, the Duke de Mayne attempted vppon Lyons; but he was put backe by the inhabitantes.
               About the ſame time alſo the inhabitantes of Orleans, Anious, Bourges, Abeuille, and in other places did expell the Kings garriſons and officers, with the Citizens who did hold with the King, whom they did call politickes, and many of them were taken priſoners.
               The thirteenth day the King went to the Citty of Chartres, where many of his faythfull ſeruantes reſorted to him, and alſo his gardes, which had eſcaped the ſlaughter of Paris.
               
               The Duke of Guyze (though very ſory, that ſo fooliſhly hee had miſſed to take the King in the Loure, as he made his ful reckoning the day before) followed the victory as well as hee could; and firſt beginneth to play the good huſband in Paris, to further the affayres to the premeditate intent. Firſt, he brought to his houſe aboue ſeuen hundered thouſand crownes of that which was none of his, which there hee layed for an earneſt of the whole.
               The ſame daye alſo hee tooke the Kinges Arſeuall at the Baſtile, and ſealed vp the Kings treaſury, and in hope ſhortly to make all his owne: in the meane time hee will carry the key.
               When the Duke of Guyze had ſo played the good huſband: now hee will trie in a ſmall matter how hee can play the Kings part in great and waighty matters. For ſuſpecting the Prouoſt of Marchantes, named Perreuſe, & the Eſcheuins, to be politickes, and fauourers of the King, aſſembled

the ſtate of the citty, and there in his preſence, the ſaid Prouoſt and Eſcheuins were depoſed, and by his commaundement one Chapel, a moſt treacherous and ſeditious man, was elected Prouoſt, and one Rowland 
                   
                  Compan, with other factious and mutinous companions, all deuoted to the Duke of Guyze were elected Eſcheuins.
               Immediatly after theſe thinges done in Paris, the fame there flyeth abroad from towne to towne: reports are ſpread abroad, not as before, that Cities are ſurprized, that the people riſe in armes, that muſter is taken: but the king was beſieged in the Loure, and in great daunger to be ſlaine by the Duke of Guyze: hee is fled from Paris, the Duke is in poſſeſſion of the ſayd Citty. It was incredible to many, ſome made but a 
                     •
                  uſh at it, good men were greatly mooued as it, for ſeeing that ſuch a treaſon would draw after it many calamities.
               But the Leaguers lifted vp their heads, thes ſtoutnes and high courage of the Duke of Guyze was in the mouthes of them of his faction: but ſpecially the Prieſtes, Monkes, and Ieſuits did in their Pulpits extoll him to heauen: and vpon the newes of this exploit done in Paris, by the aduertizements which the Duke of Guyze gaue euery where, but ſpecially by the preaching of the Friers and Ieſuits, the partakers make them ſelues ready to battaile.
               A ſudden feare came vpon the Duke of Guiz, and them of Paris his partakers: for after the Kings departure from Paris, they conſidering their error, and that now they are further to execute their enterprize vpō his perſon than euer they were: the guiltines of their conſciences doe repreſent to them the reuengement, and the King making already (as they ſee in their fearfull viſion) an agreement of peace with the King of Nauarre, and calling him with his forces to his ayde to chaſtize them according to their deſerts: Therefore they ſent preſently to their partakers to arme themſelues: The Fryers and Ieſuites ſound the allarum euery where, their ſeditious and impudent tongues ſeruing them for trompets, and their pulpits for a drumme, and giue the rendes vous at Paris, about the perſon of the Duke of Guyze.
               
               When the Duke had ſo played the good huſband, and had no more to take, and had played the king in altring the ſtate of the citie, and ſeazing vpon the kinges arſeuall and treaſurie, and had ſhewed himſelfe a good prouident Captaine, yet conſidering that in a little while the king was like to wax ſtronger than the Leaguers, ſpecially if he ſhould ioyne himſelfe to the king of Nauarre, whoſe name they not onely hated, but alſo feared extreamly: in the meane while they goe about both to ſtrengthen themſelues, and to amend their error as well as they can, eſpetially three maner of wayes; by letters, by ſpyalls, and ſeeking the way of reconſiliation.
               
                  
As for the letters, the Duke himſelfe playeth the ſecretary, to ſhewe how pretily he can ſkill of that occupation when it pleaſeth him. And for  that the part of a good Orator is to delight, he hath a ſpeciall care of that, and ſuppoſeth that vanitie is the chiefeſt thing whereby to delight the Reader, therefore to atchieue this part of eloquence happily, he plucketh quilles out of one of Polypus wings, wherewith hee maketh him three pennes, and with the one he writeth to the gouernour of Orleans, of whom he had alwayes aſmuch aſſured himſelfe, as of the inhabitants. Therein he ſheweth in plaine tearmes, that he doth not repent of his former actions, but reioyceth in them, and will
                     •
                  th him to warne his friends to come to him ſpeedily with horſes and armour, without baggage, and ſheweth the facility thereof, ſaying, that the wayes (as he ſuppoſeth) are free.
               Secondly, he boaſted to haue defeated the Swiſſers, and cut to peeces the Kings guardes.
               Thirdly, he braggeth that he was ready to haue beſieged the King in the Loure, making his reckoning to haue either taken him, or ſlain him there. But ſeeing that the king had beguiled him in flying away by ſtealth, hee referreth that matter till an other time.
               Laſt of all, he ſheweth that he hath determined to ſeaze all that which the king hath in Paris, vntill he be called to accounts. The copie of this letter was ſent the 14. day of May to the Gentlemen of the League in the Bayliwikes of Orleans and Bloys, who immediatly tooke their horſes to repayre to Boyſgency, where the gouernour had giuen the rendes vous. But the 15. day they receiued a contrary aduertiſement by a letter which the ſayd gouernour ſent them, contayning as followeth.
               Our great Duke could not execute his enterpriſe, the K. hauing retyred to Chartres: wherefore I coūſell you to retyre into your houſes as ſoftly as you may, making no ſemblance to haue ſeen any thing. If you doo not think your ſelues ſafe, come hether: I pray you let this letter ſerue for the Lord Villecombline, and Cigognes of Marchenoyre, and haue me excuſed if I doo not write to you ſeuerally; it is not that I am proude, fooliſh or drunk, but I am ſo glad that I knowe not what to doo.
               With the ſelfe ſame pen he wrote alſo a letter to the Lord Boſſempiere, in the which he boaſteth of his exployt done at Paris.
               
               Firſt, how he hath diſcomfited the Kings forces of Swiſſers & French men, who were beſtowed in certaine places of the Citie, and after how the ſayd companies are beholding to him by ſauing their liues, armours and goods.
               Secondly, he reioyceth of the great good will, obedience and reuerence of the perſons ſhewed vnto him in that commotion.
               Thirdly, he complaineth how he hath béen aſſaulted by the practiſes of the heretickes.
               
                  
Fourthly, he acknowledgeth to haue béen preſerued by the brauerie and valiantnes of them of Paris, of whom he aſſureth himſelfe for euer. 
               
               Fiftly, he maketh a compariſon betwéene the King and himſelfe in theſe words: The King gathereth forces and we alſo; the King is at Chartres, and we in Paris.
               
               Sixtly, he boaſteth how he hath changed the ſtate of the Citie. And laſt of all, ſheweth that euery where the Townes and Cities about doo ſend to acknowledge him. Alſo, praieth the ſayd Boſſempiere to come to ſee him, where he ſhall finde him very luſtie with forces, courage, friends, and money enough to make merrie withall. To thoſe kinde of people whom he durſt truſt, hee wrote in plaine tearmes with a plaine pen what his minde and intent was. But writing vnto ſome friends in whom he thought that there was ſome french heart and nature, and therefore could not truſt them ſo farre as to commit the thoughts of his hart vnto thē in plaine tearmes, he taketh another pen which could diſguiſe the matter, by the which he goeth about ſo to colour his actions, as to make them beléeue that they are all iuſt and lawfull.
               Firſt, hee deriueth the occaſion of all the things which had happened from him and his ambition, vpon the Duke Eſpernon, whom indéede he knewe to bee one of the faithfulleſt ſeruants to the King of all his Catholikes, whom hee would faine haue to be put out of countenance, ſuppoſing that if he were not, he might doo with the King what he would, and rid him eaſily out of the way.
               Therefore hee blameth the Duke Eſpernon to haue ſearched out the meanes to let the Dukes iourney into Guienne, agaynſt the King of Nauarre, whether he fained himſelfe to haue béen deſirous to goe and to haue had that charge.
               Secondly, to bring theſe things to paſſe, he chargeth him to haue gone into Picardie and Normandie, with part of the Kings forces, to picke quarells, to refreſh olde inormities, thereby to diuert the kings power from Guienne.
               
               Thirdly, he accuſeth the ſaid Eſpernon, that to that intent he would haue deriued the warre againſt the Duke of Guize, and the reſt of the League, by reporting and perſwading the King, that the ſayd Duke intended to make a ſlaughter of the Kings friends in the Citie of Paris, and there eyther to kill, or to take the King priſoner, and to ranſacke the Citie, to make money to warre againſt whom he ſhould thinke good.
               Fourthly, he accuſeth the king of raſhneſſe, for beléeuing thoſe reports, and for that thereupon he encreaſed his forces in Paris, and for his ſtealing away out of Paris.
               
               Fiftly, hee ſheweth how thinges paſſed in that commotion, ſo that hee waſheth ſtill his hands, and is in no fault, and the King and Eſpernon bée

the procurers of all that hath paſſed of late in Paris: and that if it had not béen for his wiſedome and care, the King had béen vndone, and the ſtate in  extreame danger.
               Laſt of all, hee hopeth that the King will be a good boy, and if not, hee will make him a boy indeede.
               With the ſelfe ſame pen he writeth to the Townes and Cities of his confederacie, and ſuppoſing them to be of diuers diſpoſitions, to ſo many as may by his actions enter into his thoughts, to them he ſaith nothing of that which hath paſſed in Paris, leauing the report thereof to ſuch as were his truſtie friends in the ſayd Cities, thereby to colour his actions with lyes and ſurmiſes. Therefore he ſpecially without naming him, imputeth all theſe vprores which haue béen in Paris to the King of Nauarre, who for to diuert the warre from himſelfe, hath ſent (ſaith he) diuers expreſſe gentlemen, and alſo hath laboured to the ſame purpoſe them who were at his deuotion about the King, who haue gone about to perſwade the King to warre againſt the Leaguers.
               Secondly, he exhorteth them at the example of Paris, to ſuffer no manner of garriſons to be put into their Townes and Cities.
               Thirdly, he prayeth them that they will ioyne their meanes and willes with him and the Citty of Paris.
               
               The inhabitants of Paris borrowed the ſame penne of the Duke of Guyze, to write with the ſelfe ſame ſtile as hee had done therewith.
               And namely, they do charge the Duke Eſpernon as a ſecret friend to the King of Nauarre, to haue procured the King firſt to bring forces and accuſtomed garriſons within the Cittie of Paris: by which occaſion, the mutiny and commotion had enſued. Then to haue perſwaded the King in theſe tumults to ſuſpect the inhabitants of the ſayd City, and at length to haue counſelled him to flee from Paris.
               
               Secondly, they ſtirre vp the Cities and Towns of their confederacie, to make like vprores agaynſt the King and his forces, as they haue done, warning them, that now the time is come that they ought to liue and dye together, to bring to paſſe their intents.
               Thus the Duke of Guyze with his Pariſiens, hauing diſpatched thoſe thinges which they thought neceſſary either to ſtrengthen or excuſe their actions. Now he taketh in hand the third pen to write to the King, wherewith he powreth out the words of a faithfull ſeruant, and in diſguiſing his enterprize goeth about to deceaue him, & to lul him aſleep: but to do it with good grace in his exordium hee doth chafe & braule firſt, for feare the King ſhould haue that aduantage ouer him as to begin with him. And although this his laſt action did openly ſhew the intentes of al his former dealings, he muſt diſſemble and make the words of ſeruice & obedience ſound highly. There he doth lament, and almoſt fall a weeping (Crocodils lacrymis)
                  
for his eſtate, that by reaſon of the ſlaunders of his aduerſaries, he hath béen rendered ſuſpect to the King of the cryme of high treaſon.
               Secondly, to make his innocency appeare, he ſheweth how he came to  him with a ſmall company to iuſtify his actions.
               Thirdly, he blameth the King that he would harken to his enemies, who cauſed him to put extraordinary forces in Paris, and to diſpoſe them into the cheefeſt places of the ſayd Citty, and that he would be mooued by their perſwaſions to make ſuch an exemplary execution of ſo many noble men and cittizens, whoſe names hee doth omit in ſilence.
               Fourthly, he ſayeth, that when the commotion began, hee was altogether vnarmed and faſt a ſleepe in his houſe.
               Fiftly, that his great paines which hee tooke in contayning the people from murther, doth declare him that his intent was neuer to ſtir that Citty to ſedition.
               Sixtly, the care which he had to ſaue them of his officers, who had not well deſerued of him, doth manifeſtly prooue that he neuer intended any thing agaynſt his ſeruantes.
               Laſt of all, the ſauing of the liues of his Swiſſers, Captaines, and Souldiers doth plainly ſhew, that hee neuer feared any thing ſo much as to diſpleaſe him.
               Theſe be the pennes where with he doth ſo vary his ſkill, and doth write ſo contrary thinges, not to delight (as the art of Rhetorike teacheth) but by the one to confeſſe the truth, with the other to colour his actions, diſſemble and lye; and by the third to diuert the crime of thoſe things which haue happened from himſelfe and his partakers, and to charge the King of Nauarre, and the Duke Eſpernon, namely, as the workers and practiſers of all the miſdemeanours that haue fallen out in that commotion.
               On the other ſide, the King about the 17. of May being at Chartres, ſent letters vnto the gouernours of the prouinces of his Realme, to geue them notice according to the trueth of things which had happened at Paris. But namely hee wrote letters vnto the Lord Boiſeguine, gouernour for his maieſty in the citty of Poytiers, and knight of the order of the holy Ghoſt: wherin he ſheweth briefly the ſumme of the matter, of ſo ſudden (and contrary to his will) comming of the Duke of Guyze, of his owne intent in placing new gariſons within Paris, what had there hapened by the ſecret practiſing of the Duke of Guyze, of the cauſes of his retire to Chartres, praying him to giue notice of all theſe thinges to the Lords, Gentlemen, and all other of credit in Poytow and thereabout.
               He writeth alſo to the ſame effect vnto the people and inhabitants of his realme for to diuert them from rebellion, to the which they might be ſollicited by the Duke of Guyze, and his partakers, and by the example of the Citty of Paris.
               
               
                  
Whileſt theſe things are ſo handled on both ſides, euery one iuſtifiyng his cauſe: The Leaguers ſeeing themſelues farther to execute their intent vpon the kings perſon than euer before; do ſeaze vpon as many towns  and holdes as they can: and about the 25. and 26. of May, the Cardinall and the Duke of Guyze went out of Paris, and ſeazed vpon Meaulx and Chaſteautiery in Brye.
               
               The king ſeazed vpon Corbeil and Meloune, and other holdes and places vpon the riuer of Seyne, right againſt Brie, and vpon the high wayes to Paris: but the Duke of Guize hauing made ſure Meaulx & Chaſteautiery (as is ſaid) about the 27. of May returned to Paris, and conſidering how the holding of Corbiel and Meloune, was very grieuous to Paris; do in haſt prepare all things for the ſiege of Meloune, and doth his beſt indeuour to force it: but ſeeing that it was too hot for him, and that it would not be recouered being ſo ſtrongly fortified by the king, gaue it ouer.
               Whileſt theſe things aboue ſaid were a doing, there appeared within Paris ſpaniſh captaines, euery day more than other, & out of diuers parts men did ioyne with them. Some (who were faythfull to the king and of ſome credit among the people) went through the ſtreetes to perſwade the inhabitance to open their ſhops, and to doe as they haue done before.
               Other who were of the league, did cry with a lowd voice, ſhut vp your ſhops, and take armes: if you will not, be ranſaked, your wiues rauiſhed, and loſe your traffick. Many of the inhabitants went foorth out of Paris, and retired ſome whither elſe: they who could not doo it, deſired greatly the Kings returne.
               In the meane time, that on euery ſide they make their parts ſtrong, and that the parties were like to come to handy blowes. The Leaguers conſidering their ſtrength to be weak, if the king ſhould take the matter at the worſt, ſent three manners of ſpials. Firſt, they ſent of their owne faction vnder the colour of ſeruice, to view the kings countenaunce, and to giue intelligences thereof from time to time.
               Secondly, the Capuchins were ſent thither in proceſſion, that vnder the colour of hypocriticall holynes, they might ſee what weather was at Chartres, and to try if the kings minde was any thing altred toward the Friery, Monkerie, and popiſh ſuperſtition, and inclining in any wiſe to ye heretikes, as they tearmed thē. The Capuchins are a ſect of hypocrites, differing from the Franciſcan Friers, nothing but in haire, and forme of their cowle. Their garments are of colour like the robes of the ſweepe chimnies here in England, and their cowle is made after the maner of a ſuger loafe, likeſo many melancholike Deuills ſpewed out of hell, to make the worlde laugh.
               Laſt of all, another ſorte of ſpialls were ſent, wiſer & of greater countenance, than the other 2. ſorts, who would ſound better, & make a more perfect

anotomy of the kings heart, to wit, certaine picked out of the court of Parliament, and among others, namely the Lord Dauron, maſter of the  requeſts, to excuſe that which had b
                     •
                  ene committed in that tumult, and to endeuour to pacifie that indignation, which iuſtly hee had conceiued againſt Guyze and the inhabitants of Paris. To whome he ſhewed himſelf very caſie to be entreated, as it may appeare by his ſpeaches vttered to them as followeth.
               The Queene my mother hath geuen me to vnderſtand, that you were all aſſembled and will repayre to me, whereof I am well pleaſed, being aſſured that you would not offend in ſuch force, being the firſt company of my Realme. I haue promiſed to my ſelfe of you alwayes all faithfulnes and obedience, ſuch as you haue ſhewed heretofore to my predeceſſors (Kings) as vnto your lawfull and naturall Princes: And I know that if it had beene in your power to let thinges there paſſed, that you woulde haue done it. I am ſory for that which hath happened to the city of Paris: notwithſtanding I am not the firſt to whome ſuch miſfortune hath happenned: And the more I am diſpleaſed, that the ſpare of theſe foureteene yeares that I haue beene king, I haue alwayes honoured it with my abode, ſhewing all gentlenes and goodnes to the inhabitants, and they haue alwayes found me a good king, gratifiyng them in all that euer I could: I know that in ſuch a Citie as that is there be good and bad: when they ſhall make their ſubmiſſiō, & will acknowledge themſelues, I will be readie to receiue and imbrace them, as a good father his children, and as a good King his ſubiects. Your dutie is to labour in the matter, for therein conſiſteth the preſeruation of the Citie, of your ſelues, your wiues, and your familyes. Furthermore, continue in your charges as you haue accuſtomed: the Queene my mother ſhall certifie you from time to time of my will.
               In the after noone, the King ſent for them againe, and vſed theſe ſpeaches following.
               I haue ſent for you, (before you goe hence) to let you vnderſtand, beſides that which I tould you this morning, that I was aduertiſed of certaine reportes giuen out, that I would haue put Gariſons in the Citie of Paris. I doo greatly 
                     ••
                  uſe that euer ſuch a thing came in their mindes, I knowe that Gariſons are ſet either to vndoo a Citie, or for the miſtruſt of the inhabitants. They ought not to thinke that I would deſtroy a Citie, to the which I haue ſhewed ſo many tokens and witneſſe of my good will, which I haue ſo much benefited by my long abiding therein, for to haue remayned there more then ten of my predeceſſors before me had done: which thing hath brought to the inhabitantes, euen to the ſimpleſt ſort of artifficers, all the commodities which there doo appeare this day, whereby ten or twelue other Cities might haue been made rich. And when my officers

or Marchants haue had neede of me, I haue done them good: and I may ſay that I haue ſhewed my ſelfe a good King towards them. And therefore  it was farre from me, to conceaue any diffidence of them, whome I haue ſo dearely loued, and of whome I ought to aſſure my ſelfe: for the friendſhip which I haue witneſſed vnto them, was enough to take away that opinion from them, that I ſhould bee willing to giue them Gariſons, neither can it (in trueth) bee ſaid, that any man of my gardes or Gariſons, hath put his foote in any houſe, or taken from any man a loafe of bread, or any thing elſe, but contrariwiſe haue at my prouiſion been furniſhed of all needful things: neither ſhould they haue ſtayed there aboue foure and twentie houres, but the morrow after, without lying in any other place, ſhould haue been appointed to their charge, as if they had been in the campe. I intended to haue made exactly a ſearch of many ſtrangers, who were within my Citie of Paris, and deſirous to offend no man: I ſent euen to the Lord of Guize, and other Lords, to that end they ſhould giue me a booke of the names of their houſhold ſeruants, and to cauſe the reſidue to auoyde. Whereof I was aduertiſed, that there was a great number, no leſſe then fifteene thouſand men, which thing I did for the preſeruation of the Citie, and ſafetie of my ſubiects. This is the cauſe that I will haue them to acknowledge their fault, with ſorrow and diſpleaſure. I knowe well, that they are made beleeue, that hauing offended me in ſuch a ſort as they haue done, mine indignation is irreconſiliable. I will you to let them knowe, that I haue not that humor nor will to vndoo them: and that as God, as whoſe Image I am here vpon the earth (though vnworthie) deſireth not the death of a ſinner, ſo doo I not deſire their vndooing. I will alwaies prooue the peaceable way, and when they ſhall ſhew their duetie, and confeſſe their fault, and teſtifie in deede, the ſorrow which they haue of their offence, I will receaue, and imbrace them as my ſubiects, in ſhewing my ſelfe as a father toward his children. I will haue them to acknowledge me as their King and Maſter: if they doo it not, but delay the matter, in drawing my hand, as I may doo, I will make them feele their offence, ſo that the marke thereof ſhall remaine for euer. For being the firſt and principalleſt Citie, honored with the firſt and ſuprem court of my Kingdome, and other courtes, priuiledges, honors, and vniuerſitie, I can (as you know) reuoake and remoue thence, all my courtes and vniuerſitie, which would turne to their great diſpleaſure: for theſe things ceaſing, all other commodities and traffick will diminiſh, as it fellout in the yeare 1579. during the great plague, by reaſon of my abſence, and ceaſing of the Parliament, a great number of my officers, being retyred thence, young Children were ſeene that yeare to play at the nine pinnes in the ſtreates. I knowe that there is a great number of good men in my Citie of Paris, and that of foure parts, three are of that number who are very ſory of that which hath happened.

Let them therefore ſo deale, that I may be content, let them not inforce me to ſhew them what I may doo, more to doo that which I am able, and will not. You knowe that patiency prouoked, doo turne into furie,  and you knowe alſo, what a King offended may do, if I liſt to employe all my power and meanes to bee reuenged. And although I bee not of a vindicatiue ſpirit, yet I would that they ſhould know that I haue courage as much as any of my predeceſſors. I haue not yet, ſince the time that I came to the Crowne, by the death of my brother, vſed any rigour toward any man, yet will not I, that they ſhould abuſe my clemency; I am not an vſurper; I am a lawfull King by ſucceſſion, and of a race which hath alwaies commaunded with clemencie. It is a tale to ſpeake of religion, they muſt take another way: there is not a Prince in this world, more Catholicke, which deſireth more the rooting out of hereſie then I; my actions and my life haue giuen ſufficient witnes in that behalfe to my people: I would that it had coſt me an arme, that the laſt heretick were in picture in this chamber. Goe home to your charges and bee of good courage, you ought not to feare any thing while you haue mee on your ſide, I will you to let them vnderſtand all that I haue tolde you.
               During theſe practiſes of the Leaguers, and their running to an fro, to amend their errour, to fortifie themſelues, to make a way to reconſiliation, they ſtoope to the Q Mother, who was left at the Loure, there they cap and crouch vnto her, they kiſſe her hands, and giue her ſugred words, excuſing the matter, that they meant no hurt, but were put in ſome feare by the kings forces, being lodged and placed in Gariſon before their doores, they were all the Kings moſt obedient and faithfull ſeruants, they require nothing elſe, but that a Catholick ſucceſſe be nominated, an immortall warre denounced againſt the hereticks: vpon that condition they are ready to bee ſacrificed at his feete, that ſhe would be a meane to pacifie his anger and diſpleaſure; ſhe had been hetherto the onely vpholder of the ſtate againſt the hereticks, now ſhe may ſhew a notable proofe of her great wiſdome, and do great ſeruice to the holy Church.
               By theſe and ſuch like perſwaſions, ſhe was eaſily wonne to bee a mediator yet once for them to the King.
               The Q. Mother was as deeply fallen into the crime of treaſon as they, ſaue onely in one degree: for they had conſpired the kings death, and vſurping of his kingdome. Shee was not deſirous of the kinges death, nor that his kingdome ſhould be taken from him, but ſhe was glad and ſought all meanes to keepe him wrapped in troubles during her life, though it ſhould coſt him at length his life and ſtate, that ſhee might alwayes wreſt the rule and gouernment out of his hand, by throwing him headlong from time to tyme into troubles and dangers.
               This accurſed woman therefore ſeeth here an occaſion proffered her to

nouriſh ſtill her ambitious humor, & to bind both the king and his enemies vnto her by the meanes of reconciliation. She from tyme to time ſendeth  vnto the king, maketh him beleeue that there is not ſo much fault in the Leaguers, as it outwardly ſeemeth to bee: they tooke armors to defend themſelues, ſtanding in ſome feare and miſtruſt of his forces diſpoſed in the ſtreetes at their dores, and that it was rather a fray which happened by the prouoking of ſome vnaduiſed perſons, then any intent of rebellion, and that the people once mooued ranne ſomewhat raſhly and inordinatly (as the maner is in ſuch a caſe) ſhee warneth him to take heede, not to kindle a new ciuill warre farre more dangerous then the former, with the heretikes, ſtronger in forces, wealth, and partakers: & if all the power of the realme had not béene able to extinguiſh the former, it would bee an endles worke to bring this to an end: which could not bee done without the ſubuerting, or at leaſt the renting of the kingdome, that in tyme he may well be reuenged of the iniuries of ſome, of whom hee feeleth himſelfe greeued. It is beſt to diſſemble and winke for a time, then by a precipitation of counſell to hazard life and ſtate. By this Cup, which ſhee borrowed of Circe her countrey woman, ſhe tranſformed the king from a man (hauing a Lyons hart) into a ſheepe, caſt him in a ſound and vnſenſiblenes: whereby after he could not feele the good counſels of his faithful ſubiects, who proffered him their help to reuenge ſuch notorious and publike contumelies, vntill that at length neceſſity enforced him to do it.
               The rumor of ſuch a notable treaſon, attempted and performed by the Leaguers, in expelling the king of ſuch an ancient race out of his imperial Citty, ſpread abroad, there repayred vnto the king two maner of people, to offer him their help in the reuengement of ſuch an iniury, to wit, ſome Leaguers, which (ſeeing that the Lorreins had proceeded ſo far as to attempt agaynſt his perſon and ſtate) now do change their minde, do pitty their Prince ſo much abuſed vnder colour of Catholiciſme. The Catholikes both noble, eccleſiaſticall and commons, the better & ſounder part of them come in poſt to the King, exclaiming againſt the Guyzes, and againſt their preſumption, requiring the K. to take puniſhment equall to the greatnes of the offence, do counſell him to let alone the King of Nauarre and all the heretikes, who neuer enterpriſed ſuch a thing, and to turne his forces agaynſt ſuch notorious offenders. They prayed him to ouergoe his greefe, they proffer him their ſeruice, their liues, goods, and meanes for the performance thereof.
               The King deſpiſeth not their good counſell and affection toward him, but being bewitched by the ſorcering of his mother, as is aboueſaid, anſwereth them quietly, that he wanted neither courage nor force to reuenge his priuat iniuries, ſayth, that he will not kindle a new ciuill warre in his realme, thanketh them, and ſendeth them home, intending already reconſiliation

with the Leaguers. It is ſayd before how the Leaguers and the Pariſiens leagued with them, perceauing that the miſſing of the King might turne to their ſhame and vndooing, tryed to iuſtify their actions by letters,  ſolicited other townes and citties to the like rebellion, fortifyed themſelues, ſeazed vppon as many holdes as they could ſurprize: and in the meane time ſearched and viewed the Kinges mynd by their ſecret ſpials, ſounded his mind a farre of by the hipocriticall Capuchins, whether theſe vngratefull actions had any thing mooued him to diſoaine poperie, and to ſeeme to encline to them of the reformed religion: but ſpecially by them of the court of Parliament, whom they ſent to him to know his diſpoſition to peace, and how he digeſted the contumelious iniuries.
               It is ſayd alſo, that in the meane time by the means of his mother, they extinguiſhed that Nemeſis, which is in great Princes, and turned it into puſillanimity: and how bee ſhewed ſome tokens of that baſenes of hart in his ſpeeches with them of his court of Parliament.
               Now the Leaguers perceiuing by all theſe meanes, that the Kinges heat was cooled, & more inclined vnto impunitie, which he calleth clemencie, then vnto puniſhment and reuenge: Before they enter into treaty of peace, they goe about to temper him ſomewhat better yet, by a forme of petition: and to giue ſome authority to the ſame, they borrow both the perſon, and the name of the Cardinall of Bourbon, whoſe authority from the beginning they had made a couering of their negotiation and conſpiracies.
               This Cardinall being one of the firſt Princes of the blood, was not ignorant long time before, of all theſe cōmotions, & of the old hatred which they of the houſe of Guyze haue borne to the Princes, friends, and ſeruants, of the houſe of Bourbon, and that in ſeeking the decay and fal of thē they procured alſo his own: But through a certaine vnhappines, he had ſuffered himſelfe to be poſſeſſed and handled by them of the contrary part, and following their counſels, they had made alwaies a buckler of him, conſidering his qualitie and degree, which he hath in that realme, as well among the Princes, as among the prieſts. So that many of them to ſerue their turne did not feare, to affirme that he was the eldeſt of the houſe of Bourbon, and that if neede were, hee was capable of the ſucceſſion to the Crowne. This man therefore ſerued much to their faction: him they thruſt forward for the negotiation and aduauncing of their affayres, according to the occaſions.
               So that hauing determined to ſend a ſupplication to the King, to aſſwage his diſpleaſure, while they aduiſe vpon other wayes, to entangle and entrap him yet once more. They prepoſe the ſaid Cardinall his name in the ſaid petition, that the greatnes of his name (onely of that faction of all the houſe of Bourbon) may ſerue as a vayle to the affections, of them

who were more watchfull in handling of their affaires, thē the ſaid Cardinall was in the gouerning of his owne. They doo preſent this ſupplication, in the name of the Cardinall of Bourbon, and of the Maſters of the  League, who would faine becalled Princeſſe, and in the name of the Citie of Paris, and of the other Cities of their confederacie. In this ſupplication they make a low courſie and al contemptious capping, with an humble ſubmiſſion and proteſtation of their good willes, with a proffer of their ſeruice, and of all that they haue, for the defence of his eſtate, and of the Catholick religion, ſo that the Duke of Guize may haue the leading of his forces and managing of their affaires.
               Secondly, they charge the Duke Eſpernon and his brother, the Lord Valette, to be fauourers of the hereticks, to haue betrayed ye kings forces, in hindering all good exploytes, to bee done againſt the hereticks, and the King of Nauarre. To haue fauored the armie of the Germanes in their retiring home, to haue beene the cauſe by his counſell of the vprore happened of late at Paris. To haue waſted the Kinges treaſure, to be the author of all the diſorde
                     •
                   which is in the gouernement.
               Thirdly, they purge themſelues of any priuat inimitie, or affection towards him in this accuſation, and for proofe of the foreſaid offences, doo referre themſelues to the teſtimonie of the Queene Mother, and of the officers of his Crowne, if it pleaſeth him to examine them vppon the ſaide crimes, and giue them licence to ſpeake their mindes with libertie.
               Fourthly, they demand of him inſtantly with prayer to put the ſayd Eſpernon and Valette his brother, and their adherents, from his perſon and fauour, and to diſcharge them from all charges and gouernements which they haue in the Realme, & that the king will prouide them of ſome ſmall charges, of no importance at all. They alſo doe aſſure the King, that in ſo doing, he ſhall greatly pleaſe the people, in deliuering them as they ſay from that feare, which they haue conceaued of the power of the ſaid Eſpernon. Theſe lets being taken away, they require him to make warre in Guienne, in his owne perſon, to whome they doe promiſe their ready will, courage and aſſiſtance, againſt the heretikes, and in the meane time to appoynt his mother to gouerne Paris.
               
               Fiftly, they require that the Duke de Maine may haue an armie to goe into Daulphine, againſt them of the Religion, they tell him that hee may make a great booty of the ſpoyle of Eſpernon & his brother, to maintaine the warre, and that hee will aboliſh all new ſubſidies and charges layd vpon the people.
               Sixtly, they doe require that he will name a ſucceſſor Catholick, fearing it greatly to fall into the hands of them of the reformed Religion.
               Seuenthly, they of Paris (as partakers in this requeſt) doo faine and gloſe with the king, and pray him moſt humbly to beleeue them, that all

which had happened of late at Paris, was not that they thought to do him any harme, and that it was done by their Magiſtrates, and that onely they doubted leaſt the authors of the counſel (in bringing extraordinary forces  into the Citie) would haue abuſed his authoritie in oppreſſing them
               They fayne themſelues very ſory, that hee went foorth of their Citie in diſpleaſure and miſtruſt, praying him to giue them leaue to liue in reſt vnder his obedience.
               Laſt of all, they require that the Lord d'Ho be diſcharged hereafter, of his charge which he had to commaund in the Citie, and that he will allow the depoſing of the Prouoſt and Eſcheuins, and approue the new election which they haue made of others, and that hereafter it be lawfull for the Citizens to chooſe their owne officers.
               Alſo when it ſhall pleaſe him to returne into the Citie, hee will not bring within twelue leagues thereof, any other forces beſide his ordinary guards. This ſupplication was preſented to him the eight and twē
                  tith of May.
               The King hauing receiued this ſuplication, anſwereth it the nine and twentith of May at Chartres, wherein firſt hee rehearſeth the zeale which he hath to the Catholick religion, the great and dangerous warrs which he had done, the great charges which hee hath beene at for the ſame, the famous victories obtained by him againſt them of the reformed religion: and how he hath pacified the troubles rayſed by the Leaguers, and vnited the Catholicks, which were by the Leaguers deuided.
               Secondly, he ſheweth himſelfe willing to put vp all iniuries, paſſed againſt him in Paris, when the inhabitants ſhall behaue themſelues hereafter, as it becommeth them to doe, and in ſo doing hee proffereth them to preſerue them in their liberties, as his predeceſſors haue doone before him.
               Thirdly, hee wiſheth nothing more than that all the popiſh Princes, Lords, and ſubiects may be reunited againe to warre againſt the King of Nauarre.
               
               Fourthly, he greatly deſireth the reformation of his Realme in al his partes: and for becauſe it is a publike contagion, he ſuppoſeth that it can not be well done, without the aſſembly of the States, which he intendeth to aſſemble in the towne of Bloys the fifteeneth of Auguſt, where he promiſeth to ſatiſfie them in warranting them from falling into the handes of the king of Nauarre or any other here
                     •
                  ick. As touching the complaints againſt the Duke Eſpernon he promiſeth to them iuſtice therein.
               It is ſayd before, how the King after the retyre of the Germans returning to Paris, intending to make a voyage to Guienne agaynſt the King of Nauarre with all his forces, and in his proper perſon had prepared the way to doo great exployts, by ſending forces vnto Lauerdine Lieutenant

of Niort, immediatly after the death of the Prince of Conde, and how the ſayd Lord Lauerdine with thoſe forces ſeazed vpon the Iles of Marans, 
                   and tooke all the Forts within the Iland. Which exployts being done, the Lord Cluſeaulx, otherwiſe called Blanchard, obtayned the gouernment of the ſayd Iland, where hee determined to ſettle himſelfe: and after many extorſions, ranſackings and robberies, done (during and after the ſiege of Marans) to them of the reformed religion, who had abandoned all things to ſaue themſelues at Rochel; he promiſed to himſelfe to fortifie and kéepe well the ſayd places, in hope ſhortly after to occupie the whole gouernement of Aunis, and to plague the inhabitants of Rochel. Therefore he lodged there his regiment, which conſiſted of ten Enſignes, whom he deuided in the Forts of the Iland: and to make warre out right, he ordained the Lord Tremblay to bee in garriſon there with a companie of fourtie light horſes.
               He cauſed great ſtore of white Corſlets and newe Pikes to be brought thether out of Paris, to arme his garriſons there. He ſendeth Commiſſioners to the Pariſhes round about, euen to them which lye next to Rochel, to haue a number of Pyoners, to gather Subſidies and Tallages, and to bring them to Marans.
               
               He prepared a number of Barkes and boates for to hold the Sea, and to ſeaze vppon the Ile of Rhe, by the intelligences which he had with the Lord S. Luke of Browage.
               
               He cauſed the Corne and Wine to be taken vp through the Farmes of the gouernment of Rochel, and tooke many priſoners. To be ſhort, ſpeaking very bigge, he omitted no poynt of hoſtilitie, hoping to make there a ſecond Browage, and a Blockhouſe to famiſh Rochel.
               
               The King of Nauarre did beare with him: and hauing ſpied his counſell, during the ſpace of two moneths and a halfe, the ſayd King hauing on a ſudden aſſembled certaine companies of footmen and horſemen, & made all things readie, the 24. of Iune entered the Iland at Charron nigh to Marans ouer the bridges, which he had cauſed to bee made in diuers places. In this Iland were holden by the enemie the Forts of Charron and Brault, wherein were foure ſcore Souldiers harquebuſiers, commaunded by Captaine Chautery, hee beſieged the Fort of Brault, as the néereſt of greater importance and more defendable by the enemie, whoſe loſſe drew after it the loſſe of Charron. He drewe by the channell of Seure two ſhippes ſet in readines to batter it: but at night it was ſurrendered, their liues ſafe: notwithſtanding, of courteſie he granted both to the Captaine and Souldiers their ſwords: & immediatly they of Charron ſurrendered themſelues likewiſe, being in number twentie of the beſt Souldiers of the Regiment.
               The 25. day he cauſed a bridge to be made vpon the channell of Brune,
                  
approaching ſtill to the Ile of Marans, and went himſelfe to view the fort Clouzie, and a certaine houſe fortified by the enemie, called the houſe of Clouzie, nigh the méetings of two channels which doo waſh the ſayd houſe  on both ſides. Theſe two Forts doo lye vpon a deepe channell, which they muſt needes paſſe ouer to enter into Marans, diſtant one from the other about ſixe ſcore paces, and beyond the ſayd channell betweene the two forts a newe fort was builded, for to let the caſting of the bridge, if any ſhould be made. This newe fort was in the ſight of the two forts, to wit, the fort of Clouzie, and the houſe of Clouzie, whereof is ſpoken of before.
               All things well viewed, the ſayd King concluded to attempt vpon theſe fortes: the reſt of the day paſſed away in ſhooting certaine volleys of Ordinance vppon thoſe fortes out of the ſhippes, and in certaine light ſkirmiſhes. In the euening the ſayd King cauſed the ſhippes to goe downe the water to the Iland Charron, to take from the enemy the ſuſpicion of the thing which hee determined to do the day following.
               The 26. day being the Lords day, about three a clock, hee came with few of his men before Clouzie, made his bridges ſure, aduauncing forward, his Gabions prepared the bridge to bee caſt betweene the two forts, ſearched the places where they might enter into Marans, cauſeth his ſhippes to approach into that place, where they were the day before, putting his regimentes in battaile aray, placing them in the ſame order that they ſhould march, and alſo his footmen to ſuſtayne the enemy at the entring of the Iland, and to ſerue for ſuch occaſions as might ryſe, he being himſelfe in perſon the formoſt to ſee with the eie what ſhould be needeful to be done. The morning paſſed away in ſuch exerciſes, and in the meane while the enemy did what he could to keepe him off.
               At 11. a clock, prayers and ſinging of Pſalmes vnto God being ended throughout all his regimentes and troupes of horſemen, after hee had appoynted euery man what they ſhould doo, hee began to force the paſſage, kept by a companie of the regiment of the Lord Cluſeaulx, and with the company of light horſes of the Lord Tremblay, flanked on ye one ſide with the fort Clouzie, and on the other ſide by the houſe Clouſie, which was (as is aforeſayd) fortified and in front defended by the third fort, and a trench in the middle.
               Vpon the right hand of the houſe of Clouſy marched the maſter of the Campe Preaulx, who had ſlyded with his troupes into the reedes, to paſſe ouer the channell in a place knowen, and yet not without danger and the Captayne Ferrand with him: hee tooke alſo with him the Captaines Lomeau and Nede into the ſame reedes.
               A little behind was the Baron Salignak with his regiment to geue the ſcalado to the ſayd houſe.
               Right againſt the houſe of Clouzie, foure captaines with their Souldiers

thoſen out of the regiment of the Lord Granuile, did aduaunce the Gabions vppon the banke of the channell, and behind their Gabions were in  battell aray the companyes of Rochel at the right hand of the ſayd Gabions, right agaynſt the meeting of the two channels: the ſaide Lord Granuile with thirty armed men did puſh forward the ſaid bridge, they were couered from the gunſhot of the fort Clouſy by the Captaine Valley of Rochel with a great number of targets of proofe, and behinde them (who did puſh the bridge) marched the reſt of the regiment with the troupes of Rhe, conducted by captayne Planch.
               
               At the lift hand going toward Clouſy (to occupy the enemy) all along the channell marched the new and old gardes of the King of Nauarre, conducted by the Captaynes Porte and Vignoles, and the Harquebuziers on horſeback of the Lord Peujas, who were al lighted of their horſe with Captaine Limalle.
               
               The horſemen were behind the footmen, the troupe of the Lord Peujas behind the regiment of the Lord Granuile, and the companies of Rhe, which followed the bridge.
               The mayne forces of the King of Nauarre, commaunded by the Prince of Soiſſons, were a hundred paces and more behind, but a litle more aduaunced vppon the lift hand.
               The enemyes ſeeing the Kinges forces in that aray, and that they had bowed theyr knees on the ground to make their prayers to God afore they went to the battell, and calling to remembrance the prayers which were made at Coutras, did fall into ſuch a feare, as they began to crye, they pray, they will beat vs as they did at Coutras: and beginning to wauer, on a ſudden fled away in great diſorder.
               Here is to be noted, that had it not béen for the fault committed through haſtines in caſting the bridge in a place where the chanell was forked, whereas it ſhould haue béene caſt below the méeting of two channels, they had béen followed with ſuch violence, that they had béen cut to peeces afore they could haue come to Marans.
               
               It is not to bee forgotten, that the King of Nauarre at the ſame houre cauſed the regiments of his gardes of Charbonieres, and Soubran, conducted by the Lord Mignonuile, Marſhall of the campe, to take paines for to wade ouerthwart the Mariſhes in the water to the knee, more then a League, and defeated a part of the enemie, whome they met in their retyring.
               The Fort of Clouſy, ſeeing the diſaray of their fellowes, rendered immediatly: at diſcretion therein were foureſcore men commaunded by Captaine Serre, who were all ſaued; the enemies partly made their retire in great haſte to Marans, and partly fled another way.
               In the towne where it was thought that ſome reſiſtance would haue

been made, was ſuch a maze, that there was found no body.
               Many of the forces of the King of Nauarre, not ſtaying for the ſetting on of the bridge, both a foote and horſeback, caſt themſelues in the water. 
               
               The Lord Cluſeaulx, who did dine at Marans whileſt the King of Nauarre did force the paſſage, hearing of the flight of his men, as well with them which had remained within the towne, as with them who had retired from the garde of the paſſage, with the Lord Tremblay, few of the company fled into the Caſtell, becauſe there was no other way nor place to flee to.
               The firſt which entred into Marans were the gardes of the King of Nauarre, followed at hand with the reſt of the armie, as faſt as they could paſſe ouer at Clouſy.
               
               At the ſame inſtant, the enemies were beſieged in the Caſtell, the quarters parted to euerie regiment, and at euening euerie one was lodged vpon the Caſtell ditch. The King of Nauarre followed them at hand with his maine forces, and lodged that ſame night at Marans.
               
               The ſame day were ſummoned all theſe forts following, fortified with Gariſons of the enemie. The Fort Boyſneuf, where commaunded the Lieutenant of Captaine Serre, with thirtie men with him, who yeelded. Alſo the Fort Brune, wherein were threeſcore men, commaunded by Captaine Camart, who yeelded alſo: The Fort Allowette, holden with twentie men, commaunded by the Lieutenant of Captaine Roque, all yeelded with their liues ſafe. There reſted in all the Iland that day, being the ſixe and twentie of Iune, to recouer from the hand of the enemie, but the Caſtell, the Forts Bastile and Paulee, ſituated vpon the other entries into the Iland. The prudence of the K. of Nauarre is not to be forgotten, that before he aſſaulted the Iland, hee placed the Lord Trimouille, with all his light horſemen, and the companies of the Lord Orges, Plaſſak, and Arambure, within the town of Saint Ihan of Liuerſay, in the high way from Niort, to Marans, that the enemie might not receaue ſuccour through the Bastile. The Lord Trimouille had made a Fort in two dayes, betweene Saint Ihan of Liuerſay and Bastile, to cut from them which were therein, all meanes to eſcape away, and hope of ſuccour.
               The monday on the ſeauen and twentie of Iune, the Captaine and Souldiours of the ſaid Bastile, ſéeing that all the meanes to auoyde, were cut off from them, did yéeld, and went foorth with like conditions as their fellowes had done the day before, being in number foureſcore and ten, commaunded by Captaine Chapel.
               
               The eight and twenty, the King of Nauarre, with two canons, and two Culuerines, began to approach, and in the middeſt of the day, put them in place of batterie. The Lorde Clermont there did commaund: that night

there were certaine motions of Parley.
               The nine and twentie, about three a clock in the morning, when the beſieged ſaw that the King of Nauarre went to worke in good earneſt, they  demaunded to Parley, and in the name of all the reſt, came forth Captaine Riuiere, to require conditions of the King of Nauarre. At length the compoſition was concluded, that the Captaines and Gentlemen ſhould goe forth with their horſes and corſelets, & the ſouldiours with their ſwords, that the reſt of their armour ſhould remaine within the Caſtell. The maſter of the campe, the Lord Tremblay, the Captaines Maron and Toure ſhould remaine in the hands of the King of Nauarre, to deliuer him the colours, to wit, eyght Enſignes (for two companies had none) and the Cornet.
               The agréement was carefully kept, the King himſelfe conducted them part of the way, they were not iniuried ſo much as one word, although the Lord Cluſeaulx had great enemies.
               The ſame day, Captaine Roque rendered the Fort Paulee, with the ſame conditions, that the Caſtell was yeelded vp: the Lord Lauerdine ſending word that he could not reſcue them, for becauſe the Lord Boulay was lodged on that ſide.
               The King of Nauarre kept Cluſeaulx priſoner, who was brought with great ſolemnitie into Rochel, where he was kept priſoner a long time, hauing liſence (notwithſtanding) to goe where he would, vnder cuſtodie of certaine Souldiours: he was better vſed then many did expect: at length he was deliuered, and among other, vpon this condition, neuer more to ioyne himſelfe to the League.
               The King of Nauarre alſo ſendeth all the armour which there was taken, in great ſtoare, with the colours to Rochel there were taken alſo: many faire horſes.
               So in the ſpace of foure dayes, he recouered all the Iles and Forts of Maran, & did rid all that quarter of the filthie ſinke of the Leaguers, where he did ſhew no leſſe courteſie to his enemies, then valour and diligence in the repreſſing of them.
               It is ſaid before, how that after the accurſed and execrable rebellion, and inſolencie of the Leaguers in Paris, they perceauing the foule and dangerous errour which they had committed, in miſſing of the Kings perſon, and that hee was now ſafe enough from falling into their hands againe, which might redound to their vtter vndooing, they ſent three manner of ſpyalls to him, to view his countenance, to ſound the thoughts of his heart, by the way of ſorrowing and excuſing the deſperat fact attempted againſt his ſacred perſon in Paris. It is ſaide alſo, how they ſent a ſupplication vnto him, therein faining a ſubmiſſion full of ſnares, and vnreaſonable demaundes.
               
                  
It is ſayd alſo, how vppon the rumor ſpread abroad throughout all the realme, his faithfull ſeruantes of all callinges and degrees moued with anger  and compaſſion repayred vnto him, moſt humbly prayed him not to put vp ſuch publike iniury, proffered him their ſeruice, goods, and liues for the reuengement of ſuch an outragious offence.
               Now agayne many of the Kinges ſubiects of all qualityes and degrées do repaire a freſh vnto the King, moſt inſtantly to require him not to ſuffer ſuch a damnable treaſon of the Guyzes and their confederats let go vnpuniſhed, but that puniſhment be executed vpon ſuch offenders in ſuch ſort as is fit for the greeuouſnes of the offence: they do promiſe him againe all aide and ſuccour, if hee will reſolue himſelfe to ſeeke the meanes of reuenge, and let the heretikes alone for a time.
               The King whom Gods iuſtice did vrge and purſue for the hardnes of his hart, in ſo obſtinating himſelfe againſt the Goſpell and other offences,  which do iſſue out of that ſpring, ſeemed to be touched with the readines of his good Subiectes, but not to any purpoſe moued to follow their good counſell, but thanketh euery one as though hee had no neede at all of their counſell and ayde.
               The Leaguers now vnderſtanding by their ſpials the puſillanimity of the King, and his inclination to ſome compoſition and peace with them, though diſaduantagious, by his ſlender and fearfull anſwere to their vnreaſonable demaunds in their ſupplication, do now conceaue a good hope, not onely to amend the former fault, but alſo to make themſelues a way more plaine and eaſier then euer they had before, to performe ſhortly their enterpriſes. And as they haue had recourſe alwaies to the Q. Mother, by whoſe meanes they haue found a preſent remedy in all faultes committed, and offences geuen to the King: but now yt at their requeſt ſhe had beſotted him by her ſorceries, ſhee muſt make an end of her good worke begunne. This accurſed woman hath béen the diſhonor of womankinde, the ſubuerſion of the whole kingdome, the ſlaughter of the nobility, the butcher of the commons, and the vndooing of her owne children.
               The Leaguers then hauing ſuch an interceſſor, who vnder colour of a motherly counſell, will bring them neerer to execute their rage vppon the Kinges perſon, and to vſurpe his eſtate, do ſend this old Medea to make a negotiation for them, as much to their aduantage as ſhee can. Therefore that they may ſtrip the King cleane out of authority, they do thruſt in their demaundes, the articles concluded at Nancy ſpoken of before. She muſt vrge the Kinges conſent to theſe articles following: for which intent ſhee went to Nemours, a towne in Gastinois.
               
               In theſe demaunds they woulde faine make the Kinge beleeue, howe all that they doo is for the preſeruation of the popiſh religion, and that they deſyre greatly a reunion of the Catholiks, whereof he ſhould be the head.
               
                  
Firſt, they doe demaund that all generally ſhall promiſe and ſweare, to imploy their perſons, goods, and meanes, for the conſeruation and defence,  of the king, of his eſtate and authoritie, and of the children which it ſhall pleaſe God to ſend him, and that againſt all manner of men. By this demaund they lull the king aſleepe.
               They ſhall ſweare alſo the rooting out of hereſie, and doe require prouiſion to be taken, that no heretike Prince, or ſuſpected of hereſie, or fauourer of heretikes, may enioy the Crowne, whatſoeuer right he may pretend thereunto: and that this may be confirmed by an oath of all men. Alſo that the king ſhall ſweare to defend the Leaguers (who doo call themſelues Princes) againſt the heretikes and their fauourers.
               By this artcile they will exclude (if they may) all the Princes of the houſe of Bourbon, whome they will eaſily finde either heretikes, or fauourers 
                     Note.
                   of heretikes.
               Secondly, they demaund, that it may pleaſe him to ſweare to the obſeruation of thoſe demaunds, and that hee will permit in their cuſtodie the townes and Cities which are graunted them, during ſix yeares: and that in all other townes which ſhall ioyne themſelues to the Leaguers, nothing be innouated, and that they may not be puniſhed for any offence or rebellion committed.
               Furthermore, they doe demaund that if during the ſix yeares, there ſhould happen any vocation of gouernours and Captaines, in the ſaide townes and Cities, that then the Leaguers may name ſuch as they think good, and that the king ſhall ſtabliſh ſuch at their requeſt.
               This is to diſpoſſeſſe the king of his holds, towns and cities, and therin to place ſuch as ſhall bee at their deuotion, whome they may truſt. 
                     Note.
                  
               
               Thirdly, they doe require the publiſhing of the councell of Trent, and the obſeruing of the ſame, and that the King ſhall forſake his aliance which he hath with princes and nations, heretickes, and that hee ſhall giue ouer the protection of certaine townes knowen to bee the receptacle of heretikes.
               By theſe they meane, the Germanes, the kings of Denmarke and Scotland, 
                  
                     Note.
                   the Queene of England, the cantons of Swiſſers, the townes of Geneua, Sedan, and Iamets. that of one ſide he might be deſtitute of friends to defend him againſt his enemies, and that the one of theſe Cities might be the more eaſily ſubdued by the Duke of Sauoy, and the other two by the Duke of Lorreine.
               
               Laſt of al, that the goods and lands of the heretikes be ſolde, and to imploy the mony to make warre againſt the heretikes, but ſpecially to maintaine one armie in Poytow, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Guyze, and the other in Daulphine conducted by his brother the Duke de Maine.
               
               The king knew very wel (except he had been talpacoecior) yt theſe articles

were againſt the dutie of faithfull ſubiects: and that of the princes mentioned in the ſaid articles, there was but one, to wit, the Cardinall of Bourbon, & that all the others being ſtrangers, did handle him cunningly at  will, vnder faire colours, and made him their mouth to ſpeake for them. He knew very well, that all that which they ſay in their articles, of the preſeruation o
                     •
                   his perſon, crowne and eſtate, were but wordes, and a couering of their trayterous drifts: he perceiued well, that the deſire which they pretended to haue of the eaſe and preſeruation of Cities, was but a flattering bayte, on the one ſide to alienate them from his obedience, and on the other ſide, to make them affected, & ready to the execution of their enterprizes.
               As for the nomination of gouernours and captains in the ſayd townes, which they would haue to be reformed to them, to place therein ſuch as they would think good; he vnderſtoode well, that in plaine tearmes they meant to abridg yt ſmall ſtore of authoritie which they had left him, and to make him their inferiour: He ſaw well enough, that the degraduatiō, and diſheriting of the lawfull Princes from the ſucceſſion of the crowne, vnder the colour of hereſie, or fauouring of heretikes, was but a meane to put the Crowne vpon their owne heads.
               Alſo, that to breake the aliances which he had with the forraine Princes and nations whome they called heretikes, was a thing no leſſe vniuſt, than pernitious to his eſtate, whome by ſuch means, they wrapped into a heape of newe troubles, and that ſuch a demaund was arrogantly to command their King and Soueraigne.
               To be ſhort, the king knew very well, that in all theſe things they ſought but the eaſier way to their greatnes, and the means to debaſe his authoritie, and to haſten the fall of his eſtate. Yet as a man bereft of wit, deſtitute of wiſdome and courage, and bewitched with the pernitious and poyſoned counſells of Circe, his execrable and accurſed mother, without conſidering any thing the greatnes of the offence of the leaguers, and the innocencie of the party condemned, he graunted the Edict of reunion, patched by the hammering and tinkering of his mother & the Leaguers, in the towne of Nemours, where they had aſſembled themſelues, bearing date the one and twentith of Iuly.
               This Edict was made according to the former demaunds and articles of Nancy, ſpoken of before.
               Here it may bee aſked, how the King knowing the ſecret thoughts and drif
                     •
                  s of the Guizes and other Leaguers, by long experience and obſeruation of their behauiours, by the admonitions giuen him by men of all degrees both ſtrangers and ſubiects, by their attempts and actions ſo often times atchieued, by their vniuſt, pernicious, vnreaſonable, vnſeemely and irreuerent demaunds ſo oftentimes propoſed, and his faithfull ſubiects

vrging him with earneſt prayers to ſeeke the remedying and reuenge of theſe iniuries: why did he not hearken vnto them, and purſued them with ſtrong hand, if they had refuſed to anſwer to his iuſtice; which thing to doo  at length he was enforced to do: There is no doubt but he had a will and purpoſe to be reuenged of them: but being a ſcholler of the villanous and prophane Atheiſt the Italian Machiauell, whoſe philoſophie he had hardly ſtudied by the counſell of his godles mother, and of ſome villanous ſcullions Italians which were about her, hee ſuppoſed that he could be reuenged better by craftineſſe and ſurpriſing of them, then by force. He watched for the occaſions how to handle them in ſuch wiſe as he handled them of the reformed religion at S. Bartholomew, and ſo with one banquet to haue rid his hands of his enemies, and recouered his authoritie, ſtate and quietnes. And ſo refuſing the lawfull meanes by the which God giueth ſaluation vnto Kings, his owne counſell turned to his owne ſhame, confuſion and diſhonour. Doo ye therefore that which is righteous, ye Kings and Iudges of the earth, and kiſſe the ſonne leaſt ye periſh out of the way. The king therefore hoping to beſtowe a S. Bartholmews breakfaſt vpon them, was content to take any thing at their hands. This agréement concluded, cauſed an excéeding great ioy to all the conſpirators, who thought it to bée no ſmall cunning of theirs thus eaſily to haue auoided the deſerued puniſhment of their mutinie and rebellion: for which cauſe they of their confederacie doo carrie their heads higher then euer they did, their courage dooth double, and heate kindle againſt them of the reformed religion without compariſon farre more then before.
               Thereupon two mightie Armies are appoynted to be ſent, the one into Guienne, the other into Daulphine, compounded of the Kings & Leaguers forces, dreadfull and terrible not only to the reformed Churches of France, but alſo to the Nations round about. The Duke of Sauoy (one of the conſpiracie of the League) muſtered a mightie Armie that ſhould inuade the Marquizat of Saluces, to enter into Daulphine, to ioyne his forces with the League. The Townes and Cities great and ſmall, according to the edict of reunion, doo ſhewe themſelues readie and willing to beſtow gold, ſiluer, goods, fauours, armours and liues to further the affaires of the Leaguers. All theſe things were much, but they were nothing to the great preparation of warre, and the inuincible Armado which was not onely in a readines, but alſo ſayling forward to the execution of this conſpiracie agaynſt the Church of God, they goe to worke by land and by water. For this nauall Armie builded in Spayne, was thought ſufficient to conquer many Realmes: the ſhippes were of incomparable bignes, in number ſo many that they couered the ſeas. The moſt excellent Carpenters, cunning men, and fineſt workemen of all Europe, had ſpent their wits and ſeuen or eight yeares in the building and preparing of the ſayd Armie: The Artillerie,

powder, pellets, munitions, tacklings, and other neceſſarie things, for ſo dreadfull an army, was a heape of things incredible to beléeue. 
               
               All Italy, Venice, Sicil, Sardinia, Malta, and other Ilands, ſubiect or confederated to the King of Spayne, had brought to it their counſell, their money, their ſhippes, their Captaines, their armour, their pylots, and all that euer they could deuiſe: ſo that Xerxes did neuer ſo much againſt Grecia, as this Armado determined to doo to England and to France, in paſſing by.
               As for France, the Spanyard made his account, to bee alreadie vanquiſhed and ſubdued vnder his power, hauing already theſe mightie armies aboue ſaid, and the conſpiracie of the League on his ſide. As for England, they thought they ſhould haue a little to doo in conquering it, as they had indéede, though they had much a doo on the narrow Seas, nigh the coaſt of England.
               
               On the other ſide, the Duke of Parma had a mighty army in the Lowe Countrey, wherewith at the ſame time, to inuade the Countreys of Holand and Zeland, and others where they haue the exerciſe of the reformed religion, ſo that they had alreadie ſwallowed in one morſell, by imagination all France, England, Scotland, Zeland, and Holand: and for to make this great morſell goe downe eaſilie without choaking, there was in the middeſt of France two armies, and about France the Duke of Sauoy on the South, the Nauall army of Spayne on the Weſt, and Parma on the North ſide.
               The enemies of God made their full account, that there was no more hope to outſtand or ouerwaigh ſuch heauie forces. They therefore breathing fire, bloud, and murther, doo not onely determine to reduce al that remained of the reformed religion to fire and aſhes, and to make hauock and waſte of all things, but alſo doo promiſe themſelues a beginning of an aſſured reſt hereafter, and infallible victories, and that this exployt being done, and this great morſel ſwallowed, Germany, Denmark, Suiſſerland, and Geneua, other places would follow, or elſe for feare of like handling would be reduced to the holy Church.
               After this famous victory of the Leaguers was knowne through the realme, how they had conquered the Kings heart and courage, the edict of the 21. of Iuly proclaymed and ſworne in euery towne and Citie, where the crier durſt venture; Sathan, the chiefeſt maſter and worker of all this game, ſtirred vp falſe Prophets in euery place, to wit, the legions of Ieſuites, Friers, Monks, & Prieſts: theſe falſe Prophets 
                     •
                  an euery where, a viſion, a viſion, I haue ſéen a viſiō; they bring into their pulpets, which haue ſerued them this long for trumpets and drommes, to kindle ſedition, rebellion and murther; they vtter the viſion of their owne hearts, bring forth diuers Prognoſtications and Propheſies, for to animate theſe fiery courages

of the Leaguers and Catholicks, reunited together; they doo handle ſo their viſions, that they do promiſe an infallible good, and proſperous ſucceſſe. But ſpecially they (by their ſpirits of diuination) ſhew their great  learning in vttering loades of wiſdome vpon the predictions of the olde Mathematicians, concerning the yeare 1588. which they had long before accounted fatall to the world, both the Prophets and the people doo eaſily perſwade themſelues, that the things will befall, which they greatly deſired.
               The feare of theſe thunderclaps was great euery where, the forces in number and furniture were inequall: therefore in France, many not conſidering that God may defend his people, as well with few as with many, and that hée hath Legions of Angels to fight at his commaundement, for the defence of his Elect, yéelded to the time, and reuolted, made their abiuration, and followed the world.
               The Duke of Guize was the Northen Star, by the which, all this Nauigation was guided, ſo that it was perceaued, that neither all this preparation and ſtoare, neither the Propheſies and viſions of the rauing Prophets, could aſſure the happy ſucceſſe, except the Duke of Guize might be in court, nigh the Kings elbow. Therefore the Q. Mother ſhe muſt be ſet to worke, ſhe with other Leaguers, which were about the Kings perſon, tell what a great wiſe man the Duke of Guize was, and that hée could not bée well without ſuch a counſeller, hauing ſuch great waightie things in hand. The King thought it was a dangerous thing to haue ſuch a gueſt ſo nigh him, yet ſuppoſing that it would be the néereſt way to ſurpriſe him, and that at ſome occaſion he might rid his hands of that perilous burthen, conſented thereto.
               All caueats and prouiſions which the prouidence of man could deuiſe for his ſafetie, being prouided and made ſure, he purpoſeth to depart out of Paris to goe to the court.
               He tooke in his companie the Q. Mother, and raigning wt a great traine of the inhabitants of Paris: the Lords Byron and Neuers, who had béen alwaies with the King (the one as a faithfull ſeruant to the King, the other as a ſecret fauourer of the League) went to meete the ſaid Duke.
               At his comming to the Kings preſence, what welcomes, what complainings, what excuſes, what praiers, what promiſes, what gréetings, and what diſſimulations there was betweene them, to wit, the King & Guize, euery man of iudgement may conſider.
               The Duke of Guize cauſed his table of great maſter of France, to be eſtabliſhed, and good and aſſured meanes for the maintenance thereof; he obtained alſo a patent of great Maſter of men of war in France (which is a 
                     •
                  imini
                     •
                  iue title of Conſtable) for an earneſt, and in hope ſhortlie to haue all.
               
                  
And whereas in the requeſt preſented to the King, it was demaunded that he ſhould be the Kings Generall of that armie, which ſhould bee ſent into Guienne. Now he dooth recant, and vpon the puſh doth refuſe to take  that charge, but willeth another to be appoynted, and that for two cauſes: he would rather venture another mans ſkin then his owne, knowing well that hee could neuer repaſſe Loyre without a broaken ſkin, which thing he loued not: the ſecond cauſe was, that he would not go farre from the King, and from Paris there to be at hand, vpon all occaſions to take opportunitie to execute his enterpriſe.
               In his roome therefore the Duke of Neuers is appoynted to conduct the armie into Guienne againſt the King of Nauarre, he maketh his excuſe (fearing the whip as the other did) of his indiſpoſition, and offereth to mainetaine one hundred Gentlemen, ſo that he might be excuſed, which charge, notwithſtanding at length he accepted.
               The wiſeſt ſort feared in general, that this wound could not be cloſed vp and healed, without ſome fowle ſcarre remayning, or that hee who had once preſumed to beat his Prince out of his imperiall citty, ſhould not want audacity to attempt further matters.
               All theſe vprores being now pacifyed, and all theſe great preparations vrged with great courage, they of the reformed religion all ready proſcript, all things threatning death and deſolation by land and by water, a parliament of the States is appointed by the King to be holden at Bloys the 15. day of Auguſt next following, there to determine vpon the affaires of the land according to the ſaid edict of reunion, and not otherwiſe, and about the reformation of the State: but ſpecially for the diſheneriting of the Princes of the bloud, that they ſhould not ſucceede to the Crowne. In this Parliament the King and the Duke of Guyze had diuers and contrary meanings, and neither of them both did intend to do the thinges aboue ſayde, touching the affaires of the land, and reformation of the State.
               But the Kings purpoſe was, that now (hauing recouered as he thought part of his authority) hee might bridle his domeſticall enemy, to wit, the Duke of Guyze, whoſe practiſes and attempts had béen ſo euidently ſhewed to the eie of all men, agaynſt his perſon and eſtate, and there either to haue had him condemned and executed by the full aſſembly of the ſtates, or elſe by ſurpriſing to haue diſpatched him out of the way, as hee at length performed.
               The Dukes meaning was, either to exclude the King from all gouernment, or elſe to haue condemned him by the authority of all the ſtates, or if opportunity might ſerue, to do him away by ſome violence, and after to haue tryed how to bring his intent to paſſe.
               Euery one of them therfore hauing his contrary thoughts in his mind, yet they in common do prepare all things for this aſſembly of the Parliament,

they make the ouerthrow of the King of Nauarre, and the raſing of the Blockhouſe of Rochel (as they tearme it) very eaſy. 
               
               While they keepe this great adoo, and repleniſh the world with cruell threatnings, and are in hand both by land and by water, to aduance the treaſons of the Leaguers, which cannot be done without the rooting out of the true Religion. Therefore it is aſſaulted on the South ſyde by the Dukes of Sauoy and Mayne, with two mighty armies on the Weſt, by the omnipotent Armado; on the North, by all the forces of ye low Countryes; in the middle of France, by the Duke of Neuers with a mighty army: behold, God who holdeth the ſtearne of the whole world doth produce euents all contrary vnto thoſe which men had promiſed to themſelues.
               For in the meane time God doth execute his dreadfull iudgements againſt the inuincible (as they did call them) but in deed barbarous and ſauage nation of Spaniards, partly beating them out of the narrow Seas with a notable ſlaughter and ſhame of them, by that nation which they had ſo deadly hated for the Goſpell, and ſo arrogantly deſpiſed: and partly God ſent his meſſengers, the wind, ſtorme and tempeſt, with the rocks in their waies, that by ſhipwracke, thirſt, famin, and peſtilence, and other calamities of the Sea, they might be drowned in an euerlaſting obliuion, lyke Pharao, his horſes and horſemen.
               In Auguſt the Kings writtes are ſent into all prouinces and citties to  ſend ſpeedily their Deputies, ſo that they were catholikes, Romans, and not otherwiſe, and in the meane time doth fortify himſelf: but not miſtruſting the practiſes of the Leaguers in the Prouinces, he gaue them leaue to do all by partialities in the Prouinces in choiſe of the Deputies. For they gaue order that their partakers might come ſtrong, not ſo much with the outward force, as with plurality of ſuffrages, which in all places they had ſecretly ſuborued by premiſes and corruptions. And ſo it came to paſſe, that there came but few to that aſſembly, but they which were of the Leaguers faction.
               Here (Chriſtian Reader) wee may ſee Gods iudgements, calling this great King as it were by ſteps, to a miſerable and ſhameful fall for his vnthankfulnes. He hath forſaken one part of his ſubiectes, and that the beſt part, though not the greateſt in number, holdeth them for enemyes, and wil haue none of their counſell: and by the ſelfe ſame means hath opened a dore to weaken himſelfe in his Parliament, and committed his perſon into the hands of them that were aſſembled to diſpoſſeſſe him out of his kingdome, either by murther or by captiaitie, making the way plaine before his enemies, to rule the matter as they would without controulement.
               Now we will leaue the King, with all his courtand traine, with his Leaguers, to goe (ſoft and fayre for feare of ſweating too much) to 
                     
                        •
                     loys, there to take order for their Proceſſions, Maſſing▪ and other ſolemnities. And

vſed by men of that religion, and there to ſtay for the arriuing of the deputies, while we do ſee what things had happened in other places.
               While (and after) the Edict of reunion was a caſting in Iuly, and the  States appoynted, all meanes were ſought out to vndoe the King of Nauarre, and with him them of the Religion.
               The ſayd king of Nauarre of his part did make himſelfe ready vppon the defenſiue, grounded vpon all his reaſons, propounded often times by his declarations, and vpon the grieues and iniuries proffered vnto him, and vnto them of the religion.
               It is ſaid before how the Lord Colombieres had brought certaine companies out of Normandy vnto the King of Nauarre, and in Iune before had ſeazed vpon the towne of Montagne. This was a towne belonging to the Prince of Conde, which had beene miſerablie defaced in the former ciuill warres. The wall and the caſtell being one of the ſtrongeſt places in all that countrey, had beene beaten downe. But the ruine of the towne was not ſo great, but within few dayes it was reaſonablie repayred, and made defenſible, by the ſaid Lord Colombieres, and other Captaynes with him.
               The companies of the ſaid Lord Colombieres out of that towne made dayly long roades and courſes toward Nantes, and againſt other places holden by the papiſts, whereby dayly they greatly moleſted them.
               After the Edict of reunion, Duke Mercure, gouernour of Britaine, and others of the countrie who did holde with the League, but ſpecially they of Nants, who could not away with ſuch neighbours, gathered certaine regiments of the Leaguers, to make certaine roades into the lowe Poytow, as well to let the enterprizes of the king of Nauarre there, as to prepare the way to that armie which ſhould folow ſhortly after, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Neuers, but ſpecially intending to lay the ſiege before Montagne, to gett that place out of the hand of them of the religion.
               The Duke Mercure therefore with as great forces as hee was able to make, went in perſon to lay ſiege before the ſaid Montagne, abou
                     •
                   the eight of Auguſt, and lodged the regiment of Gerſay at Saint George. And ſending from thence to view the towne, a hot ſkirmiſh was begonne againſt them of the towne, in the preſence of the ſayd Mercure, who ſtood in battle aray with two hundred horſes on the ſide of Barrillery, ſo called, becauſe there they make barrels, tubbes, and ſuch like ſtuffe.
               They within the towne at the diſcouering of the enemie, iſſued ſo furiouſly, and did ſo beat them back, that many men and horſes remained ſlaine vpō the place, among whom were ſome of the guards of Mercure, who ſeing that it was ſo hard for him to lodge his men of war in ye ſuburb of Saint Jamets, as he had determined to doe, ſent them againe to their

lodgings at Saint George. As for himſelfe, in the euening hee retyred to Eliſon, hauing ſent downe the riuer Loyre from Nantes, three double cannons  to pont Roſſeau, which is a towne ſituated on the fall of the riuer Seuie into Loyre.
               
               The King of Nauarre aduertized of Mercures inuaſion into Poytow, gathered ſuch forces as he could, and vpon ſome other occaſions alſo, departed out of Rochel the ninth of Auguſt, accompanied with a hundred horſes onely, and the harquebuſiers of his gardes: and taking his iorney toward Loyre, went that day to lodge at Luſſon.
               
               The Duke Mercure being lodged at Cliſſon, the tenth day of Auguſt vnderſtoode that the King of Nauarre was gone foorth out of Rochel, and vpon the ſhadow of his owne feare he perſwaded himſelf that it is to raiſe vp the ſiege of Montagne; ſo that hauing repreſented vnto himſelfe the accuſtomed diligence of the King of Nauarre in his exployts of warre, he imagineth to ſee him alreadie: whereupon he determined to retyre before he had planted his ſiege, and returned to Nantes the 11. of Auguſt, two daies before the comming of the King of Nauarre: he left the regiment of Gerſay to make the retyre, and lodged the 12. day at Mounieres, a towne ſituated vpon the riuer Seure.
               
               The King of Nauarre at his departure from Luſſon, went to lodge at Bourneueau, where the Lord Boulay with his companie of armed men well appoynted, and a companie of harquebuſiers on horſeback, commanded by Captaine Nede ioyned to him.
               From Bourneueau the King went to lodge at Eſſars, where he was aduertiſed that the Duke Mercure was departed and retyred to Nantes, and that the regiment of Gerſay was lodged at Mounieres.
               
               Theſe newes did cauſe him to diſlodge the day following very earely, leaſt he ſhould loſe the occaſion to ouertake that regimēt: he went through the Towne of Montagne with much toyle, and there tooke the garriſon commanded by Luzerne eldeſt ſonne to the Lord Colombieres, and with extreame diligence in a little ſpace of time came to the riuer Seure, which he paſſed ouer ſpeedily on foord: there he found that the regiment was parted from Mounieres, purpoſing to retyre to Pilmil Suburbe of Nantes.
               
               The garriſon of Montagne being forerunners to the ſayd King, followed with diligence, and ouertooke them in a way hollowe and couered, very aduantagious for the enemie, by reaſon of three little houſes wherein they had put men to flancke them. There the ſkirmiſh did continue about halfe an houre, vntill the ſayd King of Nauarre had arriued with all his companies, at whoſe comming the enemie was diſcouraged, begā to faint and flée away in diſaray, and there was wholly ouerthrowne.
               The King of Nauarre tooke to mercie as many as were taken priſoners to the number of foure hundred and fiftie, and ſuffered none to be killed but

ſuch as were ſlaine in the battell: The maſter of the Camp Gerſay, ſaued himſelfe by flight, by the meanes of a fayre Ienet of Spayne, yet hurt with  a ſhot. There were eight Enſignes taken, great number of carts & horſes of carriage: the onſet was giuen within two leagues of Pilmil ſuburbe of Nantes.
               
               The King (after giuing of thankes vpon that place where the ſkirmiſh was fought, for that proſperous ſucceſſe and victorie) made a light dinner vnder a tree, and after retyred to his lodging at S. Georges, where hee ſoiourned the whole day following, for the long daies iourney which he had made the day before: notwithſtanding, that day hee went a hawking for Partridges, and in the euening viewed the towne of Montagne, to take order for the fortifications and garriſons of the ſayd towne, and purpoſed to haue layed the ſiege to the towne Cliſſon not farre thence.
               The King being yet at S. George, was ſtrengthened with foure regiments of footmen, to wit, of Charbonieres, Sallignak, Preau, and the regiment of his gardes, commanded by the Lord Querine: there alſo he receaued the light horſemen of the Lord Trimouille, who had diſcomfited the regiment of Leſtele, and taken foure Enſignes, which they preſented vnto the ſayd King.
               The ſelfe ſame day being aduertized of the daunger wherein the Duke Eſpernon ſtood within the Towne of Engoleſme, beſieged there within the Caſtell by a conſpiracie of the Leaguers, cauſed him to giue ouer his enterpriſe vpon Cliſson, & the day following being the 15. of Auguſt, departed from Saint George, purpoſing to make toward Engoleſme, to ſuccor the ſaide Lorde Eſpernon: but hearing by the way, how the tumult there was pacified, went not ſo far as that place.
               It is ſaide before, how that the Leaguers in their requeſt preſented vnto the King, made a great complaint againſt the Duke Eſpernon, charging him to haue intelligences with the King of Nauarre, and them of the religion, to haue been the cauſe that their armies had heretofore ſmall ſucceſſe, and that if he ſhould grow to greater authoritie, it were danger that in time he would deliuer the places of his gouernement to the King of Nauarre; that he is the onely cauſe, that the politick ſtate is ſo corrupt, and out of frame, and therefore the King muſt needes put him from about his perſon and fauour.
               This Lord Eſpernon of the auncient houſe of Valette, grew in great fauour with the King, through his faithfull ſeruice, a man altogether ſold to popery, yet a louer of the Kings perſon, crowne and ſtate, a louer of the realme and peace of the ſame, a hater of conſpirators and perturbers of the quietnes of the King and his ſubiects, who neuer could bee drawne to the conſpiracies of the Leaguers, neither by faire promiſes nor other meanes whatſoeuer, which thing was the cauſe that the Leaguers hated him, as

the onely man about the Kings perſon, who did hinder the execution 
                     •
                  f their enterpriſes: that man therefore muſt not be about the King, nor be admitted  into the aſſembly of the ſtates.
               The King to giue place to their hatred for a time, and to auoyde the inconueniences, which through ye malice of his enemies, might befall to ſuch a truſtie ſeruant, determined to ſend him out of their ſight, and where hee thought that they ſhould be leaſt able to practiſe againſt him. And giuing him a very great power and commiſſion in a moſt ample manner, to commaund in the Prouinces of Aniou, Toureyne, Poytow, Engomoyes, & Xainctonge, commaunded him to depart the Court, about the ſame time that the edict of reunion was made by the Leaguers: who hauing ſoiourned a while in the Tower of Loches, ſituated in Toureyne, vpon the riuer Vndre, which falleth into Loyre, betwéene Tours and Samure, to fortifie and aſſure the ſaid place to the Kings obedience, againſt the practiſes of certaine Gentlemen of the League, made againſt that place. From thence he tooke his iourney to Engoleſme; where he vnderſtoode that many enterpriſes were a working by the League againſt the Kings ſeruice. There commaunded the Lorde Tageus his kinſeman, vnder the charge of the Lord Valette his brother.
               The ſaide Lorde Eſpernon arriuing at Engoleſme, accompanied with a great number of the nobilitie, was honorably receaued by the Maior and Aldermen of the Citie, by the officers of iuſtice & policie, with great numbers of people, who went to meete him at the gates of the Citie; hee was likewiſe receaued by the Biſhop and his Prieſts, at the doore of Saint Peters Church, where they ſung ſolemnly, a great te Deum laudamus, in the worſhip of him.
               Not long after, the ſaid Lord Eſpernon called together the Biſhop and his Prieſtes, the Maior and the Eſcheuins, the Kings officers and other chiefe Citizens, to giue them notice of the occaſions of his comming, which was firſt to preſerue them all in the Catholicke Romane religion, for the which, and for the Kings ſeruice he would willingly aduenture his life againſt all manner of men. Exhorting them to aduiſe what was requiſit for their conſeruation, and that they would propound the ſame vnto him.
               All anſwered with one conſent, that they would dye vnder his authority in the ſame reſolution, and for to teſtify their willes the better, they would haue his authority from the King, printed, read, and publiſhed (as the manner is) through all the towne.
               The ſaid Lord hauing many companies both of horſemen and footmen, yet would he innouate nothing, not ſo much as to change any part of the garriſon of the Citty: and to teſtify vnto them more apparantly of the confidence, which hee had in the promiſes and fidelity of them, he would not

lodge in any ſtronger place (nor more aduantagious for his preſeruation) but in the Caſtell, which is called the Kings houſe: wherein he found his Coſin the Lord Tageus lodged, as the gouernours heretofore had accuſtomed  to do. This Caſtell hath no ſtrength which is any thing worth, nether in Ditches nor in any handy worke, except ſome great Towers of ſtone very olde: but otherwiſe very commodious for the ſtore of chambers which are therein. The ſaid Lord had brought his Lady with him, and had alſo lodged the Lady Tageus there. Hee went the ſame day into the Citadell, wherein he commaunded the Lord Bordes, with all the nobility which accompanied him, & could euen then haue lodged there, if he had had any diffidence of the inhabitants: for the keies were preſented to him by the Lord Bordes. That Fortreſſe was ſufficient to haue bridled the inhabitantes, conſidering the ſtrength and great ſtore of Munitions of the ſaid place, as well in Ordinance as in other neceſſary things. But ſpecially hauing a gate to get out of the towne, whereby may be let in as many men as one would. But the ſayd Lord in ſtéed of miſtruſt kept an open houſe, as well for the nobility of the countrey, as for the inhabitantes of the citty, without any reſpect of perſons, whereof a great number (but ſpecially the Maior of the town with his conſpiratours) ſat ordinarily at his table, with great curteſy and welcome ſhewed vnto them by the ſayd L. Eſpernon.
               
               He walked familiarly with them through the citty and ſuburbs with a ſmall company of his, without any other care then to conferre louingly with them about the neceſſary thinges for the preſeruation of their Cittye.
               The Maior had in his poſſeſſion all the keies of the Cittie, the inhabitantes made their accuſtomed watches, and by halfes, with two companies which were vnder the commaundement of the Lord Bordes, whereof the moſt part were inhabitantes of the Citty.
               Vppon requeſt made vnto him by the Maior and Aldermen, concerning the neceſſary fortifications for the ſafety and increaſing of their Cittie, the ſaid Lord promiſed to lend them to that effect ſuch a ſumme of money as they ſhould thinke good. And to aduaunce the worke, the ſaid Lord commaunded the Maior, and the Lieutenant Neſmond to make the proiect, by the counſell of Captaine Ramel, ſon of Auguſtine, mayſter of the Kings workes.
               In the meane while the ſaid Lord cauſed the edict of reunion to be publiſhed in the Cittie, and according to the ſame did prepare to war agaynſt them of the religion, to let them from gathering ſubſidies and tallages, & to repreſſe their courſes: & furthermore, had made an enterpriſe agaynſt one of their beſt places. And for a beginning of ye performance of theſe things, had commaunded his coſin the Lord Tageus to take with him all the companies of his light horſes, and the companyes of the Lords Sobelle, and Cadilan, with all the footmen, and troops which he had brought with him.
               
                  
And beſides all this, for to win the hartes of the inhabitantes, he cauſed euery day all ſorts of publike exerciſes of Romiſh poperie to be done in all  their chiefe Idoll Temples in the Cittie. He had alſo promiſed to the gray Fryers to helpe the reedifying of their couent and temple of the ſame.
               For the warre defenſiue and offenſiue agaynſt them of the religion, hee obmitted no meanes he had, no indſturie, nor diligence.
               For his paſtimes, he would go euery day (without miſtruſt of any man) to the Tenis court, ſituated in one of the furtheſt partes of the citty. Euery morning he would get vppon his horſes himſelfe, to exerciſe them in the ſight of great aſſembly of people, with a very ſmall company of his men about him.
               It is ſayd how the King (to conuay the Lord Eſpernon, his truſty and faythfull ſeruant out of the ielouſies & dangers of the Leaguers) ha
                     •
                   ſent him into Guyenne, to keepe ſuch townes there as did wauer, into his obedience.
               The towne of Engoleſme was aboue all the townes of that Countrey inclyning to the League, ſo diſpoſed by many Gentlemen therabouts, who were leagued and deuoted to the Duke of Guyze. The Duke Eſpernon (as it is ſayd) went thether to make it ſure to the kings obedience.
               The newes comming to the towne of the determination of the ſaide Duke, the complices of the conſpiracie of the League conſidering that neither to admit him, nor to exclude him was a ſafe way for them, conſidering that the King might recouer the town at all tymes by the citadel, which was kept by the L. Bordes, a faithfull ſeruant to his Prince, did immediatly ſend one (who was ye Maiors brother to the court) to know by the Oracle of the Leaguers, what was to be done in ſuch a doubtfull matter.
               The Duke of Guyze with his counſell, to wit, his brother, the Cardinall, & the Archbiſhop of Lyons, did ſit vpon the death of the Duke of Eſpernon, they did condemne him to die. They anſwered to their partakers, to admit him, and bid him welcome: but to rid him out of the way, if it can bee done by any meanes, the reuenge they neede not to feare, for they are in good hope that the maſter ſhall followe him ſhortly, and if not, yet they wil finde out ſome ſhift to excuſe the matter, and will find him guiltie of his owne death, elſe they will ſo worke, that the King ſhall haue little leaſure to thinke vpon the reuenge. They writ alſo to their complices, gentlemen of the countrey, as to Mere, Maſsilieres, Maqueuile, Boucheaulx, to the Baron Tonnerak, Caze, and Fleurak. They cauſed alſo Vileroy the Kings Secretary, to write his letters to the Lord Aubeterre, to repaire to the Maior of Engoleſme with al his power, at ſuch time as they ſhould haue warning by the 
                     •
                  aid Maior: in the meane while they expect the Oracle of the Leaguers, the Duke Eſpernon is lulled a ſleepe, and caſt into a dangerous ſecurity, by the Maior and the reſt of the conſpiratours,

they make him beleeue that they loue him as their owne ſoule: by the which diſſimulation, hee vnarmeth himſelfe, ſendeth his forces abroad  to warre agaynſt Chriſt.
               At length Souchet (long deſired) commeth from the court, geueth the anſwere that Eſpernon muſt die by all meanes poſſible, biddeth them to put aſyde all feare of reuenge for the cauſes afore ſhewed. Now then it muſt be executed out of hand afore the returne of the Lord Tageus, with the Dukes forces, for then ſhall they not be able to put in execution yt iudgement, hauing any forces about him: or elſe becauſe he will goe forth to war agaynſt the heretikes, according to his deliberation.
               The tenth day of Auguſt the Lord Eſpernon very early got him on horſbacke to goe to his ordinary exerciſes, with few of the nobility with him. The maior with certaine of the inhabitants of the cittie were all that morning with him. The ſayd Lord lighting downe of his horſe, embraced the Maior, and with great curteſy aſked him whether hedelighted in horſes. Thence the ſayd Lord returned to his lodging, and went into his cloſet to change his ſhirt, intending to goe deuoutly to Maſſe in the Chappell of Saint Laurence, in the church of Saynt Cibert, where his Almoner had prepared all the tooles ready to finiſh that miſticall play: this was about 7. a clocke.
               The Maior on the other ſide with his complices (who were gone to ſee his riding, onely to ſpie what ſtrength he had about him) went home, to put on his armour, to charge his piſtoll, to take order about nine of the clock that the toxin ſhould be rung, and to appoynt at the ſame time certaine firebrands of ſedition to goe about the ſtreates, crying, that the Hugon
                     •
                  ts had ſeazed vpon the Caſtell.
               The Maior alſo did craftily entice the Lord Bordes, gouernour of the Citadell into his houſe, vnder colour to diſcouer him a certaine enterprize againſt the king, and when hee had him in his houſe kept him as priſoner.
               Betweene eight and nine a clock, the Lord Eſpernon being in his cloſet, and knowing that the Abbot of Elbeue, and the Lord Mariuault, were in the next wardrobe, ſtaying there to accompany him to Maſſe, ſendeth a Page to call them to him into the Cloſet, which when they had done hee 
                     •
                  hewed them a place in a booke ſent him from Paris, full of defamations againſt the honour & authoritie of the King, lamenting the vnbridled licence of this age: hee prayeth them alſo to ſit by him, to vnderſtand out of his own mouth, his reſolution and platforme of war againſt them of the religion, aſſoone as the Lord Tageus could returne from this exployte, whome he would leaue there for the preſeruation of the Citie.
               Behold (Chriſtian Reader) this noble man indued with good gifts, raiſed vp to high degree, ſent out of the danger of his enemies, to keepe the

kings ſubiects in peace and iuſtice, vnthankfull of Gods good graces, doe meditate how to turne that power, wiſdome, and graces receiued of  God, to perſecute his Church: and whileſt hee is laying downe his plott, God ſendeth him a warning; to wit, murtherers, to execute the rage of Gods enemies vpon him.
               For as they concluded vpon the reſolution of this warre, which he purpoſed againſt the Children of God, the Abbot of Elbeu ſitting next vnto the doore of the cloſet, heard the ſound of a piſtol ſhot within the wardrobe, and ſome crying, kil, kill. At this alarum the ſaid Abbot ranne firſt to the doore nigh the cloſet, where he found the Aulmoner of ye ſaid Duke, who had ruſhed in, & had ſhut vp the doore, and thought it had neither lock nor boult, but held the ſaid doore with his back, very pale and frighted: The Abbot enquiring what it was, ſpeake ſoftly ſayd the Aulmoner, there be armed men which ſeeke to kill my Lord.
               At the ſame inſtant, the ſaid Lord Eſpernon, the Lord Mariuault, and the Abbot, heard two other piſtolls ſhot in the ſame wardrobe, with manie voyces, crying, kill, kill, & comming to the ſaid doore, cryed, yeeld my Lord, for you are but a dead man.
               The Abbot and Mariuault then counſailed the ſayd Eſpernon, to keep within the cloſet where was a ſecond doore, very narrow & hard to get in. At the ſame time, the Toxin began to ring in all Churches of the Citie, and they of the faction ran into the ſtreates, crying, that the Hugonets had ſurpriſed the Caſtell, and willing all men to run to ſuccour it, according to the inſtructions giuen by the Maior. Theſe tokens being giuen, the people ran on euery ſide to their weapons, and went toward the Caſtel, they lodge themſelues in the houſe next to the Caſtell.
               The Maior that morning intending to bring to an end their conſpiracie, had perſwaded them of his faction, but eſpecially 40. or 50. of the vileſt and moſt deſperat perſons of all the Citie, that his brother in law Southct came from the Court, and had brought with him an expreſſe commaundement from the King, both by letters and word of mouth, to ſeaze vpon the perſon of the ſaid Lord Eſpernon, dead or aliue, and to aſſure the citie: ſome of them he had appoynted to run through the citie, and to giue the alarum, as is afore ſaid: ſome ſhould ſeaze vpon the gates of the Caſtell, when hee ſhould haue entred the ſaide Caſtell; and ſome ſhould goe with him to execute this murther. This vile traitor then head of the conſpiracy, entred firſt armed into the Caſtell, through the great gate, hauing two men booted with him, which as he ſaide were Purſeuants, whom he brought to ſpeake with the Duke, and followed with ten men, going vp into the hall, and paſſing through it, ſaluted the Lord Couplieres, who ſat vpon a table, and thence paſſing through the Lord Eſpernon his chamber, went as farre as the wardroabe, ſuppoſing there to finde him, and there to execute his damnable

conſpiracie, there he met with on Raphael Gyrolamy, a Gentleman Florentine, Rouillard and Segnencio, Secretaries, and one Sorline, the  Kings Chirurgion. The Lord Aubine, one of the Kings Magiſtrates in the Court of Engoleſme, who was expreſſely come to aduertiſe the Lorde Eſpernon, that there was ſome practiſe againſt him in the towne, and there he ſtayed for his comming foorth, to doo his meſſage. The Maior therefore entred as is ſaid, firſt of all armed with a Corſelet, into the wardrobe, with a Piſtoll in his hand ready charged, and the cock downe, came to Sorline firſt, who ſet his hand to his ſword, and did hurt the Maior a little on the head.
               Another man (great and ſtrong) with a Piſtoll ſet vpon Raphael, who immediatly taking him by the coller, caſt him downe vppon the ground, and with his ſword wounded him, as he did three more, as they haue confeſſed after, and beate them out of the chamber, crying ſtill, my Lord is not here: but being wounded with a Piſtol, he fell downe, and then they made an end of him with their ſwords. The others who were in the wardrobe, ſaued themſelues as they could. Sorline running into the kitchen, gaue the alarum to the cookes, who ran with their broaches: but the conſpirators being in the hall, and hearing the noyſe in the kitchen, ſtopped the way out of yt kitchē into the hall. In the meane time while theſe things were dooing within the wardrobe by the Maior, his partakers went about (as they had receaued inſtructions aforehand of the Maior) to ſeaze vpon the great gate of the Caſtell, for to bring in the people, who were already in armour: but they were let by ſome Gentlemen, who were in the Court of the Caſtell, ſtaying there for the Lorde Eſpernon his comming forth.
               The firſt were the Lordes Ambleuille, Beaurepayre, Sobelle, and others: in defending of the ſaid gate, the Lord Beaurepayre was ſlaine with the ſtroake of a Halbeard, the Prouoſt Baretes likewiſe, and one of the gardes, the Lord Clauery was hurt: certaine Gentlemen entred into the ſaid gate, afore it was ſhut vp, as Captaine Baron Artiges, the Countie Brune, brother in lawe to the Duke Eſpernon, the Lords Goas, Mirane, Coſte, Emars, and others.
               They beleeued then that the Lord Eſpernon was dead, ſo that being aſtonied and looked one vpon another, they knewe not what to doo, nor in whome to truſt, vntill that the Lords Ambleuille, Myran, Sobelle, and Emars, acknowledging one another, and giuing hands with promiſe, to dye together, gathered as well Gentlemen as Souldiours of the garde cloſe together, and ran to the Chamber doore of the Lord Eſpernon, through the which the conſpiratours would haue gone forth, to ſeaze vpon the tower of the Caſtell, but they were let by the Gentlemen and gardes, who wounded the Maior through the doore, where of he fell downe, they ſhot alſo againſt

the reſidue of the conſpiratours, with theſe threatnings, you ſhall dye traitors. Seguencio the Secretarie, whome they detayned priſoner, reported  that at that threatning, they began to be amazed, and to ſay among themſelues, we are vndone if we doo not ſaue our ſelues ſome where, and thereupon carrying away the Maior, went out through a little doore of that chamber, which iſſued to a little paire of ſtaires, that did lead vp to a chamber, nigh the tower: but they were followed by the ſaid Gentlemen, and at the ſame time, the Lord Eſpernon, the Abbot Elbeu, and the Lord Marinault, who vnderſtanding the voyce of Sobelle, went forth of the cloſet with Piſtolls and ſwordes in hand.
               The conſpirators were enforced to ſaue themſelues in that Chamber nigh the great tower, to ye which no man could go but by a payre of ſtaires ſo narrowe, that but one man alone might paſſe: there were none armed, neither the Lord Eſpernon, nor any of his were at all; which thing cauſed them to ſtay their going vp.
               At the ſame inſtant a maidſeruant aduertiſed the Lord Eſpernon, that the Maiors brother with a number of armed men, did enter into the caſtle through a hole in the wall on the ſide of the Curtine. The ſayd Lord Eſpernon ran thether, who found alreadie the Maiors brother entred with another, which both were ſlaine there, and a gard was put at the place.
               At the ſame time, the complices of the conſpiracie, and among others the foreſaid Souchet, the Maiors brother in law, who had come lately from the Court, with ſome other gentlemen of the countrey, ſeeing that they could not fire the firſt gate, where they found reſiſtance (as is ſayd before) ran to another gate of the Caſtle with fire to burne it, preparing alſo gi
                     •
                  s to breake it vp. But the Lord Eſpernon with fiftéene of his men, whom he had gathered together, ran alſo to the ſayd gate, to defend and fortifie it with earth, ſtones, boords, and ſuch like, leauing his gard to keepe the dore of the chamber where the conſpirators were locked vp, the which endeuoured themſelues to iſſue foorth, but notwithſtanding were repulſed by the ſayd gardes and the Lord Eſpernon himſelfe, who hauing deuided his gardes vpon the entries into the Caſtle, went too and fro as néed required, and where hee iudged his preſence neceſſarie; ſo that reſorting to the foreſayd doore, he killed one of the ſayd conſpiratours with his own hand, as he went about to iſſue foorth. The inhabitants in the meane time did beſtowe their ſhot freely vppon the chambers of the Caſtle, becauſe they were ſo great and wide, and becauſe the inhabitants had ſeazed vpon the next houſes, and among others, vppon the houſe néereſt to the Caſtle, called the Quéenes houſe.
               The diligence of the Lord Eſpernon, and other gentlemen which accompanied him was ſuch, that within two houres they aſſured themſelues of the Caſtle: ſo that it had béen hard for the gentlemen and others who were

within the Towne, to force it without Canon.
               The labour beſtowed in fighting, fortifying, and breaking the ſtaiers of the chambers, and in fiering the narrowe ſtaiers which went vp the chamber  where the conſpiratours were locked vp, had béen quicke and violent.
               The L. Eſpernō
                   deſirous to make the gentlemen which were with him to drinke, there was found in al the houſe but foure flagons of wine, which were brought in that morning for his breakfaſt: there was no water at all, and very ſmall ſtore of bread, for the inhabitants had ſeazed vpon the well which was in the other court, and alſo the way to goe to it; which thing did greatly trouble them that were beſieged, the ſpace of two dayes and a halfe that they were incloſed therein. But the diſcommoditie was little in compariſon of the conſtant reſolution which they tooke, rather to dye then yéeld themſelues vnto that ſedicious multitude.
               It is ſayd before, how the Maior afore hee began to execute his enterpriſe, had by falſe ſurmiſes entiſed the Lord Bordes, gouernour of the Citadell, to come to his houſe, making him beléeue that hee would diſcouer him ſome great practiſe againſt the King; whom when he had in his hands he kept priſoner in his houſe.
               This thing did greatly amaze the Lord Eſpernon that he heard not the Citadell play againſt the Citie: the cauſe was, that when the fray was begun at the Caſtle, immediatly men appoynted by the Maior, brought the ſayd Bordes before the Citadell, to cauſe the Lieutenant to ſurrender it, or els to ſtay him from diſcharging the Ordinance againſt the towne, which in caſe hee ſhould doo it, they threatned to kill the ſayd Lord Bordes. The Lieutenant deſirous to ſaue the life of the ſayd Lord Bordes, promiſed to doo their requeſt, and ſo kept promiſe with them. The Lord Eſpernon ignorant of all theſe things, was greatly diſmayed, fearing leaſt the Citadell had béen in the hands of the conſpirators, or els had fauoured them. The conſpirators cloſed vp in the high chamber of the Caſtle, did affirme the ſame, and when they were ſummoned to render themſelues, they anſwered that it was for the ſayd Lord Eſpernon and his to yeeld, & that they ſhould quickly ſee the Canon of the Citadell before the Caſtle.
               There was an other miſchaunce that happened. The Ladie Eſpernon before the cōmotion began, was gone to Maſſe to the Dominican friers. Whē the alarum was giuen, ſhe went about to go forth to get the citadel ouer her head, beleeuing that they were Hugonets that had attempted againſt yt town; ſhe was lead by ye armes by 2. gentlemen to wit, Seguency (not the ſecretary, but an other of that name) & Pial: ſhe was arreſted priſoner, and her two Gentlemen ſlaine by theſe two Catholicks, within the Church doore, not permitting the Prieſt to make an ende of his iuggling game. They tooke alſo many Gentlemen, among whom were the Lords Curee, Meſme, Blere, and Captaine Ramel, the Baron Coze, and many

others of all degrees, of the traine of the ſaid Lord Eſpernon.
               
               The Lords Curee and Meſme, went about to get into the Caſtell, but  the people with Holbards kept them back, although they ſaide that they would go fight againſt the Hugonets, when they aſſaid to haue entred the Caſtel. The Lord Haultclerie (a man of that countrey of great eſtimation) with much adoo ſaued their liues.
               Captaine Ramel fell into the ſame daunger of the people, in going about to get into the caſtell, by the Curtine of the towne wall, but he ſaued himſelfe by taking the Biſhops houſe.
               In the middeſt of all theſe diſcommodities, the Lord Eſpernon ſendeth a Lackie to the Lord Tageus, who was at Xainctes with all his horſemen, to make haſte to ſuccour him. The Lacky was let downe the wall of the Parke ioyning to the Caſtell, but he was incontinently taken by the inhabitants. Notwithſtanding the Lord Tageus was aduertized of the commotion by two Gentlemen, who in a good houre went forth of the towne to goe on to hunting, who hearing the Toxin, did gallop vnto the gate of the Citadell, where they cauſed immediately all the bread and prouiſion which was in the ſubburb to be brought in, and the ſelfe ſame day at night came to Xainctes, to warne the Lord Tageus of that commotion.
               The people in the meane while continued in their rage, aſſiſted and conducted by diuers gentlemen of the coūtry, who were of the league, among whome was one (brought vp in the houſe of Guyze) Meſſeliere Makuole, and Boucheaulx, and others, who two houres after the commotion ſummoned the Lord Eſpernon by a drumme to yeeld, and to deliuer the place into their hands, promiſing him and his life and baggage ſafe.
               That proffer he diſdayned, and gaue them no other anſwere, but that he would within few houres make them change their language. They threatned alſo the Lady Eſpernon (if ſhe would not perſwade her huſband to yeeld) to make her ſerue for a gabion, or elſe to ſtabb her. She anſwered them, that if they would bring her before the Caſtell, ſhe would perſwade him to the contrary: and that ſhe did hope one day to haue reaſon of the inſolencies of the ſaid Mere, who did proffer her ſuch ſpeeches.
               The Lord Eſpernon had but eight Harquebuſiers of his guard, they neuer ſhot without killing or hurting ſome one or other; ſo that there were killed by them. 25. or thirtie perſons: but this was their euill luck, that they had no powder with them but that which they found in their flaſks. One of the conſpirators who was ſhut vp in the Caſtel, with linnen cloth cut in length, and knotted in the endes in ſtead of a coarde, was let down into to the Caſtell ditche, and aduertized the inhabitants, howe that his felowes were ready almoſt to be ſtifled with fire, or quelled with the fall of the houſe, which could not bee auoyded, except they were very ſhortly reſcued. That moued the Parents to induce the other Mayor, named

                  Bourgoyne, to goe to the Caſtell to parley.
               The Abbot Elbeu and the Lord Ambleuille ſpake with him through a  hole of the wall, and ſhewed him the danger wherein the towne ſtoode to be ranſaked, at the arriuing of the ſuccour which was at hande: That they had in holde the Maior with his conſpired felowes, wh
                     •
                  me the Lord Eſpernon had forgiuen, and that eaſily he mought be moued to pardon the people alſo which had beene abuſed. And that it they ſhould goe further in their enterprize, and aſſault any more the Caſtell, the Lorde Eſpernon would ſtay them all. Furthermore, they offer themſelues to make meanes for the people with the ſaid Lord Eſpernon.
               
               They which were ſhut vp being no more able to endure, yeelded vnto the Lord Eſpernon vpon his faith, which he kept to them inuiolable. The Maior at the time of his yeelding, was gaping for life, and within a while after dyed in the caſtell of the wounds which he had receiued.
               The Lord Eſpernon cauſed his priſoners to write to them of the towne in what danger they were of their liues, if they ſhould any more aſſault the Caſtell. Whereupon the inhabitants required the Maior Bourgoyne to returne to the Duke Eſpernon in the behalfe of them, that he would ſend the Abbot and the Lord Ambleuille to them, to intreate of peace. The Lord Ambleuille would not forſake the Duke Eſpernon. The Abbot preffered himſelfe ſo that they would giue hoſtages. They of the towne gaue the Kings procurator, who entred into the Caſtell by a ladder, by the which the Abbot came downe into the towne.
               The Abbot at the firſt trenches, found Mere and Meſſeliere, two Gentlemen, fir
                     •
                  ts of the ſedition: accompanyed with a multitude of people who would haue treated with him: but the Abbot would not, ſaying, that he would goe to treate with the ſeneſchall in the houſe of the Lord Argence, who was an olde Gentleman, and of honour, who alſo had promiſed all friendſhip to the Lorde Eſpernon.
               
               Being conducted thither, all the officers and chiefe of the Citie, with much people, reſorted to the place. The Abbot ſhewed them the enormitie of their of
                     •
                  ence, ſo to attempt againſt ſuch an officer of the Crowne, a good Catholick and faithfull ſeruant to the King, that they had made themſelues guilty of high treaſon.
               Hee ſhewed them alſo the Maiors treaſons, whereof they had made themſelues raſh ex
                     •
                  cutioners vnder a forged colour of the Kings commandement. He ſpake vnto the officers, the nobility, and people, to euery one ſ
                     •
                  nerally, and before all ſhewing them their fault and their duty: and concluded that by ſuch kind of dealing they put themſelues in great hazard of the Hugonets, their common enemies. He ſo much affected, that they were deuided among themſelues, and found in the end that the kinges officers; the cheefeſt of the cittie, and the moſt apparant of the nobility were

not at all priuie nor conſenting in the beginning to the Maiors conſpiracy, who had onely aſſured himſelfe of forty or fifty the vple
                     ••
                   ſor
                     •
                   for the execution  of his conſpiracy: and that theſe at the ſound of the alarum had cauſed all the reſt to take armour in hand, vnder colour of the name of the Hugonets.
               
               The common people (induced by Mere) ſhewed themſelues void of all capacity, of reaſon, and intractable. Many ſpéeches and reaſonings paſſed in this conference, the people fell to mutiny agayne, and bidding the Abbot to make ſhort, proffered him like conditions as before. The Abbot cut them ſhort, and aſſured them that the day following after noone, the Lord Eſpernon ſhould giue them the law.
               The ſeditious Leagued Mere, whom we haue ſaid to haue béen brought vp in the houſe of Guyze, the ſchoole of treaſons and ſeditions, did heate the people by an aſſured promiſe, which hee made to them of an infallible ſuccour of the Lord of Aubeterre, who as hee ſayd was at hand: to whom alſo the Lord Vileroy, the Kings ſecretary, had written to that effect.
               The Abbot departing thence, went (not without payne and danger) to viſit the Lady Eſpernon, and commended her vnto a company of gentlemen, who were aſſembled there, and proteſted reuenge agaynſt them, which ſhould proffer her iniury.
               That beeing done, he returned to the caſtel, hauing nether ſ
                     •
                  ene the L. Bordes, nor any other of the gentlemen which were detayned priſoners in the Towne.
               The morrow after beeing the twelfth day of Auguſt, the alarum was geuen in the Towne by the Drum and Toxin, and as well the gentlemen, the people, the Leagued, and others who were not of the conſpiracie, were enforced to take armor to go to the breach, which they prepared and hoped to make in a weake place of the Caſtle wall, defended neither with any window, nor otherwiſe flanked. Some ſmall opening beeing made, the people preſented themſelues, where they were receaued: and there was flayne the Lord Fleurak, one of the Leaguers.
               About three a clocke in the morning, the people heard the trompets of the light horſemen of the Lord Eſpernon, which made them beleeue that ſuccou
                     •
                   was not farre. This aſſwaged much their fury, and on the contrary encouraged much the ſouldiers of the Citadell (which hetherto had done nothing) ſo that they let flee many ſhot of Harquebuzes, and certayne voleyes of Canon agaynſt the Cittie. The Lord Eſpernon hauing commaunded them ſo to doo from the top of the high tower of the Caſtell.
               At this new thundering from the Citadell, they of the Towne began to wauer, and to draw on agayne to parley, and do deſire that the Abbot would returne, and that they would harken to the propoſitions of the ſaid

Lord Eſpernon.
               
               The Abbot calling to remembrance the danger paſt, maketh ſome difficulty to goe forth agayne. But at length the Lord Eſpernon writeth, and  ſendeth by the ſayd Abbot what he wil require of them of the towne for the acknowledging of their fault. Agayne all came together about noone to the houſe of the Lord Argence.
               
               As they were all ready there to ſigne the agreement, behold a new commotion of the people, who will not compound: the reaſon was the arryuing into the towne of the Baron of Tonnerak, with diuers gentlemen of the League, alſo of captayne Caze Marſhall of the lodgings of the L. Aubeterre, who do aſſure them, that the ſayd Lord of Aubeterre will come with ſuccour to them the next day morning, with three hundred horſmen, and fiue hundred footmen.
               The Abbot by theſe occaſions was enforced to get him to the caſtle agayne with greater danger then at the firſt, by reaſon of the raging of this Leagued people. For they brought him by force before the Citadell, to forbid the Souldiers to diſcharge the ordinance agaynſt the towne: which thing notwithſtanding in a while after they continued to do, becauſe that the people aſſaulted the caſtell continually vppon a vayne hope, incited by thoſe leagued gentlemen newly come.
               The chiefeſt officers of the King, and Bourgeſes of the Citty, hauing duly conſidered in the Biſhops houſe, the danger wherin their citty ſtood, if ſo many ſtrangers on euery ſyde ſhould come in, ioyned themſelues with the cheefeſt Gentlemen agaynſt the reſt who were ſtubburne. They ſent agayne 2. of the chiefeſt Bourgeſes to the Lord Eſpernon, to beſeech him that it may pleaſe him that the Lord Tageus his kinſman newly arryued in the Suburbs with his companies, might ſigne and ſeale the agréement, to the which they added onely, that they who were detayned priſoners in the caſtell, ſhould be compriſed therein and ſet at liberty, according to the fayth which he had geuen them, promiſing of their part to do the like to them, whom they did detayne, and all that which had been taken in the houſes ſhould be reſtored.
               The Lord Eſpernon graunting vnto them their demaund, ſent againe the Abbot, who went forth with them of the towne to the Lord Tageus, to make him ſeale the compoſition, which was done about foure a clocke in the euening.
               Within a while after the trenches were broken, the people went away, the Lady Eſpernon was conducted by the ſayd Abbot into the caſtell, with all the priſoners detayned in the towne.
               The Lord Bordes entred the Citadell, the conſpiratours, and Maiors fellowes, who were priſoners in the caſtell were ſet at liberty.
               
                  Mere with his complices went forth out of the towne and retyred into

theyr houſes, vnder the conduct of the Lord Maumont captayne of light horſes. 
               
               The dead on both ſides were quietly buried, and namely the Maior, whoſe corps with the corps of his brother, were freely deliuered to their friends to be buried.
               When the agreement was concluded, it was nine and thirtie houres that neither the Lord Eſpernon nor any of his, had eate nor dronk. There was no more powder for the ſhot: he had determined the night following to iſſue forth vpon the enemies for to ſeaze vpon the well, hee alſo looked that night to be reſcued by his men: to be ſhort, by the ſinguler goodnes of God he eſcaped a perilous ſnare of the Leaguers & a marueilous great danger, for the which to auoyde, hee ſhewed himſelfe both valiaunt and watchfull, and if he would be thankfull to God for ſo great deliuerance, and conſider from whence, & for what cauſe theſe blowes came, he ſhould doe the part of a right noble man.
               About the ſelfe ſame time that theſe things were done at Engol
                        •
                     ſme againſt the Duke Eſpernon, the Lorde Autragues, gouernour of Orleans, ſent to the King, to proteſt obedience, with excuſe that the things which he had done in fauour of the League, had been for none other cauſe, then for zeale of the Catholick religion: but perceiuing that the chiefe Leaguers paſſed further then he thought, he wholly doth renounce & deteſt y• League, and vpon that proteſtation he was receaued in fauour by the King.
               Whileſt the King, after hee had ſent his writtes to the Prouinces, Townes, and Cities, to make thoyſe of their deputies, men of wiſdome, diſcretion, and louers of peace, to ſend with ſpeede to the States, preparing all things to reſort with a ſoft pace to Bloys, to the States.
               It is ſaid alſo, how the Leaguers peruerted all things, ſuborned all the moſt vile and accurſed traitors, that could be picked out in all France.
               
               It is ſaid alſo, how leaſt that execrable company might be ſpied or croſſed, they had obtained by the edict of reunion, that none of the reformed religion, or ſuſpected to fauour the ſame, and that none of the Princes of the bloud ſhoulde bee admitted to that houſe, leaſt they ſhoulde bee ſpyed when they ſhould go about to make proceſſe againſt their lawfull King, and naturall Prince.
               The King conſidering the ſhortnes of the time, reiourned his eſtates, vntill the beginning of October, following whatſoeuer other cauſes did moue him ſo to doo. But toward the latter end of September, he and his mother accompanied with the Duke of Guize, with all their traine, ariued at Bloys.
               
               The Princes of Monpenſier, County, and Soyſſons, did appeare at Bloys: and for becauſe the Prince County had ioyned himſelfe to the army of the Germanes the yeare before, his company was greatly ſuſpected, and

many of his friends, went about to perſwade him to ſend to the Pope for an abſolution: but in that following the counſell of his beſt friends and ſeruants, he did it no
                     •
                  . The Prince of Soyſſons had alreadie obtained a Bull  of the Pope, containing a pardon, for hauing followed the part of them of the religion, with a Renuoy for his abſolution to the Legat of Veniſe, who was alſo at the States: hee made great difficulties in the matter, ſo that they of the aſſembly had once reſolued to require the King, not to ſuffer the ſaide Prince to bee admitted, but at length it was found good to ſtay their ſute for that time.
               Whileſt theſe things aboue ſaid do paſſe ſo diuerſly in ſundry places, the great and mightie armie appoynted for Daulphine, vnder the leading of the Duke d' Mayne, dooth march, and at length arriued in Liomoys, & there continued long, daring not enter far into the Prouince of Daulphine, for feare of ſcalding, but ſoiourned vpon the borders betweene Liomoys, and Daulphine, as a man that came onely to ſee, whether he could make the hereticks afraide, or not.
               The King arriued at Bloys with all his traine, maketh readie all the ſolemnities fit for that aſſemblie, whileſt the deputies and aſſignes of the Prouinces doo make readie their inſtructions, and haſt to the place appoynted.
               The King hauing more truſt in his ſubiects, then his ſubiects were to be truſted of him, doth expect honeſt, wiſe, and indifferent deputies, & ſuch as would ſeeke onely the good of the Common wealth. But the Duke of Guize had ſo laboured of long time, and ſo reduced the people, that there was almoſt no citie, towne nor prouince in all France, but the complices of the Leaguers (vnder colour of zeale of religion) preuailed, in ſending ſuch as were altogether factious and deſirous of innouations, the Kings ſecret enemies, and moſt falſe traytors to their king and countrey, hyding al their intended treaſons vnder the old gabardin of the Catholike religion.
               Theſe conſpirators againſt God, their King and their Countrey, being come at length from euery part of the realme, the ſecond day of October  being the Lords day, the King cauſed a generall proceſſion to bee made with great ſolemnitie from the Temple of Saint Sauiour, which is in the court of the Caſtle vnto the Temple, commonly called our Ladie of helpe in the Suburbe 
                     Ʋienne, on the South ſide of the riuer Loyre.
               
               There was in this proceſſion great magnificencie and outward apparance of deuotion, but as little godlines & loue as could be. The King, the Quéenes, the Princes and Princeſſes, Lords & Ladies which were at the Court, & generally all the people, as well ſtrangers as inhabitants of that place, were at it, there they offered vnto their gods, which did ſtand gazing in their temples, with great ſtore of diſſimulation and hippocriſie. They carried in great pompe that Idoll, which commonly they doo call the corpus
                  
                  Domini, through the ſtreates, which were decked with tapiſtry, and other ſuch things, as they are accuſtomed to bee done that day, which they call  
                  corpus Christi day.
               In the ſaide proceſſion, the King with all the States, marched in this order following. The formoſt of all were the Frie
                     •
                  s, Monkes, and Abbots, like a ſwarme of Locuſts: after them followed ye deputies of the third eſtates foure & foure. They were followed of the nobilitie, and after them marched in battaile aray, the deputies of the Clergie in long gownes, and ſquare caps onely: next after them went the Archbiſhops, and Biſhops with their rochets: after the Biſhops, went their God, otherwiſe called by the Prophet, Idolum vastans, by ſome Corpus Domini, and by ſome Corpus Christi, & by ſome the Sacrament of the Altar. It was the ſame God, by whome the King with all his Lords and traine did dayly, and at euerie word ſweare by. That God was arayed in pure beaten Gold, and had beene ſo beaten and turmoyled by the hereticks, theſe 27. yeares before, that he was gone ſo weake, that it could not goe, but was carried verie demurely by the Biſhop of Aix in Prouance, vnder a Canapie. This Canapy could not goe neither, no more then their God, but was caried by foure Knights of the holy Ghoſt: they ſung continuallie ſo many gaudeamus, ſo many ſalue fest a dies, and ſo many aleluia, and ſo many ora pro nobis, and ſo many black ſanctus, that it was too bad, and that with ſuch melodie, that a man would haue thought that all the Cuckoos of the ſpring, and all the Owles of winter had mett together, to try who could make the pretier noyſe.
               The King followed that company, with the Queenes and Princes, and other Lords of the court. After they had walked their God through the ſtreats to take ayre, and to recreate him a little, hauing beene kept ſo long in very ſtraight and cloſe priſon: at length in that order they came all to the Temple of our Lady of help, where the Archbiſhop of Bourges iugled and charmed the Maſſe, plaied with his God, as the Cat with the mouſe, and at length eate him vp. The Biſhop of Eureulx babled out a Sermon as well as he could: And that done, haue with you to good cheare.
               This was ſuch a painfull iourney to thoſe ghoſtly fathers, but ſpecially for the Biſhop of Aix, to carie all the way ſuch a heauie fardell, that S. Chriſtopher was neuer more combred with his burthen, than this piller of the holy Church was with his. They would do nothing all that weeke, but eate, drink, ſleepe, and doe worſe, as theſe ghoſtly fathers can doe that well.
               The 9. day of Octob. the K. the Lords & deputies of ye three eſtats, were houſed together at the Friery of ye frantick franciſcā Friers. There they did eate ſo much raw fleſh, that the canibals of ye weſt Indies might haue ſurfeted with one halfe of that which was ſpent there. Blood they dranke

none, hoping ſhortly to fill their bellies with the blood of Saintes. Such as was the beginning of this aſſembly, ſuch was the end thereof,  as you ſhall ſee hereafter in the ſequell. It began with heatheniſh ſuperſtition and Idolatry, it ended with heatheniſh murthers and diſloyall rebellion.
               As this was done to confirme the vnion and correſpondence which was betweene them, for performing of their enterprize: of which thing by the meanes of this vnion euery man conceaued ſo good hope, that nowe they made no doubt but all would goe well.
               This done, the K. delayed the propoſition of the States to the ſixteenth of October, willing in the meane time the officers of the aſſembly in euery order to be choſen.
               For the Prieſts in the abſence of the Cardinall of Bourbon, & the Cardinall of Guyze, the Archbiſhop of Bourges was choſen preſident. The County Briſſak and Mignade were choſen Preſidents of the Nobilitie. The Prouoſt of Paris was for the third eſtate.
               But the headlings of the League, had greater things in their brayne than all this: for they were day and night conſulting how to make an end of all their labours.
               The ſixteenth day of October all the deputies of the States being aſſembled in the great Hall of the Caſtell, appoynted to that vſe, their places taken according to their order. The King followed, and accompanyed with his court, maketh an Oration to the aſſembly, by a long & doubtfull ſpeach, paynted with diuers tearmes of ſorrow: by the which he ſheweth, that his minde caried a remembraunce of the iniuries receiued by the Leaguers, from time to time, by the which he cōplayneth, his authority to haue decaied, and vniuſtly to haue beene debaſed.
               And firſt propoſeth the things which ought to be done in that aſſembly, to wit, the eſtabliſhing of Popery, the rooting out of hereſie, the ſetting of good order in the gouernement, the eaſe of his people, and reſtoring of his authority, proteſting that he is their lawfull King, giuen to them of God, and that he will not be, but that which he is, neither doth he couet greater authoritie or honour in this Realme than hee ought to haue.
               He proteſteth alſo of his great ſorrowe which he hath felt in the miſeries and oppreſſions of his ſubiects, acknowledging the ſame to bee procured by his and their offences in generall.
               Alſo he ſheweth the care which hee hath had to take away the cauſes of the ſayd miſeries, and how he hath tryed all the wayes that euer hee could d
                     •
                  uiſe, and following the auncient manner of the Realme (accuſtomed in ſuch a caſe) had aſſembled his eſtates for that intent, but that he hath been interrupted alwayes by new vprores, ſtirred vp to hinder his good mind and purpoſe, and to ouerthrow his good indeuours.
               
                  
And alſo complayneth that to bring to paſſe theſe things, and to make his labour in that behalfe taken fruſtrate: they haue peruerted by falſe,  ſiniſter, and malitious interpretations, the ſincerity of his meaning.
               And laſt of all, he complayneth of the partialities and corruption of the Deputies of prouinces, exhorting them to aſſiſt his vertuous and royall enterpriſes.
               He proteſteth of his zeale to popery, and good affection to Papiſts, which he hath teſtifyed by ſundry benefytes moſt largely beſtowed vppon them, & by the victoryes and conqueſts which he obtained againſt the heretikes, being then but a child, and that now being a man hauing more experience then euer he had, he hath alſo more wil and courage, which hee would haue playnly ſhewed in his voiage to Guyen entended, to haue béen performed in his owne perſon if the League had not let him.
               After theſe complaints and proteſtations, hee giueth the charge to the aſſembly, that when they haue conferred wiſely and aduiſedly, about their inſtrucions, they will ſpecially ſhew him the means howe to reforme and repreſſe ſwearing, and blaſphemies, and corruptions, in beſtowing eccleſiaſticall liuings; which he called ſimony, ſelling of offices, of iuſtice, which things he was about to reforme, when the League roſe vp in armour. Anno 1585.
               He promiſeth them, that hereafter he will make a better choyce of men, in prouiding them of dignities and offices.
               He commendeth to them the carefull prouiſion for the aduancement of learning, crafts, and traffick, to ſeeke for the meanes to cut off exceſſe and waſte, and to pull downe the exceſſiue price of things.
               He commendeth vnto them the royall authoritie, and the ancient laws, for the preſeruation of the ſame.
               As for the feare which they haue co
                     ••
                  eiued to fall hereafter, in the gouernement of an heretick Prince, as he hath prouided therefore already by his Edict of preunion, ſo hee pretendeth to make it in the next Seſſion a fundamentall law of the Realme.
               He willeth them to prouide for the eaſe of his ſubiectes, for the reformation of his reuenues, tributes and treaſury, ſo that conſideration be had to the entertaining of the royall dignity and publike charges: promiſeth for his part to reforme himſelfe and his houſe, exhorteth them to goe faithfully about their buſineſſe.
               And calling heauen and earth to witnes, proteſteth the fayth of God and men, that the fault ſhall not remayne in him if the realme be not reformed, but in them if they do abandon their lawfull King in ſuch an holy & laudable action.
               Laſt of all, citeth them to appeare before the righteous Iudge, who ſhal make open their craft, hipocriſyes, and diſſimulations, and puniſh their

treachery and vnfaithfulneſſe, in caſe they do not their duty in this matter.
               The King hauing ended his 
                     •
                  peech, the Lord keeper of the Seales began, by the Kings commaundement, to open the matter, to be intreated  of in that aſſembly more at large: and hauing ſpoken of the originall, Ordinance, Power, Authority, and of the benefites thereof.
               Firſt, he exhorteth the Prieſts to propound vnto the people the word of God, which ſayth, he is liuing, full of efficacy, and more pearcing then a two edged ſword: and confirme the ſame in their hartes by vertuous life, ſhewing that for lacke of dooing theſe things, on their parts had iſſued out all the corruptions and miſeryes of the realme: but all theſe good ſpeeches are aeren verberare, laterem lauare, oleum & operam perdere.
               
               Secondly, hee directeth his ſpeech vnto the nobility, ſhewing them what their dutie was, how they ſhould excell in all iuſtice, goodnes and godlines, and ſpecially to aſſiſt the king in obeying him in the execution of iuſtice, tantundem efficit.
               
               He ſheweth them the great & execrable ſwearing and blaſphemyes, to be much vſed among them: willeth them to follow the ancient manner of the nobility of France, which was to ſweare in the word and faith of a gentleman, and that with great reuerence and circumſpection: ſheweth them the great miſchiefs which do procéed out of duels, fraies, or priuy combats, abhorred in all ages of all good chriſtians, and that they ſhould ſhew themſelues valiant in commaunding ouer their owne affections.
               Thirdly, hee ſpake vnto the third eſtate, whereof the iudges and miniſters of iuſtice did hold the firſt roome, and vpon which all Monarchies, ſoueraignties and powers are grounded and ſtabliſhed. Sheweth the ouerthrow of the diſtributiue iuſtice done by the delayes, ſubtiltyes, diſguyſing of the truth, and malicious interpretation of the law, which thinges commonly are done euery where, attributing all theſe faults partly vnto particular coueteouſnes of the miniſters of iuſtice, partly to their ignorance and wicked life, partly to the multiplicity of offices in the realme.
               He ſheweth the horrible faults committed in not obſeruing the lawes for the puniſhment of ſwearers, blaſphemers, players, vnthrifts, vſurers, vniuſt purchaſſars, deceauers in ſelling, vncleane perſons, & ſuch as do reſort to brothel houſes, and ſuch like vic
                     •
                  s. Willeth them to conſider the maintenance of royall dignity, his charges and debtes: and laſt of all, to bee carefull to preſerue the Catholike religion.
               The Prieſts, Nobility (for the moſt part) Deputies, Commiſſioners, and Aſſignes of the Prouinces appointed for that aſſembly, did harken to that doubtfull, yet wiſe and graue orations of the King, and Lord keeper, with a mery countenance, as it ſeemed, but with a diſſembling and treacherous hart. So that they, who for his vndooing and ouerthrow, were aſſembled and ſworne, fed him with fancies.
               
                  
And firſt the Archbiſhop of Bourges doth cloſly couer all the diſſimulations and traitrous thoughtes of the Prieſtes, with a low courteſy and  great grammarcy: and wee hartely thanke you for your great paines, in ſo opening the way to the aſſembly, prayſeth his great eloquence and wiſedome, compareth him with Vliſſes, and Neſtor: both he and the reſt of his fellowes do ſhew themſelues ready, not onely to kiſſe his foot, but alſo to runne into his tayle with their noſes, if it pleaſe him to giue them leaue gratia ſit auribus.
               
               He exhorteth him to execute his charge, which (ſaith he) is to perſecute the heretikes, as he tearmeth them, to eſtabliſh popery, and with tooth and nayle to defend the holy Mother the church: (by holy Church, hee meaneth the ſwarms of Maſmonging Prieſtes, and the legions of the Fryery and Monkery) which thing if hee doth, he doth not onely promiſe him the long life of Argantonius and Neſtor, but alſo euerlaſting life: becauſe belike the more bloud of the Saynts he ſhall ſpill, (for that is to 
                     •
                  efend the church) the more he ſhall merit to win heauen.
               When the Archbiſhop had ended his flattering Oration, the Baron of Seuecy in the name of the Nobility doth awake the King of his ſleep, bloweth the Trompet, ſoundeth the alarum, crying out vppon heretikes, ſet vppon heretikes, down with heretikes, ſtrike, kill, murther, ſpoyle, roo
                     •
                   out heretikes, reſtore the church, eaſe the people, eſtabliſh the realme in the firſt dignity and brightnes, proffereth to the King in that reſpect, and in the name of the nobility, to expoſe all vnto the laſt drop of theyr bloud.
               This being ended, the Prouoſt of Paris, leaſt he ſhould ſeeme to haue neither ſaide nor done any thing, began in that kinde of rhetorick which hee was wont to vſe among the ſeditious of Paris, when he ſharpened them againſt the King, at the laſt rebellion in May of the ſame yeare onely, altering the name of King, into the name of hereticks. So that as there was that day many good words caſt away, without dooing any good, ſo there was many cruell, bitter and ſeditious words vttered in the Kings preſence, to prouoke him to crueltie and ſlaughter, by it to lull him aſleepe, to caſt him into ſecuritie, to take away from him all miſtruſt the more eaſily, and at ſome conuenient to oppreſſe him.
               The 18. of October, the King came into the hall with the body of the States, for the ſecond ſeſſion, where he began to ſay as followeth.
               Sirs, I haue teſtified vnto you, on Sonday laſt, the deſire which I haue alwaies to ſee, during my raigne, all my faithfull ſubiects reunited in the true Catholick Romiſh religion, vnder that authority which it hath pleaſed God to giue me ouer you: and hauing to the ſame effect made my edict of Iuly laſt paſt, that it might be holden for a fundamental law of this realme, to binde both you and your poſteritie, to the intent that now the ſame may be confirmed before me, as made by the common conſent of you al, and that

no man may pretend ignorance of the nature and ofſpring of it, and that it may haue the marke of a fundamentall law of the realme for euer; I will that this edict bee now read with a loude voyce, and bee knowne of all,  and after that, ſworne vnto by all the States, to the which thing, I will ſweare firſt of all, that my holy intent may be knowne both of God and men.
               The King hauing ended his ſpeach, commaunded Ruze, one of his Secretaries of eſtate, to reade with a loud voyce, the declaration which he had made the ſame day, vpon his edict of reunion.
               Wherein he firſt ſheweth his great and feruent deſire, which hee hath had from his youth, and the noble acts which he hath done, for the rooting out of hereſie: alſo how he hath vſed all gentle waies, to call the hereticks to the holy Church againe.
               But conſidering that all this would not ſerue, but onely to make them more obſtinate, he dooth declare himſelfe, to haue made the edict of reunion, for an irreuocable lawe of the realme, condemning already by this his declaration, all ſuch as will not ſweare nor obey the ſame, as guiltie of high treaſon.
               This declaration being read, then followed the edict of reunion by the ſame Secretary, which being done, the Arſhbiſhop of Bourges made a long exhortation to the States, vpon the ſolemne oath to be taken by the King, and required alſo to be taken by his ſubiects, for the obſeruing of the ſaide edict.
               This faire and learned ſermon, about a naughtie matter, and to couer their diſſembling heart.
               Firſt, did ſpeak of the truth, and of lying, then ſhewed the vſe of an oath, the neceſſitie, the forme and qualities thereof.
               Secondly, he ſpeaketh of the Church, which he ſaith in ſome reſpect to be viſible, and in ſome reſpects inuiſible, and that it is gathered of diuers nations and degrees of men, without acceptation and diſtinction of perſons.
               He ſaith that it is called the Church of Rome, in none other ſence, then that it imbraceth the word of God, and true doctrine, which S. Peter there taught, to the which all other Churches haue vnited themſelues, by a generall and vniuerſall conſent: hee ſaith that the triumphant and militant Church, is but one in effect. And that this Church is grounded onely vpon the ſtone, which is Chriſt, the true foundation and head corner ſtone thereof, and that it hath ſuſtained many aſſaultes, which haue not preuailed. He ſaith alſo, that out of that Church, there is nothing but death, and that hee who will not holde the ſame for his mother, cannot haue God for his Father.
               Out vpon the heretick, 
                     ••
                  e vpon fowle hereticks, ſo many words concerning 
                     Note.
                  
                  
the Church, ſo many hereſies, or elſe they make great iniurie to the Hugonets, whoſe death they doo conſpire here in this aſſembly, for holding  ſo much in a manner, as this ſaucie Biſhop d
                     •
                  re ſpeake here, before one of the greateſt Potentates of the world. I lictor, colliga manus, caput obnubi
                        •
                     o, quadrupedem constringito, &c. Loe, the omnipotent power that ſhauelings haue, they can make hereſie good doctrine, and true doctrine hereſie, when they liſt. Theſe things being ſpoken by an Archbiſhop, are no hereſie: being ſpoken by another man, as Theodorus Beza, or ſome other which they doo not fancie, there will bee picked out nineteene hereſies, a quarter and a halfe.
               Thirdly, he ſheweth what a great matter vnion is, but ſpecially in the Church, therefore hee exhorteth them, being of one faith, lawe, and beliefe, vnder one Sauiour, in one and the ſame Church of one nation and tongue, to vnite themſelues for the defence of the ſame holy Church.
               Fourthly, he preuenteth by an obiection, that whereof they may be charged, ſaying, we (meaning the Prieſtes) doo not proclayme wa
                     •
                  re: no, no, (ſaith he) the Church dooth not thirſt after bloud, but we doo deſire them who are out of the way, to returne into the right way, and if they bee obſtinate, wee doo deſire that they may be cut off, as gangr
                     •
                  ned and putrified members.
               See here godly Chriſtian reader, what hipocriſie goeth about to doo: this Biſhop would faine ſee the Kings horſes to ſwim in the bloud of them 
                     Note.
                   of the reformed religion, and bloweth the trompet, giueth the watch word to the onſet, vnder the colour of reuniting the Catholicks, yet hee would not for all the goods in the world, that men ſhould thinke that it were done by his approbation, conſent and counſell, and therefore he ſaith, that the holy Church ſeeketh not to ſpill bloud, but that they that are in error may be cō
                  uerted into the right way.
               Now my Lord, ſhall I bee ſo bould to ſpeake one word to your Lordſhip: what way will you follow to conuert them from their errour, as you ſay they are in? my Lorde Biſhop will anſwer, that hee will firſt ſhewe them their errour, and then teach them the certitude of his doctrine.
               Then my good Lord (I pray you be not angry) why haue you denied this way to the King of Nauarre, & to the reformed Churches of France, which onely thing they haue deſired?
               When once you haue followed that way, and haue conuerted them of errour, and taught them a better way, if they ſhew themſelues obſt
                     ••
                  at, cut them off as rotten and gangrened members in deed.
               But belike this is the methode which you will follow againſt them, you will drawe a forme of a
                     •
                  iuration, in the firſt part you will make them to abiure and renounce that forme of doctrine, which they ſay is grounded

vpon Gods worde, the infallable rule of veritie; then you will lay downe your fantaſies & traditions, flowing out of the darke illumination of your  owne brayne, and that you will make them beléeue for an vndoubted truth vpon your ſingle aſſeueration, and all the reaſons which you bring for the confirmation of theſe your fantaſies, you lay downe ſic volo, ſic iubeo. I pray you (my good Lord) tell me whoſe voyces be theſe?
               But what if they will not take your ſic volo, ſic iubeo, for reaſons which may induce them to ſubſcribe to your abiuration, and will not ſuffer themſelues to bee cut off neither, being not conuincted of error, but ſtand to defend themſelues againſt an vniuerſall contumelie, iniurie and violence? What will you doo?
               My Lord Biſhop hearing this newes: what, will they neither beléeue vs, neither ſuffer themſelues to be burned for our pleaſures? Now all my Lords religion is turned into madneſſe; his zeale to rage; his authoritie to tyrannie, and his mildnes (that holy Church doth not couet after blood) is turned to murther.
               Then my Lord in his furie and in the trance of his hart he crieth: Open the Kings Arſeuall, bring foorth his Ordinance, gather together his men of armes and footmen, and if néede bee the whole Realme, ſet vpon them, kill them, ſlaſh them, cut them, ſpoyle them, murther them, and worſe if you can. This is not to warre (quoth my Lord) no, no, holy Church thirſteth not after bloud.
               But here is good play which I doo offer you, ſeeing that you muſt néedes to warre, there is in France many legions of diuells of your haire, put on your carnall armour, (for the ſpirituall armour you haue loſt long agoe) let your Myter ſerue you for an Helmet, your Rochets for Corſlets, your Surpleſſes for ſhirts of male, your Croſſes for pikes, your Croſier ſtaues for Launces, your red roundaches which the Cardinalls doo weare vpon their heads, for Targets; your Holy water taſſels for Clubbes; put on your Spectacles too, that you may the better aime at your enemie; call vppon all the he Saints and ſhe Saints, which the Popes haue deified with thouſands of Ora pro nobis; ſet you all in battell aray, be fiue againſt one, méete the heretikes if you dare in y• plaine open field. I aduiſe you, though you be deſperate enough, not to come within their reach, leaſt that with baſtinadoes the pockes and the gowtes be wrong out of your rotten boanes againſt your wills.
               But to returne to the purpoſe, he exhorteth the States to vnite themſelues, and to ſweare the foreſayd edict: which ſpeaches being ended, the King tooke the word thus.
               Sir, you haue heard the contents of mine edict, and vnderſtand the qualitie of the ſame, the greatnes and worthines of the oth which you be about now to ſweare. And ſeeing that I perceiue your iuſt deſires to agree with

mine, I will ſweare, and doo ſweare before God in a good conſcience, the obſeruing of this mine edict as long as God ſhall continue my life here,  and will, & do ordaine that it may be kept for euer, as a fundamentall law of this realme, and in witneſſe of the correſpondence and vniuerſal conſent of all the States of my Realme, you ſhall now ſweare the obſeruation of mine edict of vnion all with one voyce, you Churchmen laying your hand vpon your breaſt, and the reſt lifting vp their hands to heauen: which thing was done with great reioyſing and acclamation of all men, crying, God ſaue the King.
               Now by this, hee in his owne perſon and his ſubiects haue ſworne an immortall warre in his Realme, of which thing he commaundeth an act to bee made in writing to ſerue for a perpetuall remembrance of the fact. The act is ſuch as followeth.
               This day the 18. of October 1588. the King ſitting at Bloys in the aſſemblie of his generall ſtates of his Realme, hath ſworne in his faith and word of a King, to obſerue this preſent lawe in all that ſhall concerne his Maieſtie. Alſo the Lords, Cardinalls of Bourbon, Vendoſme, Princes of Soyſſons and Monpenſier, Cardinalls of Guize, Leuoncourt and Gundy, Dukes of Guize, Nemours, Neuers and Retes, the Lord Kéeper, and many other Lords, aſwell of his Counſell as Commiſſioners of the three eſtates of his Realme, haue ſworne to kéepe and entertaine inuiolable the ſayd lawe, as well in their proper names, as in the names of the Prouinces which haue ſent them to the ſaid aſſemblie of the States.
               This thing being done, the King teſtified the great deſire which he had to make an end of this aſſemblie, and to prouide for all his ſubiects vppon their iuſt complaints and grieues: and for that end promiſed not to depart out of Bloys, vntill the finall end of the ſaid eſtates: commanding likewiſe them of that aſſemblie, not to depart by any meanes: whereof they gaue him moſt humble thankes.
               The aſſemblie diſmiſſed, the King, the Quéenes, Princes and Princeſſes, Cardinalls, Prelates, and other Lords, with all the deputies of the States went to the Church S. Sauiour, there to ſing te Deum, where they were alwayes accompanied with a generall voyce of the people, crying, God ſaue the King; ſhewing an extreame ioy and gladneſſe for their owne calamities and miſeries which they had ſworne.
               Now (good Chriſtian Reader) conſider well three things in this hiſtory, to ſee Gods wrath, iuſtice and mercy; the thing which they haue done; the miſeries which haue followed; and the gracious godnes of God in vpholding the ruines and miſerable fall of that kingdome.
               For firſt in this ſeſſion, Gods wrath drawing them to work, to ſweare, and to reioyce in their owne dreadfull deſtruction, they haue degraded and diſherited the Princes of the moſt noble and ancienteſt family of the

world, from that inheritance and preheminence, which God, Nature, and Law had appoynted vnto them: whoſe aunceſtors haue gouerned that kingdome with iuſtice and equitie, aboue thirteene hundred yeares: And  now without cauſe, contrary to Gods ordinance, Lawe, and Nature, to plant another family vnknowen in France, within theſe threeſcore and ten yeares, & the performance of this moſt vniuſt exheredation and degradation, they haue ſworne to execute an oath more damnable than witchcraft, ioyning to that iniurie the perſecution of the true church of God. But O thou moſt higheſt, rayſe vp thy ſelfe, bruſe them like a Potters veſſell. What hath followed that execrable oath? Firſt, the moſt wretched and infamous death of the chiefeſt authors of this coniuring and witchcraft. Secondly, an vniuerſall rebellion againſt him, who ſware firſt and miniſtred the oath to others.
               I am not a Prophet, nor the ſonne of a Prophet, yet thus much I dare affirme, grounded vpon the nature of Gods iuſtice, who ſayth, that who ſhall do thoſe abominations ſhall die the death. That peace ſhall neuer be reſtored to France, as long as there is one left aliue of that damnable and accurſed company, who with that abomination haue poluted the land, either in their mind haue giuen approbation vnto that accurſed execration and vntill the Lord hath waſhed away the polution of their execrable deede with their owne blood.
               Laſt of all, here we haue to conſider the Lordes prouidence, in releeuing of the afflicted States and tottering kingdomes, that he whom they had ſworne ſhould not raigne ouer them, him I ſay the Lord hath ſet vp, and annoyuted him with the oyle of grace and wiſedome, and ſaid that he ſhall raigne ouer them, that it may appeare that his Scepter is of God. And wheras likewiſe they haue ſworn the rooting out of Gods truth, the Lord wil make it floriſh vnder their noſes, & vnder the authoritie of him whome they haue reiected.
               Here alſo is another thing worthy to be noted, that the Lorde in all ages, for to reſtore peace, iudgement, iuſtice, and religion, in any decayed ſtate, hath rayſed vp Princes, endued with heroycall giftes and graces, called by the ancients, Nemeſis, & by the Prophet Pſal. 51. the principall ſpirit of force, conſtancie, iuſtice, wiſedome, counſell, and godlines, by the which crooked things are made ſtraight, and all things reduced to their order. For as fortitude in an hot and vnwiſe nature is tranſformed into a barbarous cruelty & rage, ſo the ſame being in a wiſe nature, gouerneth the victory with mercy and mild
                     •
                  nes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  ad benficentiam. The experience teacheth vs, that if God had not giuen his principall ſpirit to this King now there raigning, to direct the valiantnes of his courage and the proſperous ſucceſſe of his victories, with clemencie and mildenes, one fourth part of France by this day had beene reduced into a miſerable wildernes.
               
                  
But thou O great King, iſſued out of Noble race, gird thy loynes with force and might, goe on ſtill and follow the Lord, who goeth before  thee, and leadeth thee by the hand, to reſtore the decayed ruins, brought into that kingdome by the obſtinate and vnwiſe counſels of the Valoys, and the accurſed ſnares of Sycophants, whom they haue foſtered and nouriſhed in their boſoms, by the bloud of theyr ſubiects, and the fatnes of their people.
               It is ſaid before, how immediatly after the making of ye edict of reunion,  the Duke Mercure out of Britayne, with certayne companies inuaded the low Poytow, intending to lay the ſiege before Montagne, and how hee was defeated and ouerthrowen by the King of Nauarre: after which ouerthrow the ſaid K. being ſtrengthened with new forces of the Lords Trimouille and Boulay, intended to haue reſcued the Lord Eſpernon, who ſtood in great daunger in Engoleſme by a conſpiracy of the Leaguers: but vnderſtanding that the tumult there was pacifyed, went to Rochel, where he appointed an aſſembly of the reformed Churches of France, there to take aduice by a generall meeting, what they had to do agaynſt the cruell (and neuer heard of) conſpiracie of the King and the Leaguers, who had ſworne the vtter ſubuertion and vndooing of the King of Nauarre and reformed churches: hee ſendeth therefore in the moneth of September his meſſengers into all Prouinces of France, willing them to ſend theyr commiſſioners and deputies to Rochel in Nouember next.
               The King of Nauarre hauing done all neceſſary diſpatches for that thing in ye latter end of September, departed from Rochel, intending to lay the ſiege before the caſtle of Beauuoyre, lying vpon the Sea in the low Poytow, and paſſing not farre from Niort, ſome of his company aduaunced very nigh, vpon them that iſſued out of the town, not much further then their Suburbs. The Lord Valette great prouoſt of France, who alwaies had followed the King of Nauarre, and a gentleman named Peray, ſet vpon them and gaue them a hot ſkirmiſh, wherein the ſaid Lord and gentleman were ſlaine, fighting moſt valiantly.
               The Lieutenant of the towne beeing a moſt ſeditions Leaguer, with other of his fellows, ſhewed themſelues no leſſe then inſolēt in committing great indignities vpon their dead bodies, whom they cauſed to bee drawen through the ſtreetes of Niort, by the common people.
               From thence hee tooke his iourney toward the ſayd Beauuoyre, as is ſayd, a Towne and Caſtell vppon the Sea, a place of great importance as well for the ſituation as for the commodities thereof, becauſe it holdeth the Iles about in ſubiection: out of the which great reuenues are receaued by reaſon of the ſalt and other commodities. The King lodged his footmen in the Suburbs of Cliſſon.
               
               There he receaued newes, that certayne regiments of footmen of the enemies had paſſed Loyre at Saumure: which thing cauſed him to diſlodge

in great haſt, to goe to charge them, but the enemy being aduertiſed therof, repaſſ
                     •
                  d the Loyre before that he could come to them. 
               
               Therefore he tooke his way toward Nantes, and in the low Goleyn with all his army. There the Lorde Trimouille preſented him the Captaine Bonneueau, whom he had diſcomfited and taken at Doway a walled town.
               The ſayd King went to lodge at 
                     Ʋretow, a little league from Pilmil 
                   ſuburbe of Nantes, and there paſſed his army vpon the caulſies ouer the riuer Seure: the other part of his army paſſed the ſayd riuer by a Foord at  
                  Mounieres, and came to lodge at Touſche Liuoſiniere.
               
               The morow after, the fourth of October, he paſſed before the Caſtell of Maſchecow, which he viewed, the Marquis Beliſle beeing within, did let flye a ſhot of Culuerine.
               Paſſing further with his companies of men of arms, his light horſmen and Harquebuziers compaſſed the caſtell of Beauuoyre, wherin was in gariſon a company of footmen, who at the arriuing of the King forſooke the Towne and retyred into the Caſtell. The Towne beeing deliuered to him, he left within the towne his Harquebuſiers, and he with his troupes went to lodge at Saint Geruays, within halfe a league of Beauuoyre. There arriued vnto him the Lords Montluet and Pleſsis from Roch
                        •
                     l, with a faire company of nobility. After they had embarked in the hauen of Rochel, two canons, two culuerings, gabions, and other munition of warre, which they had conducted to Saynt Gyles hauen, diſtant from Beauuoyre about ſeuen leagues. But this furniture could not arriue at Beauuoyre in fifteene dayes after the ſiege was begun, by reaſon of contrary windes, and continuall rayne, with the diſcommodity of the waies, the countrey beeing very mooriſh.
               The ſouldiers were in the water to the mid legge, with other great diſcommities: notwithſtanding, they ceaſed not to make trenches vnto the very ditch, out of the which he drewe great ſtore of water: ſo that the platformes being made, the Ordinance brought with much ado, being placed and leuelled, he began the 21. of October to batter, and after 30. Canon ſhot, they who were within ſeeing the forces prepared againſt them, did chooſe rather to prooue the clemencie of the ſaid King in yéelding, then to ſtay a greater batterie and the extremitie of an aſſault, which infallibly would be giuen them: therefore they would parley and yeeld. The capitulation was ſuch, that they ſhould render their Colours, ſhould goe foorth with armour and baggage, but their match out. They went foorth about 53. perſons, and were ſafely conducted to the Iland Bouing, whether they ſayd they would retyre.
               The King of Nauarre loſt at that ſiege two Gentlemen, to wit, the Lord Drow, one of his houſe, and one Villebeau, Captaine of one of the companies of the Lord Salignak.
               
               
                  
The inhabitants of the Iland Bouing had promiſed to the King of Nauarre, (who had vſed them very courteouſly) that they would ſuffer none  of the enemies to enter their Iland: which promiſe they kept not.
               The Lord of Guize (though very buſie at the States at Bloys) yet ceaſed not, but as he was very buſie to ſupplant the King at home, ſo was he very diligent to prouide for the affayres of warre, and for to croſſe in this ſiege the King of Nauarre, if he could. He ſent to the Duke Mercure the regiment of S. Paule, the fayreſt and moſt dreadfull of all the companies of the League.
               The 22. of October and the morrowe after the rendering of the Caſtle of Beauuoyre, the inhabitants of the Iland Bouing, againſt their promiſe, receiued two of the fayreſt companies of the ſayd regiment of S. Paule. But they had not ſo ſoone entered into the Iland, but that immediatly they tooke ſuch dreadfull feare, that without any ſhame they ſent a Drumme to the ſaid king, to beſeech him to giue them ſafe conduct to retyre into a place of ſafetie. They had ſome reaſon ſo to doo, for the feare of his ſworde put them in a fearefull apprehenſion. For he had ſo prouided that they were at his mercie, hauing ſent his nauall armie to a place called Collet, aboue Bourgneuf of Rhe, which was the place where of force they muſt needes paſſe by. But the accuſtomed clemencie of that Prince ſuſtayned and eaſed the feare of theſe two companies, who truſted that he would be no leſſe fauourable to them, then hee hath accuſtomably béen vnto others, who did ſubmit themſelues vnto him. Whereof they themſelues (among many other examples) are and ought to bee hereafter witneſſes: for although hée might haue cut them in peeces, yet of his good will (leauing a marke of heroicall humanitie vnto the poſteritie) he gaue them their liues & armour, with a paſport for their ſafe returne, ſo that they ſhould retyre the ſelfe ſame day.
               He forgaue alſo the Iland men, who had falſified their faith, and had rendered themſelues worthie of ſharpe puniſhment. This clemencie to them ſhewed did ſo touch them, that they haue remayned euer ſince moſt faithfull, being otherwiſe moſt deuoted and addicted vnto poperie.
               The ſaide King being deſirous to paſſe into the Iland to ſée it, could not doo it for the contrarie windes: hee left there for gouernour the Lorde Quergroy, a Gentleman of Britayn, of great reputation, with a neceſſarie Gariſon.
               And vpon the aduertiſements which he receaued of the great preparation, and marching of the royall army, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Neuers, who deſcended into Poytow, he departed thence the 24. of October with all his army, taking his way to Montagne, where hee left the regiment of the Lorde Preau, ordering all neceſſary things for the defence of that place, which as was thought ſhould be the firſt place, where to that army

would lay ſiege, which alſo hee determined to reſcue in conuenient time: he deuided his gariſons in the places, which he iudged neceſſary, and among the reſt, he put Gariſons in Mauleon, Ganache, Talmond, Fontenay, 
                   and other places.
               That being done, he tooke his way to Rochel, to be at the aſſembly of all  the reformed Churches of France, which hee had called thethere for diuers and notable conſiderations. The deputies of all the Churches of all ſorts and qualities, ſtayed ſometime in Rochel for him, where the ſaid King being ariued, receaued them with great contentation, and according to his naturall facility and mildenes, to the great reioyſing of all men, which hoped for much fruite of this aſſembly, for the preſeruation of the realme, of the Kings authority (againſt whome the Leaguers, vnder colour of the States at Bloys, did worke dangerous conſpiracies) and for the iuſt defence of them of the religion, ſo long time, ſo cruelly intreated in all partes of the realme.
               The ſaid King being certified of the comming of all the deputies of this aſſembly, of all degrees and conditions, Lordes, Nobles, Iudges, Kinges officers, Maiors, Aldermen, and other notable men of the Prouinces, gaue an opening vnto the ſaide aſſembly, by the inuocation of the name of God, the 14. of Nouember, in the towne houſe of Rochel, aſſiſted by the Lordes of Turenne, his Lieutenant general, in the prouince of Guienne. Trimouille, Colonell of the light horſes, and many other Lords, Barons, Vicounts, Gentlemen, and other his counſelers. The ſame day were called all the deputies for the aſſembly, & the authority which euery one had of the Prouinces, for whome they were ſent.
               There was almoſt no Prouince in France, which had not ſent their deputies, to wit, deputies were ſent out of Gaſcoyn, Amignak, Albret, and other places, from beyond the riuer Garonne, out of the Prouinces of Britayne, Anjou, Tourene, Berry, Lodunoys, the Ile of France, Normandy, Orleans, Picardy, Champaigne, and others beyond the riuer Loyre, out of the Prouince of high and lowe Languedock, Daulphine, Rowergue, Mountalban, and out of the gouernement of Terrides: there were alſo out of the gouernement of Xainctonge, on this ſide Charante, out of all the Iles of Xainctonge, other deputed for Rochel, for the Prouinces of Limoſin, Perigord, Agenoys, for the towne of Bergerak: in particular, for the Prouinces of Poytow, and Engomoys, for the principalitie of Orenge, and many others, for the baily weekes, townes, and comunalties, with ſufficient ſhew of their charges and commiſſions.
               The 16. day of Nouember, after publick inuocation of Gods name, the King of Nauarre accompanied, as is aboue ſaid, repreſented to the whole aſſembly the chiefeſt cauſes of their conuocation; the great neceſſities which ſhould moue euery man to oppoſe himſelfe to the enemies, whoſe intent

was too apparant (for they went euen againſt the King and the whole eſtate) he ſhewed that hee had hetherto, in ſo iuſt and godly a cauſe, ſpared  neither goods nor life, as his former actions could teſtifie, and that if theſe miſchieues ſhould growe to the worſt, he for his part felt his courage to be increaſed of God, in the reſolution which he had long agoe taken, to ſpend therein, euen the laſt drop of his bloud, and the laſt pennie of all his goods, and deſired onely, that the world would iudge in this his reſolution of his good intent, as indifferently, and truely, as himſelfe ſincerely had walked before God, and determined to doo hereafter.
               He ſhewed how the long continuance of war, and liſence of armes, had to his great griefe, bred and brought in many diſorders, to the which hee required them, as well it might bée, to prouide both in reſpect of the glorie of God, of the King, of the realme, and in reſpect of all priuat men. Prayed them that were of that aſſembly, to bring with them cleane ſpirites, voyde of all paſſion, endued with the loue of the common wealth: which thing if they did, hee aſſured himſelfe that God would bleſſe their counſell, and woulde make them to reape much fruite to his glory, and the deliuerance of his children. Hee repreſented vnto them, the good and proſperous euents, which might enſue vpon their firme and faſt vnitie in a cauſe ſo iuſt and holy as this, that preſently was in queſtion, by eſtabliſhing of all good order: towards the which
                     •
                  auſe, hee exhorted all the aſſembly to continue as well affected as they had done before, and to bring ſo much the more aboundantly, as the nouelties and late alterations, happened by the malice of the enemies, did moſt euidently require.
               Aboue all things, hee willed them to prouide for that which imported moſt of all, the glorie and ſeruice of God, the good order, policie, and Diſcipline of the Church. And to auoyde the prouoking of Gods wrath, by ſwearing, blaſphemies, rapes, whordomes, robberies, forbidden games, and other diſorders, who had crept among many, by the vnhappines of war: the required that the lawes made, for repreſſing of ſuch things, might bee ſtraightly enioyned, commaunded and obſerued by the Magiſtrates, without any diſſimulation, ſupport or reſpect of perſons: commaunding alſo the Magiſtrates to aſſiſt euery one in his behalfe, vppon great paines, that the Diſcipline of the Church may haue a due authoritie and execution.
               He willeth them alſo, that the poore may bee aſſiſted, with certaine ordinary ſummes of money, which ſhould be dedicated to the ſame effect, according to the forme of the books, that ſhould be made for that intent, with the authority of certaine chiefe officers, magiſtrates, conſuls, or commiſſioners appoynted for that purpoſe.
               Alſo that charges and offices bee giuen to men capeable, and ſufficient for the due execution of the ſame, to the eaſe, & contentation of euery one:

and as for other orders, it ſhould be ordayned as the ſeſſions, and propoſitions ſhould be made in order.
               All the aſſembly gaue moſt humble thankes to his Maieſtie, for the care  which it pleaſed him to haue, as well in particular of the ſaid Churches, as true and lawfull nurſer, protector, and defender of the ſame, as alſo in reſpect of the publick peace, welfare, and preſeruation of all, with proffer of their moſt humble ſeruice, and obeiſſance for ſo good, ſo holy, and ſo lawfull pu
                     •
                  poſes, proteſting with a moſt conſtant reſolution, to employ their perſons, their liues, & their goods, to fauour ſo good and rightfull a cauſe, with praier vnto God, to continue in him his bleſſing and fauour, for his honor and glory, for the preſeruation of his Church, for the good and quietnes of the publick eſtate.
               The Seſſions, propoſitions, reſolutions, and ordinances, were afterwarde made, and continued in good order in the preſence of the ſaid king, vpon the diuers arguments which were there to be handled.
               And firſt they entreated of the glory and ſeruice of God, next of iuſtice, of a good counſell, and good ordering of the ſame: then afterward of the mannaging of the treaſure, gifts, paſports, officers, order of warre, commiſſions, bootyes, priſoners of warre, protections, 
                     •
                  taking of townes and places, of the ſafety of huſbandmen, and many other ſtatutes, as euery one of the deputies of the Prouinces was ſeuerally charged by their remembrances and inſtructions.
               Many ſuch things were there determined, vntill the diſſolution of the ſayde aſſembly, which was made (the ſayd King ſitting accompanied as  aboue, in the preſence of all the deputies) on the Lords day being the 17. day of December, after the preaching of the worde, and inuocation of Gods name, with the vnitie, conſent & voluntary approbation of al men, to the glory of God, and for the Kinges ſeruice, the preſeruation of the Crowne and Realme, reſtabliſhment of the State, and for the defence of all faithfull Frenchmen, againſt all enemies leagued, mutinous, and ſeditious perſons, who directly or indirectly, would ſeeke the trouble and euerſion of the ſame.
               Whileſt theſe things did paſſe, and ſo contrary aſſemblies, did take  contrary counſells and reſolutions, to worke ſo contrary effects, (for at Bloys counſell and deliberation was taken to deſtroy the K. the Crowne, the Realme, the State, the true Church of God. In Rochel they went about to ſaue the King, to defend the Crowne, to preſerue the Realme, to vpholde the ſtate, to maintaine the true Religion.) the Duke of Sauoy after great preparations of warre made, the Duke de Maine being as then at Liomoys, and about the borders of Daulphine, inuaded the Marquiz at of Saluces, and by treaſon and intelligences of the Captayne, ſurprized Carmagnole, one of the Arſeuals of France: he tooke alſo Rauel and

                  Chaſteaudauphin, with ſome other holdes.
               Theſe newes brought to Bloys, did greatly trouble them who coulde  take no pleaſure therein: But the Leaguers did greatly reioyce thereat. For they thought that 
                     •
                  his increaſe of miſeries, would further their enterprizes, and that the ſire being kindled in diuers places, that which they did blow in the middeſt of France, would not be either quicklie, or eaſily put out.
               This enterprize of the Duke of Sauoy, was by the practize and counſell of the League, which was that the armies of theſe two Dukes (of Sauoy and Maine) ſhould reſpectiuely fauour each other, each keeping his entent ſeuerall to himſelfe. For the Leaguers and the Duke of Sauoy did agree in this: to wit, in hating the true religion and the profeſſors thereof, and in making againſt them cruell warre, to roote them out, if they could doe it.
               But the particular thoughts of the partie were kept incommunicable within the heart of them, both of them reſeruing to themſelues, the meanes to worke their affayres, according to the opportunitie and occaſion. And in this reſpect (as it commonly falleth out among them, who doo aſpire to any Soueraignetie) there was neither ſocietie nor ſaith betweene the Duke of Sauoy and the houſe of Guyze, each of them enuying his fellow in that which he wiſhed for himſelfe.
               The Duke of Guize with his partakers, intended to raigne and to ſtabliſh his authoritie in France, and would not admit any fellow, neither the Duke of Sauoy, nor any other.
               The Duke of Sauoy on the other ſide, thought himſelfe ſo well deſcended in blood, that he might claime to haue a good part, and thought it very conuenient for himſelfe to enlarge his dominions, and that being Sonne to a Daughter of France, he was nigh enough to poſſeſſe all, and would haue beene very ſory to haue had any companyon, either of the houſe of Guyze, or any other whatſoeuer.
               Theſe diuers drifts did lurke cloſe hidden in the hearts of both parts, being holpen and aduanced mutually by the common pretence which they tooke on both ſides, to wit, the rooting out of the reformed religion, which tearmed hereſie, and to that end, in open words they agreed together, did helpe and ayde each other, reſeruing to the craftieſt the beguyling of his felow, or to the ſtrongeſt to preuaile
               Fryer Sixtus Vicar, vnderſtanding of this inuaſion of the Duke of Sauoy, fearing leaſt the King ſhould ſuppoſe that to haue beene ſome of Fryer Sixtus tricks, and vpon a ſodaine deſire of reuengement would haue his peniworth vpon the Countie of Veueſe and Auignon, which is a part of the de Mains which Saint Peter purchaſed with his penie, that the Fryers might liue like kings after him, to waſh his hands, and to

make the world beleeue that hee ſaw nothing, firſt beganne to chide and brawle with the Duke of Sauoy, and findeth great fault in him, reprouing  him for ſuch an enterpriſe.
               The Duke of Sauoy playing falſhood in good fellowſhip, faineth, although  that Fryer Sixtus had no finger in that pie, goeth about to excuſe the matter, and did colour this action ſpecially with Fryer Sixtus, ſaying, that hee had done all thinges for the aduantage of the holy church of Rome, becauſe he vnderſtood that the K. had determined to put thoſe places which he had taken, into the hands of the Lord des Diguiers and other heretikes: which thing would be very daungerous both to him being nigh neighbour, as alſo in tyme very domageable to the holy church, and the county of Veues.
               
               Some of his counſellers alſo did greatly miſlyke his enterpriſe, foreſeeing that it would be in tyme as pernitious vnto him, as it had béene to his father in tymes paſt, for not knowing the meaſure of his forces.
               Whileſt the King of Nauarre did holde the aſſembly of the reformed Churches at Rochel, as is aboue ſayd, and that the Duke of Sauoy inuaded the Marqueſdome of Saluce, the States did continue at Bloys with ſtrange miſtruſt, which did ſpring from hower to hower among the partakers.
               The pretence of Religion did continually rowle among the Leaguers and Leagued. Their liues and ſtate, ſayd they, did hang on a rotten threed.
               In December, two great alarums and pannick terrors were raiſed within the caſtell of Bloys, who did put the whole court in armor, and made them ſtand vpon their guardes. The cauſe of the firſt was a quarrell, which aroſe betweene the pages and lakeys, who did hold with the Bourbons, and them which did hold with the League. The commotion and the feare was ſuch, that the Duke of Guyze tooke the alarum, ranne into his chamber, ſhut vp the dore, with Cofers, and other ſuch like things as were at hand.
               The ſecond alarum was geuen by a ſouldier hurt, which ſaued himſelfe in the chamber of the Duke of Guyze, into the which hee was purſued by ſome of the Kings guardes, who went vp with ſword in hand, whereupon once agayne all the court was in an vprore.
               About the ſame time alſo there were great enmities and ſeedes of quarrels in the court (beſyde the vlcer of ambition & deſire to raigne) betwéene the Lord of Guyze and many other Lordes of the court, by reaſon of loue: for as the Duke of Guyze in the middeſt of thoſe waighty matters which he went about to compaſſe, was greatly in loue with a Lady of the court: there were ſome Lords alſo who pretended the like affection to her, whether it were that they did ſo of purpoſe to pick a quarrell or otherwiſe, but ſo it was, that there paſſions of loue were openly perceaued.
               The Duke of Guyze about the middle of December, did ſhew himſelfe a more contemner of the Kinges authority, then euer he had done before: for

there was ſeene after him in great ſecurity following his trayne, and lodged euen in the Kings houſe, a great number of ruffiens and malefactors,  condemned in diuers places for diuers crymes, and executed in picture for contumacy: euen many of them which in Auguſt before had raiſed vp a ſedition in Engoleſme agaynſt the Lord Eſpernon, they were in ſuch ſecurity vnder his wing, that no magiſtrate durſt ſay any thing to them.
               The ſaid Duke alſo had ſhewed himſelfe more ſaucy and malapert in his words and behauiour, then euer hee did before. For the King hauing intercepted many of his letters, by the which hee did ſhew in open tearms the vilanous intent which he had purpoſed in his hart, called his Nobles, willed them to ſweare to him, that they would neuer conſent nor practiſe any thing agaynſt his perſon: he moſt arrogantly and contemptuouſly denyed ſo to doo, euen in his preſence, ſaying, he will not do it, and if hee did it, there was good lawes to puniſh him: ſpare him not, let him bee puniſhed; bould and arrogant ſpeaches were geuen dayly by him, and his partakers.
               The Duke of Guyze conſidering, that by theſe freſh iniuries the King could not be much prouoked, calling to remembrance his former attempts, and that the ſtroke which he had long before intended, was made knowen to the King, began to enter a great fearfull apprehenſion, that the King would not delay his reuenge, but will goe about to preuent him. And now conſidering that all his partakers had bent their eyes vppon him, and expected ſome great atchieuement, which ſhould farre exceed the former attempts, ſeeing alſo how the K. of Nauarre by the edict of reunion, ſworne by the aſſembly of the States, was condemned and diſherited, & that there was nothing left in the way to hinder him of his enterpriſe, and that hee himſelfe was now vpon the laſt ſtep of the ſtayrs, either to be King, or firſt commaunder vnder the name of King of France, ſo that nothing was wanting, but either quite to diſpatch him, or elſe to take him priſoner. Hee reſolued himſelf therefore to haſten one of theſe two executions, leaſt perhaps he might bee preuented, hee vndertooke himſelfe to do that feat, and layed that burthen vpon his ſhoulder. And that ſuch diſorder might bee done orderly, he called the chiefeſt of the conſpiracy to counſell.
               The chiefeſt of this counſell and conſpiracy were Fryer Ladouik, cardinall his brother, and Fryer I. Archebiſhop of Lyons, with few other, to whom he ſhewed in what ſtate his matters ſtood, and that all thinges are brought to ſome good effect, that nothing is obſtant to obtayne the thing ſo long, and ſo greatly deſired, but the perſon of the King: and that their counſels beeing come to light, hee was driuen to ſuch extremity, as that 
                     •
                  ither he or the King muſt needes periſh.
               Hee propounded vnto them therefore, whether the King was to bee diſpatched out of hand, or elſe to bee impriſoned till all thinges were confirmed,

and eſtabliſhed for a new gouernment.
               They anſwere, that this matter is not to be delayed, but that the King  was to be made away, and diſpatched out of hand: their reaſons be theſe, for (ſay they) fetters and priſons are altogether vnprofitable, that no dungeon (how deepe ſoeuer) could be able to keep cloſe ſo great and mighty a Potentate, and that ſo long as he ſhould liue hee would cou
                     •
                  t alwaies for reuenge.
               If hee were kept in priſon, it would ſeeme cruell and ſtrange to the common people, and intollerable. That they of late (after the Kings fleeing from Paris) had found and learned by experience, that pitty preuaileth more then fauour.
               But aſſoone as he ſhould be diſpatched, new deuiſes ſhould bee practiſed, new counſels taken, and that euery man would fall againe rather to their priuate, preſent, and ſure commodities, then to attempt dangerous enterpriſes.
               Grounded vpon theſe reaſons, the ſeruants do determin vpon the death of their Lord, the anoynted of the Lord, and a man reuerenced of ſo many Nations, is condemned to die by the bloudy ſwordes of them, who might haue ſaid, that whatſoeuer they haue beſydes their béeing, they haue it of him and his predeceſſors liberality, whoſe Grandfather came to begge to the dore of his aunceſtors. Riſe vp O Lord, defend thyne Ordinance, and the powers which thou haſt appointed.
               The 24. day of December is appointed for that cruell execution: their deſperat parricide is ſealed with an oth, ſo they depart.
               The King ignorant of this ſentence of condemnation geuen againſt him, yet prouoked both by the old and new iniuries, proffered him daily by the Duke of Guyze, did meditate how, and watched for the opportunity, as by one blow to rid himſelfe out of that danger and feare wherein he ſaw himſelfe: and perceauing well by the partialities and partaking of (in a maner) the whole aſſembly of the States, and that contrary vnto his expectation: (for he thought by the conſent of the States to haue conuicted, condemned, and executed both the Duke and few of the chiefeſt of his partakers) he was in danger that which he pretended would be wrought againſt him either directly, or vndirectly by the ſayd eſtates, determined to follow an extraordinarie way, and to preuent his enemy, knowing the Prouerbe to bee true, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : and knowing the cauſe ſo to do to be lawfull, thought the courſe taken for the execution, would be diuerſly iudged: yet hee thought to follow a iuſt cauſe ſome what vnlawfull (neceſſity enforcing him ſo to doo) might be well interpreted in a man of his degree and calling: he pronounceth therfore ſentence of death againſt the Duke of Guyze, and few others.
               Here Chriſtian Reader, thou ſeeſt the ſubiect and ſeruant to haue condemned

& appoynted to the ſlaughter his Lord and Prince, only through aſpyring vnlawfully vnto his Scepter and Throne. Here thou ſeeſt the  ſoueraigne power ordayned of God for to reuenge the euill doer, to haue condemned his ſeruant for diuers crimes committed, the procéeding is extraordinarie, but neceſſarie, and not at all to be condemned, conſidering the circumſtances: but it is to be wiſhed that it could haue béen done otherwiſe by ordinarie courſe.
               Marke alſo Gods iuſtice vpon carnall men deſtitute of the right knowledge of God, fellowes in a manner and companions of one affection, of one minde, of one conſent, in perſecuting the Sonne of God, in deuouring the innocent, as if they would eate bread: the Lord ſent euill Angels among them to ſcatter them, their counſels and power; the one is poſſeſſed with an vncleane ſpirit of ambition; the other (bewitched with a ſpirit of hatred againſt the trueth of God) is made ſecure and flacke to preuent the euill betunes, vntill he is enforced to followe that courſe, which commonly men will condemne vpon his companion, his friend and familiar, who went into the Temples of their Gods to take ſweete counſell together. O the depth of Gods iudgments, how deepe and vnſearchable be they:
               The Kings counſell and determination could not be kept ſo ſecret, the King hauing ſo many Leaguers about him to ſmell his breath, but the 22 of December, as the Duke of Guize had ſet downe to dinner, he found vnder his napkin a little bill, wherein was written that he ſhould take héede, for they will play a ſhrewd play with him. In the ſame bill he wrote with his owne hand a mocking anſwere thus. They dare not, and ſo caſt it vnder the table.
               The Leaguers neither could not keepe their breath ſo warily, but that their determination tooke flight abroad. For the ſame day the King receaued diuers aduertiſements of this perilous conſpiracie, and determination of the Duke of Guize againſt his perſon. But ſpecially ye Duke de Mayne brother to the Duke of Guize, ſent Alphonſe Corſe expreſſedly to the K. to aduertiſe him to take heed of the Duke of Guize his brother: it was an eaſie thing (ſayd he) to carrie a rope of Beades about his necke, but for certaine hee knewe very well that his brother had a ſhrewd enterpriſe in hand againſt him. He knewe not when the execution would be, but he knew very well that it would be ſhortly, and that he was in doubt leaſt this warning ſhould come too late: and warned him in theſe words, that his Maieſtie ſhould beware of a furious and deſperate minde.
               The Duke Aumale likewiſe ſent his wife to Bloys to the King, to aduertiſe him of the ſame daunger and conſpiracie againſt him, and that the conſpirators were vpon the poynt of the execution.
               Alſo one of the conſpirators themſelues mooued in conſcience, diſcloſed vnto him the whole conſpiracie, the day appoynted, the tokens & the names

of the conſpirators, but in ſuch a ſhort time, that the King had ſcarſe opportunitie and time to eſcape and preuent that imminent danger. 
               
               The King alſo had intercepted not long before many letters, wherein in plaine tearmes the Leaguers had vttered their determination.
               The King hauing receaued ſo many meſſengers of death, and reduced to this extremitie, doth perceiue that he is beaten with his owne rod. For calling to remembrance the great iniuries which hee and his brethren had receaued of that houſe euen from their infancie, acknowledging now that all the former troubles (as hee confeſſeth in a certaine letter of his to the Lord Tageus) in his Realme, haue béen by their practiſes and procurement: how that hee hath ſeene all the euident tokens of their aſpyring to his eſtate, their clayming of the Crowne by their fayned geuealogies, ſet foorth in the ſight of the world. He remembreth alſo the decay of his authoritie among all his ſubiects, to haue béen their worke, by the diffamatorie Libels diſperſed abroade, with diuers ſlaunders and calumnies. He acknowledgeth the practiſing of the deliberation of Rome, about the rooting out or diſheriting the royall bloud in France in the houſes of Valoys and Bourbons, to ſet vp the houſe of Lorreyne.
               
               Among other things, he reckoneth the ſeditious preachers, as Ieſuites, and other vncleane foules of that colour, hired by them of Guize, and Lorreyne, to ſtirre vp ſedition, and ſteale away the people from his obedience, thereby to ſtrengthen their partes. He calleth to remembrance, the taking vp of armes againſt his will, in the yeare 1585. the raiſing vp of the tumult in Paris againſt his owne perſon, the letters of Guize intercepted, wherein he diſcouereth his minde ſo deepely, that thereby he might ſee euery veine and hole in their braine and hearts: the ſaucie parts, and manifeſt attempts, which both hee, and his partakers had vſed toward him in his owne preſence, both in words and behauiour, the conſideration alſo of theſe aduertiſements from ſo many parts, did cauſe great paſſions in his minde. But did not conſider from whence theſe blowes did come, neither from whence his ſlacknes, in repreſſing and puniſhing by time thoſe offences.
               Specially, when remembring the fauours that hee and his predeceſſors had giuen to that famely: but he aboue all, had more eſteemed them, then the Princes of his bloud, had made him his fellow and companion, in all the exploytes done againſt them of the reformed religion, whome hee had fauored with diuers great dignities, pardoned him of ſo many grieuous offences, which he would not haue forgiuen to his owne brother: to be ſhort, he loued and imbraced him, as his own ſoule: this incredible vnthankfulnes and treacherie, did moue him to great indignation. But ſpecially, what griefes and ſorrowes did this 
                     •
                  nhappy King conceaue in his heart, not onely to 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſo vnthankfully rewarded of them whome hee truſted moſt, but for that, he in the ſpace of 20 yeares had ſeen ſo many warnings giuē, both

to his Brother Charles the ninth, and to himſelfe, of their aſpiring & working, not onely by the Princes of the bloud, by the King of Nauarre, by  many Lords, Gentlemen, and learned men in France, but alſo by the Princes of forren nations, and ſpecially by the Princes of Germany, who from time to time had proffered their ſeruices, and their aſſiſtance vnto him, for the repreſſing of their inſolent preſumptuouſnes.
               And namely, when he conſidered how halfe a yeare before, when he was in a manner diſpoſſeſſed of his kingdome & Authority, after his flight from Paris, how his faithfull ſubiects, of all callings and degrees, reſorted vnto them, both to ſhew him the vnſufferable indignities, which he had receaued of that houſe, and alſo to proffer him their ſeruice and aſſiſtance. When hee called to minde, how often and how faithfully, the King of Nauarre had proffered him his forces, and that in ſuch ſort, that if it had pleaſed him but to holde vp his hand onely, and let him alone with them, he with his owne forces and charges, would ſet him at hearts eaſe from any danger or ſ
                     •
                  ur of the League. He I ſay, as a man which is willingly, and wittingly lead to his fatall deſtruction and fall, had neuer regarded nor conſidered all theſe things vntil now, when being deſtitute of all meanes and deliberation, and ſcarſe knowing whome to truſt, hee is with too late repentance driuen to ſhift for his owne life, as well as hee may, which he ſeeth is moſt certainely to be taken away, within foure and twentie houres, if he dooth not preuent the conſpiratours.
               The King in this agony and heauy ſighes, not conſidering the cauſes of theſe blowes and terrors of death, full of ſorrowes and indignation, dooth determine with himſelfe as well as hee can, to preuent the treaſons of his domeſticall enemies in this wiſe.
               The keyes of the Caſtell were brought euery night vnto the Duke of Guize, as being great Maſter of the Kings houſe, but the ſaide Duke of Guize the 22. of December, the night before his death, prouided not ſo wiſely, but that the keyes fell into other mens hands, then them of his ſide. So the King tooke the keyes of his houſe in his cuſtody, he alſo cauſed a rumour to bee noyſed abroad, that the day following hee will goe on pilgrimage to the Church, called our Lady of Clery, ſituated betweene Bloys and Orleans.
               
               And according to his prudence, he prouided that as well in the Caſtell, as in the towne, they of the League might not ſtir with any force againſt him; for within the Caſtell, he doubled his gardes. In the towne, hee tooke order that night, that the gardes of the towne gates ſhould not in any wiſe open the ſaide gates, vntill they ſhould haue expreſſe commaundement from him to the contrary; ſo both the Towne, Caſtell, and keyes thereof are made ſure in that night; and all this was done, vnknowne to the Duke of Guize.
               
               
                  
The Lord grand Prior that night made a match to play at Tenis with  the Lord Ianuile, ſonne to the Duke of Guize, to whome he gaue his word, that the next day very early, hee would take him in his bed for that end. So the King hauing diſpatched many things, but ſpecially prouided to make all things ſure which he thought needefull, to preuent the determination of the Duke of Guize, which was vpon the poynt of execution, retired into his cloſet, where he was all night, to doo many needefull diſpatches.
               The ſame night, hee wrote to the Duke of Neuers, who was in the army, at the ſiege of Smache, hee wrote to Lyons, and to diuers other places, where hee thought it neceſſary, for the aſſuring of his affaires, and the preſeruation of his perſon.
               The ſame night, the Duke of Guize, Frier Lewis, the Cardinall his brother, and the Archbiſhop of Lyons, to take opportunity to commit their parricide, concluded to ſit in counſell the next morning early.
               The 23. of December, the Duke of Guize, the Frier, Cardinal his brother, the Archbiſhop of Lyons, the Marſhall Haultmont, and others, came to ſit in counſell, in a chamber nigh to the Kings chamber, being but a narow aley betweene them.
               The K. being in his cloſet with certaine Lords and gentlemen, ſent for 7. or 8. of thoſe 45. Penſioners or gentlemen, yt were daylie attendant vpon him, very early in ye morning, to whom he vſed ſome ſpeaches about his affaires ſo greatly importing him, & ſo nearely touching his perſon, & abou
                     •
                   the aſſured aduiſe & intelligences which he had receiued of the enterprize againſt his perſon & State. They proſtered moſt willingly their ready ſeruice, to execute his cōmaundement in ſuch a iuſt cauſe and defence.
               Within a while after, the Duke of Guize being in the counſell chamber before they began to ſit, was called to come to the king. He ſaw at his firſt comming the guards more carefully diſpoſed than of cuſtome, ſo that (as it happ
                     •
                  neth oftentimes, yt vpon the inſtant of great aduentures the mind of euery man is to him as a Prophet of ye euent, or a heauy preſage of his miſhappe) euen as hee had iudged of the enterprize of an other man, by calling to remembran
                     •
                  e of that which he had in his owne mind, and t
                     •
                  e ſtroke which he receaued by that which he intended, he entred into a motion of extraordinary miſtruſt, & ſo far that his countenance changing at that calling, his heart waxed cold, as though he had been ready to fall into a ſwound: whereupon hee ſent to the L. Pre (one of them who did waite in the K. chamber) to aſke ſome rayſins, which were brought him.
               Afore his going out of the counſell chamber, hee ſent a page to his chamber to fetch him a handkercher: his ſecretary had bound faſt in one of the corners thereof a ſmall bill written, contayning a warning to get him out, or elſe hee was dead. The handkercher was brought, but it was not deliuered, for it was intercepted, with the remembrance

when the page came vp againe with it.
               The Duke of Guyze being about to goe vnto the king, when hee went  forth of the counſell chamber into the alley which was betweene it and the kings chamber, encreaſed his miſtruſt, and would haue gone back; yet neuertheleſſe he did not.
               He had beene perſwaded long before, that the Lorde Loignak had vndertaken to kill him, ſo that of all other he hated him moſt, and miſtruſted him greatly, and entering into the kings chamber, he ſaw the ſame Lord Loignak ſitting vpon a coffer, hauing his armes a croſſe, and ſuppoſing that he ſtayed there to ſet vpon him (for he ſhewed that hee was touched with a violent apprehenſion of miſtruſt) although the ſaid L. Loignak did not ſtir: yet the Lord Guize notwithſtanding did ſet vpon him, & ſetting his hand to his ſword did draw it halfe, for he had his cloake (as commonly he was wont to haue) in ſcar
                     •
                  e wiſe, and vnder the cloake his ſworde, which was the cauſe that he could not draw it cleane out of the ſheath, before that ſome of them who were there, ſeeing him to enterprize ſuch a violent fray at the Kings chamber doore, preuented, and killed him there.
               Beholde thou vngratious man, thou haſt hidden all thy conſpiracies vnder a cloake of religion, and ſo haſt prophaned a prophane religion; ſay then 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               Thou vnthankfull ſlaue of ambition, haſt thou thought to murther thy naturall prince, ordayned of God to commaund thee: Say then, or if thou wilt not, I will, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               It could not be done without ſome rumor, which was heard out of the counſell chamber: whereupon the Cardinall his brother entred into miſtruſt, and conceauing a great feare, made haſte to get out: but he met one of the ſkottiſh guardes who had charge to arreſt him.
               He tooke that arreſt very ſtraunge, and made ſhew to reſiſt: but ſeeing the rumor and daunger, hee ceaſed from his reſiſtaunce and yeelded.
               The Archbiſhop of Lyons at this alarum, went forth furiouſly, and would know more, and as he ſaid, would ſuccour the Duke of Guyze, but he was arreſted by ſome of the guardes, and his fury was ſo cooled, that from a woolfe, he was turned into the forme of a lambe, yet retayning ſtill wooluiſh conditions: ſo theſe two Fryers (the deuills ghoſtly fathers) remayned both priſoners.
               The graund Pryor was gone very early to awake the Lord Ianuile, to to play the match which they had made the day before, and found him in his bed: and after he had made himſelf quickly ready (but whether it were that he ſaw the graund Pryor followed incontinently with ſome of the guardes, or ſome other matter) hee began ſodaynly to miſtruſt, and went about to ſlip into a doore of his chamber, and to make ſome reſiſtance,

ſeeking to get forth with his ſworde in hand againſt ſome of the guarde: but conſidering the danger he yeelded him ſelfe to the ſayd guard.  The graund Pryor ſeeing that by theſe new euents, the match was broken off, went his way.
               At the ſame inſtant one Pellicart, ſecretary vnto the Duke of Guyze was taken, with al his papers & writings, by the which many ſecret counſels of the ſayd Guize were diſcouered to the King, with the names of the chiefeſt of the League, as wel of the princes and Nobles, as of the prieſts and townes.
               The king of the Fryers, to wit, the Cardinall of Bourbon, who was at bed, was deſired by a captayne of the guarde to riſe, and ſo was his perſon made ſure.
               The Marqueſſe d' Albeuf likewiſe, and many other of the partakers of the Lord of Guize were taken, and put in places of ſafety.
               That day the king made a fayre hande, for he caught a number of cruell beaſts and vncleane foules, as Woolues, Foxes, ſwine, wilde Boars, Apes, and ſuch like.
               But the looſing of ſome of them afterward, was the cauſe of his vndooing and death. For either through feare of the Popes excommunication, or to aſſwage the diſpleaſure of his ſubiects, or ſome other cauſe 
                     •
                  lſe, he did ſet at libertie the Archbiſhop of Lyons, which was one of the chiefeſt counſellors, deuiſers, and procurers of his death.
               Theſe exployts being done at Bloys, a gentleman was ſpeedely ſent into Poytow to the Lord of Neuers, with commaundement to ſeaze vppon the Lord Chaſtre gouernour of Berry, who was greatly ſuſpected, by reaſon of his great familiaritie with the Lord of Guize. But the layd Lord Chaſtre was aduertized by his friends of all that which happened at Bloys, before the gentleman (ſent by the King) arriued at the camp: whereupon he went to the Duke of Neu
                        •
                     rs, ſaying, that he was aduertized how the Duke of Guyze had beene put to death, which thing made him beleeue, he had enterprized ſomewhat agaynſt the king. Hee ſayde that he had been alwayes ſeruant to the Duke of Guize, for his particular; but that if he had enterprized againſt the king, that hee was neuer made priuie to it. And foraſmuch as the loue which the ſaid Duke of Guize had borne vnto him, might happily make him to be ſuſpected by the king, he yeelded himſelfe willingly into the hands of the ſayd Duke of Neuers for to iuſtifie his actions.
               Afterward the Gentleman went from the king to the ſayd Duke of Neuers, who informed him of all that which is aboue ſayd, and within a while after the Lord Chaſtre went to the king.
               The King had ſome ſpeeches with the ſayd Lorde Chaſtre of all that had paſſed touching the particular of him: the Lord Chaſtre of long continuance,

which hee woulde forget, and vppon the promiſe which the ſaide Chaſtre made, to remaine his faithfull ſeruant, commaunded him to make  ſure the townes of his gouernement to his ſeruice, and to prepare himſelfe to goe to Orleans, againſt them of the League: which thing the ſaide Lorde Chaſtre promiſed to doo.
               A little while after the death of the Guize, the King went to ſee the Queene his mother, and ſhewed her what was done that morning, whereof at the firſt ſhe was greatly moued: yet remembring the iuſt occaſions which the ſaid Duke of Guize had giuen him to ſeeke reuenge, ſhee prayed God that it might bee well done: and willed the King to aduertiſe the Popes Legat, that which was done. For a while after, the King ſent the Cardinall Gundy, to ſhew to the ſaide Legat, the attempt of the Duke of Guize, againſt his perſon and eſtate; which thing had enforced him to doo that execution: he ſhewed that in it, he had followd the Popes his maſters counſell, who aduiſed him ſo to doo, if by no other meanes he could auoyde ſuch enterpriſes. Where it is ſaide, that the King dooth aleage to the Popes Legat, his maſters counſell and conſent, the matter goeth as the common report gooth.
               It is moſt certaine, that Frier Sixtus, and his Chaplines, with his predeceſſors before him had been, and were then the chiefeſt authors, ſetters on, and maintainers of the League in France, and that by all meanes, ſo that it were not with money, (for to meddle with the purſes of theſe ghoſtly fathers is ſacriledge, and to tirannize the holy Church) did fauour, foſter, and further all the felouies, trecheries, and treaſons of the Duke of Guize. The King hauing a perfect knowledge of theſe their dooings, yet by policy he obtained Frier Sixtus, and his Prieſts, both his conſent and hands, to iuſtifie his actions, which he entended to bring to paſſe vpon the perſons of the Duke of Guize, and others his adherents: if the Pope, after the fact; if Soltan Solyman, out of the capitall of Rome, would thunder his vaine boults, not excommunication, but of proſcription, which this Antichriſt moſt arrogantly doo vſurp vpon Princes.
               He wrote therefore to Frier Sixtus, that he had a number of rebels of all degrees, as well of the nobilitie as of others, who had conſpired againſt his life and ſtate, whether that hee might make ſuch a ſlaughter of them, by ſurpriſe, as hee made at Saint Bartholmew, in the yeare 1571. and kill them by all meanes poſſible, ſeeing that he could not follow againſt them any extraordinarie courſe. Frier Sixtus and his harpies about him, ſuppoſing that the King by rebels, vnderſtood the King of Nauarre, and others of the nobles with him, and of other degrees, and that he had ſo fetcht in his head, whereby he hoped to drawe them into his ſnare, were as ready to further him to that exployte, as the King was ready to doo it. Frier Sixtus anſwered in his name, and of his Ianiſſaries, that hee might deſtroy them

by all meanes poſſible: for in extraordinarie dangers, extraordinarie courſe might be taken. This is that which he al
                     •
                  ageth to the Legat, touching the Popes counſell and conſent. 
               
               The Legat vpon this newes, was wonderfully amazed, for beſide that, hee feared his owne ſkin, hee had alſo aſſured all Italy of cleane contrary euents, then thoſe which he ſaw to haue fallen out.
               The ſame day, the Legat was prayed to make interceſſion with the King, for the Cardinall of Guize; which thing hee promiſed to doo. Men cannot by any meanes prolong the time of their ende: many haue thought that the ſauing of the life of the Cardinall of Guize, might haue been eaſily obtained. But as a haughtie courage, which thinketh to bee nigh to ſome great and extraordinary proſperous fortune, cannot eaſily quiet himſelfe, when he ſeeth himſelfe debaſed, and carried away farre from his expectation. So this man fallen from ſo high, and moued with his domeſticall loſſes, could not quiet himſelfe, but by hot words hee threatned, to performe more thē euer his brother entended, whoſe chiefeſt ſetter on he was. This his raging minde, wrapped him in the ſelfe ſame puniſhment with his Brother, being founde and iudged culpable of the ſelfe ſame crime of treaſon.
               Here marke Chriſtian reader, a notable example of Gods iuſtice: for the King would eaſily haue pardoned him, and ſpared his life, but Gods iuſtice bringing him to iudgement, forſooke him in the perturbation of his heart, to prouoke his Soueraigne King, whome hee had offended in the higheſt degree, againſt his will, to make him drinke of the cup of Gods wrath.
               So that the King ſeeing his threatnings, which diſcouered plainly the damnable thoughts of his heart, cauſed him the ſame day to bee ſtrangled, as it is reported, with a tippet of ſilke, which he was wont to weare about his neck, to put a difference between him and the common ſort of traitors: for they are ſtrangled with ropes of hempe, but this traiterens Frier was choaked with a holy tippet of ſilke, in the ſelfe ſame place where he was areſted priſoner. Theſe executions being done vpon the conſpiratours, the King went to goe to Maſſe into the temple of Saint Sauiour, which is in the court of the Caſtell. There the Popes Legat did walke and talke long with the King, ſometime ſmiling in the ſight of a great number of people, which did marke it. Among whom, many ſeeing the ioyfull countenance of the Legat, thought that hee was not greatly ſory for that which had paſſed there that morning, although that his great familiarity with the houſe of Guize, would haue giuen occaſion to expect of him the contrarie. But all that was but to make faire weather, which the King fearing himſelfe, vpon the heate of the Kings reuenge, to haue ſuſtained the ſame puniſhment with his companions, which he had no leſſe deſerued then they had.
               
                  
Now we haue to ſpeake ſomewhat of the conſpirators, who were of fiue ſorts. In the euening, all things were as quiet at Bloys, as they had béen  before, ſaue the cloſe and hidden ſorrow, and murmuring of many, who had not foreſeene ſuch a ſuddaine tempeſt to fall vpon the houſe of Guize.
               
               
                  Briſſak and others, to mollifie the Kings diſpleaſure, which they ſuppoſed by the guiltines of their conſciences, the King to haue conceaued of them, that in time they might eſcape out of his clawes, made an oration gratulatory for his good ſucceſſe, in eſcaping that conſpiracy, but ſpecially did clawe him in that place, where he did moſt itch, to wit, exhorted him to continue the warre againſt them of the reformed religion, vſing great outragious wordes and inuectiues, leauing them no hope of merrie.
               This oration was followed of many ſuch others, not for loue to the K. but for three ſpeciall cauſes. Firſt, that with ſuch holy water the King being blinded, they might flye out of his hand. Secondly, that by ſetting the King agaynſt the King of Nauarre, and the heretikes (as they tearmed them) hee ſhould haue his forces ſcattered, and his perſon beeing the weaker by it, they might at ſome opportunity ſurpriſe him. Thirdly, they feared leaſt he would vpon this occaſion ioyne the King of Nauarre, and ſo to haue béene able to take reuenge vpon all the ſort of the conſpiratours: therefore they thought good to blow the coales to let all reconſiliation.
               The ſame day the King ſent to the aſſembly of the ſtates, to let them vnderſtand that it was his pleaſure, that the ſtates ſhould continue with a full determination to follow their reaſonable counſels in all things.
               The 24. of December, the King diſpatched diuers meſſengers into dyuers Prouinces with theſe inſtructions following.
               The firſt troubles raiſed vp by the Lord of Guyze in this realme, in the yere 1585. haue ſhewed ſufficiently an other meaning in him, thē the zeale of the Catholike Religion, wherewith he hath couered his actions, to abuſe them, who are more ready to embrace nouelties, then wiſe to conſider the euents.
               For hauing couered his entents with the cloake of the catholik religion, and the rooting out of hereſy, all his exploits haue béen executed in the catholik townes, and in the beſt, which he could ſeaze vpon, to lay downe a ſtedfaſt foundation of the drifts long before notoriouſly forecaſt for the 
                     •
                  ſurpation of the crowne.
               The King ſheweth that by the meanes of the riſing of the ſayd Duke, he was enforced to let him haue the beſt part of his forces and meanes, whereby he hath not béene able to oppoſe himſelfe to them of the religion, as he was willing to doo: whereby hereſy (ſayth he) hath taken deeper root in the Realme then euer it had before.
               He ſheweth, that while his forces were occupyed againſt the heretikes in Guyen, Prouance, and Daulphine, he and his partakers haue practiſed to

withdraw all that euer they could from his obedience.
               He ſayth alſo, that notwithſtanding the ſeditious ſeazing of Paris by thē of the League, yet he was deſyrous to forget all offences paſſed: and beſides,  he gratifyed him with as many graces and fauours, as hee could require, thinking thereby to mollify the hardnes of his hart.
               He aduertiſeth them, that the ambition of the ſayd Duke of Guyze, was growen to that contempt of his eſtate, that hee would no more depend of any other: and that in ſtead of thankes, to acknowledge theſe fauours, hee had vſed them to his further enterpriſes.
               He neuer ceaſed to practiſe the townes which were left vnder his obedience to his faction, ſo that the Magiſtrates could hold no longer the inhabitants in their duty, nor from ſtirring ſedition one agaynſt another.
               Many men conuict
                     •
                  d of capitall crymes, were ſo vpholden by his authority, that it was not poſſible for the Magiſtrate to doo iuſtice vppon them.
               He and his did braue, threaten, and put in feare, them which would remayne ſeruants vnto their King, to make them to forſake him, that ſo he might the more eaſily oppreſſe him.
               The Duke of Guyze by his partakers, had practiſed the Prouinces by his factions to render his authority, hatefull to his Subiectes, ſuborning them to make vnciuill requeſtes, that in obtayning them, they might debaſe his authority, and in refuſing them (which he will perſwade the King to do) hee might make him hatefull to his ſubiectes.
               The King had vſed all the prudence that euer he could deuiſe, vntill he perceaued himſelf to be fallen into the contempt of his ſubiects, which was a way to performe the blow long before hand entended.
               Beſides, he ſheweth, how hee hath had diuers aduertiſements euen by the next vnto the Duke of Guyze to beware of him, by whom he was in danger to looſe both his life and crowne.
               Hee notifyeth to them, that conſidering the euill could not be auoyded, but by the death of the author: he was enforced to ſaue himſelfe by ſlaying the ſayd Duke of Guyze, the 23. of December.
               To preuent therefore all falſe reportes, hee was willing to let them vnderſtand the truth of the matter, that all occaſion of tumult (which might ariſe by falſe reportes) might be taken away.
               He certifyeth his Subiects that he intendeth to follow the warre, for the extirpation of hereſy, and the mayntaining of the Romiſh religion.
               Hee ſayth alſo that he declareth to them, that he will haue his ſubiectes eaſed as much as ſhall bee poſſible, and that he hath ſent word vnto the deputies aſſembled in the Towne of Bloys, that he would haue the ſtates ended with all liberty.
               He warneth them alſo, that he will haue no partialities, leagues, aſſociations,

nor intelligences among his ſubiects, and that they ſhall not hereafter acknowledge any other then him, who is their King ordayned of  God.
               He certifyeth them alſo, that he will ſuffer no longer the contempt of his authority, but will chaſtize them who ſhall offend in that behalfe.
               Theſe informations were ſent by the King into the Prouinces to the gouernors and Magiſtrates, to geue notice of the ſame to the people, leaſt by falſe rumors, they ſhould haue béen ſtirred vp to rebellion by the Leaguers, who were diſperſed in all partes of the realme. But particularly he writeth to the Lord Tageus his gouernour in Xainctonge and Engoleſme, willing him to execute ſharp puniſhment vppon them, who ſhall ſtirre vp any ſedition.
               Within few daies after theſe things ſo paſſed at Bloys, the Q Mother dyed, who there had fallen ſicke vppon the firſt aſſembling of the ſtates: ſhe had liued a long age (and too long for France, if it had beene Gods will that it ſhould haue béene otherwiſe) for ſhe hath beene the cheefeſt worker of all the great miſeryes, and lamentable alterations which haue happened in France: hauing bewitched with her Sorceryes (as an other Circe hir countrey woman) her owne Children, and many Princes and Nobles of France, whom ſhe tranſformed not in outward forme, but in conditions and qualityes of Tygers, Wolues, Foxes, Swine, and all maner of cruell beaſtes, and vncleane fowles, euen a number tranſformed into the nature of vncleane ſpirits and deuils. She neuer ceaſed from her enchantments, vntill by Gods iuſt iudgement ſhe had deſtroied her owne children, houſe & family. To be ſhort, ſhe was a woman of a baſe birth and ability, bold to worke all iniquity and vnrighteouſnes.
               Now wee haue to deſcrybe the conſpiratours, and how they ſhifted for themſelues.
               The three greateſt domeſticall enemies that euer France or any King had in his boſome, were the Duke of Guize, the Cardinall his brother, and the Q Mother, they three are ſmitten downe by the finger of God, as if it had béen with a thunderboult.
               The ſecond ſort of the conſpirators (moſt dangerous and cruell beaſts) were in hold, as the Cardinall of Bourbon, the Marquis Albeuf, the Guizes ſonne, and Frier Archbiſhop of Lions, as is before ſaid, and more the King might haue caught: and if the King had béen a carefull reuenger of Gods lawe, and had feared God more then man, they had drunke of the dregges of Gods iuſtice as their fellowes did.
               The third ſort of conſpirators were in the Kings ſight, and within the Towne, as Chaſtre, Briſſak, Boyſdaulphin, and others, to whom hée forgaue the due puniſhment: and they did ſpeake him fayre for a while, vntill they ſawe an occaſion to worke him miſchiefe, as the ſequell did verifie.
               
                  
The fourth ſort of the traytors were, ſome in the Towne, and many in the Suburbs, there lurking vntill the Duke of Guize would haue giuen  the watch word, readie to execute or to helpe him in the execution of his enterpriſe, there notwithſtanding the ſhutting of the gates, either through the teſtimonie and guiltines of their conſciences, or that the rumour that was ſpread, flying ouer the wall gaue them the alarum; ſo that they of the reformed religion did neuer depart out of S. Germayne ſuburbe on Bartholmew day in the yeare 1572. as theſe fellowes departed out of Bloys without boates or other furniture.
               Theſe moſt damnable traytors carrying abroade the rumours of the Duke of Guize, with amplification, and with deprauing of the Kings fact, did begin and aduaunce the rebellion, which anſwered afterward agaynſt the King.
               The fift ſort was of them, who the day before tooke it to bee a poynt of honour wherupon to challenge to the combat, if any man had called them Royals: now they on a ſudden did hate outwardly worſe then murther to bee called Guiziens: of this ſort were the moſt part of the Prieſtes and Commons there aſſembled at the States, who by little and little ſlyding away one after another, cauſed through the moſt part of thoſe Prouinces which had rooted out the Goſpell from among thē, an vniuerſall rebellion.
               The King forgetting his calling, to wit, to bee a publike reuenger of Gods lawe, and executer of his iuſtice, who commandeth him that his eye ſhall not take pitie vpon ſuch abominable contemners of Gods ordinance and iuſtice, whoſe Image his perſon repreſented, fearing men more then GOD, and vnder the colour of clemencie conſented to their crimes, and through impunitie approoued their miſdéedes; God a righteous Iudge turned this his puſillanimitie to a ſnare and a blocke of offence, by the which he wrought his owne ouerthrowe and miſerable end.
               Now leauing the euents which followed this tragedie played at Bloys, we will fetch other matters and exploits which were done in other places, that varietie may not onely delight the Chriſtian Reader, but alſo ſtirre him vp to feare, tremble, and reuerence Gods iudgements. For not onely at Bloys he powred mightie ſtreames of his wrath vpon the wicked, but alſo in other places the Lord at the ſame time fed his enemies with ſhame, clothed them with diſhonour, and rewarded them with confuſion, and in all places deliuered his Saints.
               It is ſayd before, how at the making and concluding of the edict of reunion in Iuly laſt, it was agreed that two mightie Armies ſhould be muſtered and made vp with as much readines as it could be done: the one ſhould be conducted by the Duke of Guize into Guienne; and the other vnder the leading of the Duke de Mayne into Daulphine, there to roote out them of the religion.
               
                  
But yet the Duke of Guize aduiſed by his counſell, to wit, the Cardinall his brother, and the Biſhop of Lions, altered his purpoſe for three cauſes. 
               
               Firſt, the cauſe of religion which he pretended, was not the marke that he ſhot at, neither did he greatly care which of the two went backward or forward.
               Secondly, he perceaued how he went to caſt himſelfe into the hazard of warre, which is vncertaine, but ſpecially agaynſt ſuch a Captayne who hetherto had remained inuincible, and knewe with fewe how to ouercome great multitudes and mighty forces, whom hee feared as the ſlaue doth dread his Lord, whom he hath greeuouſly offended. Therfore he thought good not to hazard that way, but to reſerue himſelfe to a better opportunity, which would be offered him ere long.
               The third cauſe was, that if he ſhould abſent himſelfe farre from Paris it might be that the King would enterpriſe it there uppon, and carry it away from him. Alſo, if he ſhould abſent himſelfe from the Court, he were not able eaſily to bring to paſſe his intent, nor giue the blowe which he had in minde long before.
               Therfore another is to be ſent, yet it muſt not be any ſuſpected perſon. As for the Princes they are partiall in this cauſe, and being of great authoritie of themſelues, are not to bee armed with power, for els they may marre the play.
               The Marſhals Byron and Haultmont are good noble men, good French men and valiant, they are Royals, and therfore we will haue none of them. For it were not good to arme them with ſuch forces: for if wee ſay they ſhould in the meane time execute our enterpriſe, whileſt they had ſuch an armie they might marre all, and begin a new tragedie vpon the players of the former.
               Therefore ſuch a Generall muſt néedes bee appoynted, as may flatter with both ſides, and that will turne to the ſtrongeſt part, and if he ſhould be loſt in the battell it maketh no matter who that ſhould be. The Duke of Neuers, of Nation an Italian, an Atheiſt by religion, a Spanyard by faction; a Leaguer and a Royall both, by policie and diſſimulation; in Nobilitie nouus homo. For here is to be noted, that in Italy there is no ancient Nobilitie remayning, except it bee the Vrſins and Colomuae, and ſome of the Patrilij in Venice. For all the reſt (perhaps ſome fewe excepted) are families raiſed vp within theſe few hundred yeares, out of Colliers, as the Medicis, Porters and Chimney ſweepers, during the vniuerſall rebellion of Italy againſt the Emperours, vnder the factions of Guelpſes and Gibelius: and the Popes baſtards alſo are the ſtockes of many families, which now are accounted of the chiefeſt Nobilitie there, as the houſes of Parma, Vrbines, &c.
               
                  
This Duke of Neuers hanging about the ſkirts of the Q. Mother, maried the onely heires of the noble and ancient familie of Neuers, whoſe father  was ſlayne at the battell of Dreulx, being of the houſe of Gonzages, neuer heard of before theſe eight ſcore yeares.
               The noble Princes of the royall blood, the ancient Nobility of France are no men, but ſet behinde the doore; they may not lead the kings armies, not for lack of ſufficiencie: Why then: Becauſe they are ſuſpected by the League, to be true to their king, good louers of their country, and too naturall to their kings ſubiects and fellow Citizens.
               Whileſt therefore the States doe continue at Bloys and Rochel, the Kings armie in Nouember taking their iourney into Poytow, with great preparatiō, intending as wel to recouer the places occupied by them of the Religion, as alſo to beat the king of Nauarre; in which doing not only they ſhould make an ende of the warre by rooting out vtterly them of the Religion, but alſo ſhould recouer the loſſe of the honour of the armie, which a moneth before had beene buried at Coutras by the King of Nauarre.
               
               This armie was great and ſtrong, conſiſting of Frenchmen, Swiſſers, and Italians, hauing a great number of armed men. And as it marched forward, ſo ſtill it increaſed. For light horſes and Noble men, with other qualities out of all partes, out of the cities and communalties of the Prouinces neere about, as well of the one as of the other ſide of the Loyre, did voluntarylie ioyne themſelues to it. And among others out of the low Poytow, were the Lords of Roches, Beatault of Bourneueau, Boucherie, and Saint Andre, with their companies.
               The Duke of Neuers, as is ſayd before, was generall, aſſiſted with the Lord Chaſtre and Sagonne, two notable traytors Leaguers, and Lauerdine, loyall and faithfull to his Prince, with other Lords and Captaines, Ordinance, munition, and all kinde of preparation of warre was great. The greateſt part of this armie as well of the heads and commaunders, as of the Nobilitie and others which did obey, were Leaguers and leagued, who thought that they could neuer worke miſchiefe enough.
               It is an incredible thing to heare the miſchieues, hauock, and oppreſſion which this armie did where it paſſed through, but ſpecially to them of the reformed religion, who were found before them, both in their houſes and abroad: the people, men and women, euen in diuers places the very cattell did flie before this armie, as before a thundering tempeſt, euen as a flock of ſheepe before a heard of woolues, ſauage beaſts, or monſters neuer ſeene before.
               
                  Sultan Soliman, Siech, Selymogly, did neuer cary greater cruelty, ſauagenes, barbarouſnes and terror, into Auſtrich and Slireland, when he came downe with three hundred thouſand men to the ſiege of Vienne, than

did this r
                     •
                  bble of turkiſh broode, monſtrous Cyclops, God-contemners' and Gyancs, into their owne naturall countrey, yet doo not I ſpeake of all  generally, but of the moſt part.
               
                  Rochel, and other townes of ſafetie, round about were quickly repleniſhed of exiled people out of Poytow, Britaine, Touraine, Landomoys, and other places nigh the ſoiourning of this armie: Euen many Catholickes fled into the townes of the reformed religion, abhorring, accurſing, & deteſting thoſe miſbegotten monſters.
               The firſt place where this flood ſpewed out of the Dragons mouth to haue drowned the woman which was in trauaile, I meane this army was ſtayed, was before Mauleon, which is a ſmall towne, feeble, and of no ſtrength at all. There is in the ſame a Caſtell, which is of no better defence than the towne.
               The king of Nauarre (as it is ſayd) after the taking of Beauuoyre, leſt within the ſame towne, the Lord Viliers Charlemaigne for gouernour, with a certaine number of Souldiers, not for to obſtinate themſelues vpon that naughty place (which was not able to reſiſt a farre leſſer than a royall armie) but for to keepe the field, and for to refreſh himſelfe. The armie deſcending from Turenne tooke way to Mauleon, about the 13, of Nouember.
               The forerunners of the armie ſhewed themſelues: the gariſon there would not diſlodge for them, but made a ſhew as though they would hold the place. But forces arriuing more and more vnlooked for, at length the Ordinance was brought before the place. The Lord Viliers ſeeing that, determined to capitulate by the meanes of the Lord Lauerdine, the captayne, and one Croix were appoynted to conclude the capitulation.
               The Lord Miraumont Sargeant maior of the battell, was ſent for hoſtage to Mauleon for ſafety. From Mauleon went forth alſo for hoſtage Captayne Laudebrix.
               
               The agreement was made and concluded with ſmall aduantage to them who were beſieged within the towne: for the Lords Brigneulx, and Chaſtiagueray did draw nigh the walles of the Town, which were already forſaken by the garriſon, and not defended: and after they had pulled down few ſtones by ſurpriſing, and contrary vnto the agreement, entred into the towne, did kill and wound all them whom they found both of the garriſon, and alſo of their owne ſide; notwithſtanding the reſiſtance and reproofe which the ſayd Lord Miraumont could do, for to let ſuch a treacherous vnfaithfulnes vnworthy of men of warre.
               The paſſion of theſe leagued Souldiers was ſhewed ſo diſordered and barbarous, that they compelled the ſayd Lord Miraumont to ſaue himſelfe into the caſtell, with the remainant of the garriſon which had eſcaped, for many had béene moſt vilanouſly ſlaine after they had yeelded their armor,

ſome did ſaue themſelues by flight, caſting themſelues ouer the wall; other were hurt; ſome taken and ſpoyled of all that euer they had, contrary to the  agreement.
               The Lords Chaſtre and Lauerdine, aduertiſed of this diſorder, haſted thether, and cauſed (although very late) the killing to ceaſe, and conducted the reſt of them who had eſcaped, beyond the riuer Seure, toward Fonteney.
               
               After this exploit done, the army marched ſtraight way toward the Towne and Caſtell of Montagne, at the ſolicitation of them of Nantes, and Nobility of Aniou, and low Poytow, who were not of the religion, who altogether receaued by it many diſcommodities: the moſt part of Gentlemen hauing retyred, ſome to Nantes and ſome to Angers: and they all deſired to haue that thorne out of their heele. Some were yet remayning in Poytow vnder the protections of the King of Nauarre, wayting for the occaſion to ſtirre at the comming of that army.
               This towne and caſtle of Montagne pertained to the Prince of Conde, which by the outrages of ſome of the countrey and neighbours had béen ſurpriſed, and the walles ſo beaten downe, that there was no hope left that any warre could be made there. Notwithſtanding, the Lord Colombieres whom wee haue ſaid to haue brought certaine companies vnto the King of Nauarre out of Normandy, with his yongeſt ſonne called Lucerne, & ſome companies with them had ſeazed vpon it: the towne was very little repaired of the former ruine and decay, which was great; the caſtell had béene better relieued, trenched and made commodious. The Lord Colombieres commaunded there; the King of Nauarre had ſent thether beſide to ſtrengthen the ſaid towne the Lord Preau, with foure companies of his regiment at the approching of that army: for his two other companies had béen ſent to Ganache, and other places.
               All that could bee in that place of footmen was about three hundred, and beſydes, there might be about fifty Harquebuziers on horſebacke.
               There was in that place reaſonable ſtore of victuals for the time that they were minded to defend it, as well in wine (whereof there was aboue foure hundred pipes) as in corne, meale, ſalt, béefe, and other neceſſary munitions for mans life.
               About the 25. of Nouember, the Lord Miramont Sargeant maior of the army, accompanied with the Harquebuſiers on horſback of the army, lighted at the Barillery, where afterward the Lord Neuers lodged, and from thence went with his company to view the place, and to make his approches.
               Captayne Beauuoys, and Beuf, leaders of the company of the Lord Colombieres went out with a certaine number of ſouldiers to receaue them. The ſkirmiſh endured very hot a good hower and a halfe, and there were ſlayne of the ſide of the enemies Brichanteau, ſonne to the Lord Bigueulx,
                  
and many others, for whome there was great mone made in the army.
               Go now truce-breaker Brigueulx, & learne yet once to breake the publike  fayth at Mauleon.
               
               Captayne Beuf, who iſſued forth out of the towne, was ſhot with a pellet in the thigh. After this ſkirmiſh ended, euery man retyred, and the enemie went to lodge at the Barrillery. The two dayes following, paſſed away in light ſkirmiſhes.
               The 29. the armie made approches on the ſide of the heath Buor. Then the Lord Preau iſſued out, ſo there was a fierce ſkirmiſh, in the which were layed on the ground a great many of the enemies, but none of the towne that euer came to knowledge. The enemies who had begunne their trench
                     •
                  s, were compelled by the ſayd ſkirmiſhes to giue ouer their worke for that time.
               After that about eight dayes paſt, before that the Ordinance could arriue, for the continuall rayne, floodes and foule wayes, which were the beginning of the ſ
                     •
                  ourge of that armie of ſauage robbers.
               The eighth of December the Cannon arriued, and there paſſed three dayes before it was occupied.
               But the eleuenth of December, the Duke of Neuers ſaluted the towne with certaine volies of twelue pieces of ordinance, and at the ſame i
                     •
                  ſtant ſummoned them to render the towne. Whether the Lord Colombieres had beene already labored & wonne by ſome friends, whom he might haue had in the armie or otherwiſe, ſo it fell out, that vpon the ſummons hee ſhewed vnto the garriſon, what ſmall apparance there was to obſtinate that place againſt an armie, and amplifiyng the great diſcommodities and inconueniences which might enſue, concluded to render the place, adding as ſome afterward haue reported, certayne diſcontentments which he ſaid he had receiued, which did diſcourage him in the performance of that ſeruice, to which the occaſions and many other reaſons did binde him.
               The Lord Preau on the other ſide, ſaid, that the place might be reaſonably defended, That he was ſeruant to the king of Nauarre, to whom he had promiſed to keepe faithfully that place, ſo long as the ſkill of warre would permit him, and that his credit did reſtrayne him from conſen
                     •
                  ing to the rendring thereof.
               Out of this diuerſitie of affections the diuiſion began, which afterward was the cauſe of the ſo ſodaine loſſe of the place.
               The Lord Colombieres had on his ſide ye Harquebuſiers on horſeback, which had followed him, & were there in garriſon. The Lord Preau had on his ſide his ſoure companies, ſome voluntary gentlemē and ſtrangers: betweene them both were laboured by each partie: of the inhabitants there were few or none.
               
                  
                     ••
                  t after long reaſoning, Colombieres the gouernour caryed it away,

knowing very wel yt the enemie was not ignorant of that diuiſion, and ſent to the camp, Captayne Courbe his lieftenant, to offer agreement to the  L. of Neuers, who tooke great pleaſure in this occaſion. For the ſoiourne of 15. dayes before that plate, in ſo fowle weather, in ſo great ſcarſitie of victualls as was in that armie, was a ſecond wound of his diſſipation.
               The tearme of this agreement was ſo ſhort, that the king of Nauarre being vpon the poynt to ſuccour them, was compelled to breake his enterprize, although it was agreed that the king of Nauarre ſhould haue beene aduertized of it.
               The conditions of the agreement, were that the colours ſhould be rendered, the ſouldiers ſhould goe forth with their match out, and the gentlemen with their furniture, that they ſhould all be conducted by a Herault and a trompet, as farre as Saint Albine, with condition that they ſhould retyre within three dayes.
               The L. Colombieres conducted all the Garriſon about halfe a league, and then he aſked if yt there were any in the companies that would follow him: but almoſt all refuſed. Captaine Courbe with ſix or ſeauen more, as well of his houſhold ſeruants as others, followed him. So he taking his leaue, and induced either with diſcontentment, or with ſome other affection, he ioyned himſelfe to that armie.
               The reſt of the troups were ſafely conducted nigh as farre as Luſſen and Saint Gemmes, and were left there vpon the conditions aboueſaid, by the Herault and Trompet. But the Lord Sagonne, Colonel of the light horſemen, did ſo cut the time prefixed (that deſirous as it was ſuppoſed to reuenge the death of ſome friend of his in that armie, who had been ſlayn before in that place) ſurprized thoſe companies who were at S. Albine, and charged them ſo hardly, that ſcarce they had time to get into a church, and to ſhut themſelues therein. They were without munition of neceſſary things, ſo that they were cōpelled to render themſelues yet once againe hauing little reſiſted. This compoſition was not like the firſt, for they had onely their liues: they were vnarmed and ryfled, and ſome few were ſlaine. With a ſpeedy retire they might haue auoyded that iniurie.
               
                  Montagne ſo ſurrendred; the towne of Ganache was greatly threatned. The Marqueſſe of Beliſle, who made his abode at Maſchecow, deſired greatly to be dicharged of ſuch neighbours. And beſides, this place was very fit for him, if by the meanes of that armie he coulde haue gotten it. This place pertained to the Lady of Landimoys, of the houſe of Rohan, who had retired to Nantes, obaying the kings Edict concerning the alteration of religion.
               The King of Nauarre had giuen the gouernement of this place, to the L. Pleſsis Gette, the which diuers times, but ſpecially a few dayes afore the ſiege, had been greatly laboured by the ſaid Lady, & alſo by the Marqueſſe

of Beliſle, with faire and large promiſes, to yéeld the place into their hands, to whome he would neuer hearken, but determined to keep it faithfully. 
               
               The towne of Ganache, being diſtant from Montagne but ſeauen leagues, the Lord Pleſsis fore ſeeing the ſiege, diſpatched withall diligence to the King of Nauarre (who was at Rochel) the Lord Sabloniere and Ieſſerant, to let him vnderſtand the ſmall commodities that they had, to holde that place againſt a royall army. That notwithſtanding the ſaide Lorde Pleſsis, with the reſt of the Captaines with him, had determined to doo him good ſeruice, ſo that he would furniſh them with meanes.
               At theſe newes, the King diſpatched the Baron Vignoles, with all his companies, to ſtrengthen that place. He ſent alſo by ſea, two Captaines of the regiment of his gardes, vnder the conduct of the Lordes Aubiguy, and Robiniere, who imbarked themſelues part at Rochel, with powder, pikes, and other munition of warre, part at Eſande. But the contrarie windes cauſed them to caſt anker at the Iland of Rhe, where they ſtayed eyght daies for winde: during which time, many being ſea ſick were found wanting, ſo that at the imbarking againe, in ſtead of two hundred, were found fewer in number.
               The Lord Pleſsis in the meane time laboured hard in the places where was moſt neede, and cauſed the victuals, as well for men as for horſes, to be brought in out of the vilages round about.
               The L. Ruffigny arriued there, with 50. Harquebuſiers on horſeback, by the cōmandement of the ſaid King, in ſtaying ye ſuccor which came by ſea.
               
                  Ganache is compounded of a towne and Caſtell, ſituated in the borders of Poytow and Britayn, yet holding more of Poytow, it is diſtant from the ſea three leagues, with an open proſpect on that ſide: of the ſide of Montagne, and Maſchecow, it is woody and couered. There is a great poole, which compaſſeth a great part of the towne, vppon the Caſtell ſide, which with diuers brookes, watereth the great medowes about it, that maketh the waies to the towne mooriſh and foule, but ſpecially in winter. The ſaid poole dooth compaſſe almoſt two parts of the towne, to wit, from the ſuburb Saint Leonard, to the ſuburb of Saint Thomas, which is al the ſide of the Caſtell. The towne is compaſſed with an indifferent good ditch, cut out of a rock; the wall is auncient, flancked with ſmall towers, and made with loope holes, after the olde faſhion; it was found better to reſiſt the cannon, then it was thought it would bee, ſpecially on the ſide where it was battered, the which for being too feeble and naked, (hauing but an olde gate) the Lord Pleſsis had fortified and couered with a ſpurre, aſſoone as he had the gouernement of that place, which did him good ſeruice during the ſiege.
               Hee made two bulwarkes more on the other ſide of the towne, toward th
                     •
                  ſuburb Saint Thomas, the one to couer a tower of the Caſtell, made after

the forme of a horſeſhoo, the other nigh vnto the cauſie, which dooth kéep the iſſue of the poole: ten dayes before the ſiege, which was the fourth of  December, hee builded another fort, which dooth couer the gate of the towne towards Maſchecow, without the which, the enemy euen the firſt night of the ſiege, might haue lodged hard to the wall, that place being not flanked with any thing.
               The worke began to goe forward, after the ſuccour ariued by the ſea, with the munitions of warre, of whome a part was ſent to Beauuoyre, by the commaundement of the King of Nauarre, to wit, they which were of the regiment of Valirant, who had embarked themſelues with them, who were ſent to Ganache.
               
               The Baron Vignoles, a Gentleman of Gaſcoyne, entred into Ganache, as alſo the Lord Saint George, by the King of Nauarre his commaundement, with his companie of 50. Harquebuſiers on horſeback. There was then none of all the forts of ſufficient defence, vpon which occaſion, they deuided ye quarters, as wel for the defence, as for to labour about the fortifications, euery one in his quarter, with ſuch diligence as neceſſity required.
               The Baron Vignoles, with his captaines Piue, and Solas, tooke on him the keeping of the fort of the cauſy, right againſt a broaken chappel of Saint Thomas ſuburbs. This fort was commaunded by a little hill, couered with fruitefull trees, and alſo by the ſuburb, for which cauſe they couered themſelues with barricadoes and Gabions.
               The two companies of the Kings gardes, which were commaunded by the Lordes Aubiguy and Robiniere, vndertooke the keeping of the fort of the tower, which we haue ſaide to haue the forme of a horſeſhooe.
               The Lord Ruffigny with his companie, vndertooke to keepe the fort of the ſuburb Saint Leonard, which was the beſt, hauing the ditches full of water of the height of 9. foote.
               Captaine Beauregard, who commanded ouer the company of the Harquebuſiers on horſeback, of the ordinarie gariſon: vndertooke to make a fort at one of the corners of the towne, but it was a worke of long time, and ſerued but a little, and coſt much to keepe, and was not begon, but in hope that Montagne, which was already beſieged, would debate longer then it did, notwithſtanding, they laboured about it continually: and whereas the Captaine Beauregard had not aboue 18. Harquebuſiers of his owne, halfe of the companie of the Lord Saint George was giuen him. The two captaines of the two companies of footemen, ordained for the ordinary gar ion, did drawe the lots to whome ſhould remaine the fort which was begun at the gate; ſo it fell to the lot of Captaine Ferriere, who laboured ſo hard, that euen in ten dayes during the ſiege, it was made defenſible, and ſerued to good effect.
               The other companie of the gariſon, vnder the commaundement of the

Lord Foreſtiere, a noble man of Britaine, was appoynted for the garde of the Caſtle, and the Doue houſe which was in the garden.
               The charges ſo deuided, euery man doth labour; ſome doo pull downe  the Suburbs; others goe about the Countrey to get men to labour: for there was none of the inhabitants left in the Towne, not ſo much as an artificer, but only a butcher.
               The Lord Pleſsis aduertiſed of the ſurrendring of Montagne, ſent foorth his forerunners to ſcoure the countrey: they reported the 14. day of December that part of the armie was alreadie lodged at Lege. The morrowe was diſcouered a great troupe of horſemen, who appeared aboue the mils of Porrieres to view the Towne.
               The Lord Perrine, Lieutenant of the companie of the light horſes of the Gouernour, (who had retyred before to his own houſe, ſuppoſing there to paſſe part of the winter) returned into the Towne about three daies before the ſiege, and went out with foure or fiue light horſes to view them.
               The 16. day of December againe very early he went out on horſeback, but he had not paſſed aboue halfe a mile when he found the forerunners of the enemie, whereof he aduertiſed the Gouernour. About 11. of the clocke there marched a great number of horſemen, conducted by ye Lord Sagonne, followed of many regiments of Chaſtiagueray, Brigueulx, Leſlele, and ohers, who in haſt aduanced to get the Suburbe of S. Leonard.
               
               Theſe troupes diſcouered by the L. Perrine, hee turned face to them to hold them play, & to giue time to them of the Town to prepare to receaue them: which thing could not be done ſo timely, but that when the bel began to ring for the alarum, the enemie was at the entring of the Suburbe.
               The L. Ruffigny went to meete them with ſword in hand, & reſolutely followed by the Lord Vignoles and Maretes, ſons to the Lord Sabboniere, and ſome other Souldiers of their companies with them approached nigh them. But the L. Ruffigny, for not hauing had leiſure totake his Corſlet, entring into a houſe where he ſawe the enemies lodge, receiued a pellet in his ſtomacke, whereof (being carried thence) two houres after he dyed.
               This his death was occaſion that the Suburbs were loſt vnto the Chapell ſooner then otherwiſe it had béen. Captaine Iahn and fifteene Souldiers (beſides them who were wounded) of the enemies ſide were ſlaine, aſwell within the ſayd houſe as in the Suburbes, as afterward ſome of the enemies reported.
               For to reſcue them who did fight, came the Baron Vignoles, with Captaine Foreſtiere, and 40. Souldiers harquebuſiers, who defended all the day that which reſted of the Suburbe betweene the Chapell and ye towne. There was wounded Captaine Mote, Standard bearer of the Lord Vignoles, with a pellet in the higheſt part of the thigh, whereof he dyed fewe dayes after. There was before the towne gate beyond an olde hollow way, certaine houſes ſomewhat ruinous. The Lord S. George (the alarum being

giuen) went to lodge within the ſame ruinous houſes, aſſiſted aſwell of his owne, as of ſome armed men of the companie of the Gouernour, to  helpe the harquebuſiers if they ſhould be forced. There alſo the enemie preſented all his forces, and ſent to begin the ſkirmiſh, which was ſuſtayned and continued vntill night; ſo that the enemie was not able to lodge within the ſayd ruinous houſes without great loſſe: and ſeeing the obſtinacie of them within, lodged in a village vpon the way to Maſchecow. They of the towne loſt a ſouldier, and the Lord Coulee was there wounded.
               The night following, the regiment of Brigneulx and Chaſtiagueray, who had gotten the Suburbe of S. Leonard, lodged in the houſes nigh to the Chappell which were pulled downe. Notwithſtanding, they could not ſet vp any Barricadoes, by reaſon of the continuall ſhot which did raine out of the Forts and Curtine; ſo that they could not get out of ye houſes.
               All the dayes following, to wit, from the 16. vnto the 29. of December, paſſed away in continuall ſkirmiſhes, as the enemie made his approaches for to lodge, but ſpecially at the comming of the regiments of the Countie of Beaupre, who went about to lodge at the Planches: for there commonly began the ſkirmiſhes, which neuer ended but commonly by the death of ſome of commandement of the ſide of the enemie.
               Like ſkirmiſhes were daily fought on the ſide of the Poole, againſt another regiment which was lodged at Guinefole, where certaine Gaſcoynes of the gariſon came to hand blowes with the enemie. All theſe ſkirmiſhes were ſo fauourable to them of the Towne, that beſide the firſt day they loſt not one man, onely ſome were hurt; ſo that the enemie could not (during all theſe ſkirmiſhes) get any aduauntage vppon them, not ſo much as the hedges within foure hundred paces of the Curtine and Forts. Euen ten dayes after they were beſieged, they iſſued foorth and pulled downe certaine houſes in the ſight of the enemie, and burned others, and among them a houſe called Eſcraziere, from whence the enemie who had lodged therein, was driuen out with loſſe of certaine men. The horſemen alſo did iſſue foorth, and tooke ſo great number of priſoners, that they were enforced to ſend back a great many of them that were moſt vnprofitable: they kept a great number to worke at the fortifications; others of greater calling were put to their raunſome.
               The Lord Chaſtre, accompanied with ten or twelue hundred horſes, paſſed at the Planches to the place where the Lord of Neuers was; and ſéeing certaine horſemen who were iſſued out of the Towne when he would haue gone to view, and aduaunced ſomewhat for that purpoſe, his horſe fell in a ditch, and had not béen the diligence of them of his companie in ſuccouring of him, and that he was couered with a great number of harquebuſiers which followed thoſe horſemen, hee had béen taken by them of the Towne.
               
                  
As thinges did ſo paſſe there, the Lord Pleſsis ſent diuers times to the King for to aduertiſe him of the ſtate of the affayres, and by the ſame meſſengers  had anſwere againe.
               Whileſt theſe ſkirmiſhes and blowes were geuen at Ganache the artillery was brought from Montagne, and tooke the way of Maſchecow for to auoyd the foulnes of the other way: they were whole fifteene dayes before they could conuay the ſaid ordinance, although they of the Countrey did ſhew themſelues ſo deſyrous and ready to conduct the ſayd ordinance, that they omitted nothing of all their meanes, induſtrie and labour: but ſpecially the Lord Beliſle, for the deſire which hee had to poſſeſſe that place. There was of that artillery twelue peeces of Ordinance vz. ſixe canons of battery, foure great Culuerins, and two of a meaner ſort.
               This Ordinance being arriued the 21. of December about noone, the Duke of Neuers ſet his army in battell array, and ſaluted the towne with a voley of all theſe peeces, from the top of a little hill nigh the place of execution about fiue hundered paces from the towne.
               That being done, he ſent an Herault of armes to ſommon the Lord Pleſsis, to ſurrender him the towne as vnto the Kings lieutenant.
               The Lord Pleſsis, by the aduiſe of al the captaines, anſwered, that he and all his fellowes were moſt humble and faithfull ſeruantes and ſubiectes to his maieſty: but that hee did not acknowledge in all Guienne any other lieutenant generall for the King, but onely the King of Nauarre, to whom (& to none other, if it were not by his expreſſe commaundement) hee would ſurrender that place.
               The Herauld was yet ſent twiſe from the Baron Paluan, and the Lord Villeneufue of Anjou, for to find the means to ſpeake to the Lord Pleſsis, who knowing the importance of ſuch parley, flatly refuſed it.
               At the ſelfe ſame time that the army did ſo muſter in battell aray in the ſight of all men, a ſouldier Wallon of the companies of Picardie, with his ſword in hand drawen, began to runne ouerthwart a great medow right to the Fort of Captaine Beauregard, crying viue Nauarre: the Duke of Guyze is dead, and Niort is taken: that voice was ſo high, that it was heard of both ſides; they let flie at him diuers ſhot, but not one did hit him, but only in his hat. They of the towne were fully aduertiſed by him of the ſtate of the armie, and of the ſtrange euents which had happened at Bloys. They vnderſtood alſo of the exploit which the King of Nauarre had donein igh Poytow ſince the ſiege. All theſe newes brought not only great ioy to them of the towne, but alſo encreaſed their courage.
               The Duke of Neuers hauing receaued anſwere of the beſieged, cauſed his Ordinance to bee planted in certaine ruinous houſes on the one ſide of Maſchecow, defended with certaine Gabions, which cauſed them beſieged to thinke that they ſhould bee battered of that ſide, where they alſo began

to crench themſelues with great labour and dilligence.
               But now wee will leaue the ſiege of Ganache, whileſt the Duke of Neuers doth prepare his battery, to make a breach, and maketh himſelfe ready  to giue the aſſault, and alſo the beſieged do prepare themſelues to defend the place, and receaue the enemie: and wee will goe to ſee what exploits the King of Nauarre hath performed in high Poytow.
               
               It is ſayd before, how the King of Nauarre after the taking of Beauuoyre, ſet garriſons in the townes of Poytow, to keepe the countrey about, and to make head againſt that army which was comming with great preparations, might, fury, and threatnings: which thing beeing done, heretired to Rochel, to gather all his power, and to prouide all neceſſary things, either to croſſe, or to geue battell to that army if occaſion might ſerue.
               And whileſt theſe blowes and ſkirmiſhes aboue ſayd, did ſo paſſe at the ſiege of Ganache, and ſuch ſtrange and ſo vnlooked for euents did fall out at Bloys, the Lord Saint Gelays had long before hand curiouſly ſought out the meanes to enterpriſe vpon the towne of Niort, as well to do ſeruice to them, whoſe part he followed (the inhabitants hauing béen alwayes of the chiefeſt of the League, and great enemies to them of the reformed religion) as alſo for the iniuries which they of the ſayd Towne proffered vnto him, and to his houſes thereabouts, doing vnto him all the wrongs that euer they could deuiſe.
               The King of Nauarre arriued from Rochel into Poytow, vnderſtood as well by the ſayd Lord Saint Gelays, and by others of the enterpriſe vpon the ſaid towne of Niort, but the execution thereof was oftentimes delayd: at length the ſayd King hauing with a type iudgement wayed all the circumſtances, and ſeene the facility of the means to compaſſe that enterpriſe, at length ended his counſell, with reſolution to try ſpeedily the execution thereof: and for that purpoſe departed from Rochel to Saint Ihan d'Angely vnder other colours, about the 21. of December.
               The 24. of December, the Lord Saint Gelays departed from Rachel, accompanied with the Lord Ranques, with ten horſmen of his traine only, and arryued at Saynt Iahn about nine a clocke in the night.
               The 26. of December, arriued at S. Iahn early (at the firſt opening of the gates) a Poſt from Bloys riding with two Horſes, who ſayd that voluntarily he had departed from Bloys, to bring newes to the King of Nauarre, touching the death of the Duke of Guyze.
               
               Theſe newes did not ſtay the execution of the enterpriſe, ſo that the ſaid King hauing geuen order to the men of warre which ſhould be at the execution, and appointed them who ſhould conduct them, to wit, the Lordes Parabiere, Harābure, Preau, and others, the Lord S. Gelays & Ranques, with twelue horſemen onely departed from S. Iahn, and making toward Villeneufue within a league from Saint Iahn, met about 40. Harquebuziers

on horſe backe of the regiment of the King of Nauarre his guards, who were conducted by the Lord des Liſtres: with this troupe the ſaid  Lords Saint Gelays & Ranques went the way that goeth to the left hand of the Foreſt.
               Thence (beeing yet day) the Lord Ranques accompanied with ten or twelue Harquebuſiers, left the Lord Saynt Gelays, and went the way to Foys: he was far gone on his way when he met with ten or twelue horſemen of the enemies, who were thought to bee Albaneſes: hee charged them, and one was flaine, the reſt ſaued themſelues in the forreſt of Chizai.
               
               In the meane time while the Lord Saint Gelays, with the reſt of his troupe went the croſſe way nigh to the towne Saint Plauſiue, where the Lords Parabiere, Harambure, & Preau, with others who folowed him to the nūber of 350. men, with ſixe mules, carrying the ladders & other neceſſary thīgs which met ye ſaid Lord S. Gelays: ther they ſtaied awhile for the reſt of the troupe, all aſſembled together, which might be in number between three and foure hundered men Harquebuziers, and three or foure ſcore armed men.
               All this companie tooke their way toward Niort, with as much ſilence as could be, to the gate Saint Gelays.
               
               The Lord Ranques ſeparated himſelfe, as is ſaide before, to ſcoure the countrey, the way which goeth to Saint Jhans gate of Niort, to ſee that no man might goe into the towne, to giue aduertiſement of the things which were done abroad. There were left behinde all the companies, two ſeruants of the Lord Saint Gelays, who went on foote, they followed their maſter the way of County, to Niort. A countrey man was ſent to Niort, by the Lord Ferriere, Lieutenant of the companie of the Lorde Malicorne, who then was in his houſe at County. This countrey man did cary letters from the ſaide Lord Ferriere, to the gouernour or to the Lieutenant of Niort (a man Leagued turbulent, and at whoſe beck all the inhabitants did tremble) with aduertiſement, that already he had warned them twiſe to take heede, for although the report went, that the Hugonets were going to Coignak, it was fained, for certainely they had returned back, and went ſtraightly to them. And that he feared leaſt his men had been taken, ſeeing that he had not receaued ſince any newes, which thing cauſed him to ſend to them the third time that countrey man, to aduertiſe them carefully to take heede. Theſe ſeruants of the Lord Saint Gelays, aſked the countrey man whether he goeth: He anſwereth to Niort: and we alſo ſay they, but we feare it will be too late to come thether in time, for it was ſunne ſetting: care not for that ſaith the countrey man, for I can get in and if it were midnight, for I bring letters to the Lord Malicorne. The ſeruants hearing that, and perceauing that the countrey man had the letters within a

ball of earth, which he carried in his hand, forced him, tooke his letters from him, and lead him with them, and meeting the Lord Ranques at the rendesvous, 
                   at the winde mill, tooke him the letters, with the countrey man. When he had read them, hee ſhewed the ſame to the Lords Saint Gelays, Parabiere, and others when they came. This had been enough to put them out of heart: but in vaine dooth the garde of the citie watch, when God will ſurpriſe it, there is neither ſafety nor counſell againſt his power.
               The inſolency of the inhabitants of Niort againſt the King of Nauarre, and them of the religion, was come to a full meaſure. For notwithſtanding the great doubt, leaſt they of the towne had been aduertiſed of their enterpriſe, at the inſta
                     •
                  t requeſt of ſome, they determined to goe through.
               The troupes had already lighted a great halfe league off in the valey, nigh Vouilay, and had left their horſes made faſt, with certaine ſeruants to keepe them: they cauſed the Mules which caried the ladders, and other neceſſarie things, to goe through the fieldes vnto a quarrie of ſtone nigh the towne, and diſtant onely from the wall a bow ſhoot: there were the ladders vnloaden and deſtributed to them that ſhould occupie them. There were prepared the petar shy two Gentlemen, named Vileſan and Gentil, who being very induſtrious in ſuch things, ſhould vſe them, which were brought within a ſtones caſt of the wal, and the ladders alſo, and all in the high way that leadeth from Chiçay, to the gate Saint Gelays: all this ſtirre paſſed without any perceauing of them within the towne.
               The Moone was not downe, nor went not downe foure houres after, which increaſed greatly the feare of them who did enterpriſe, leaſt they ſhould be diſcouered, yet they determined to abide patiently in ſilence, both the great and extreame cold, and alſo the going downe of the Moone, at whoſe ſhining, many lying vpon the froſen hard ground, did ſleepe (being wearie of their long iourney) more ſwéete then if they had béene in their beddes. In the meane while, the Lordes Ranques, Valieres, Gentil, and others went to view the ditch, and the place where the ladders ſhould bée ſet vp, and the gates where the Petars ſhould be applyed. When they had viewed all, and ſawe that nothing did ſtirre in the towne, and had made their report, they began to let downe the ladders into the drye ditch, by an eaſie path, and alſo to ſet the Petars to their places. The firſt company ofſkaling ladders, was conducted by the Lords Ranques, Valieres, Ionquieres and others, guided by a Souldier named Reuaudiere.
               
               At the ſecond companyes of ladders, were the Lords Preau, Arambure, and des Liſtres, followed by the men which they had in their companies.
               The Lord Saint Gelays and Parabiere went to the gate of Saint Gelays, where the Petars ſhould play.
               The ſcalado was ſet vp at the wall of the towne, diſtant from the ſaide gate of Saint Gelays about thirtie or fortie paces.
               
                  
They who caried the Ladders were not ſo ſoone deſcended into the ditch, but the Sentinel which was vpon the wall (farre from the place  of the ſcalado about forty paces) demaunded furiouſly: who goeth there: they without held ſtil without anſwere.
               He which commaunded the guard of the towne (which was vpon the gate of Saint Gelays) came forth and aſked the Sentinel: who is there: The Sentinel anſwered, I heard ſome noyſe, but it is nothing. There happened then a great darknes (as commonly doth after the going down of the Moone) which did fauour greatly them which were without, to ſteale away from the eyes of the Sentinel: for without any knowledge of the ſaid Sentinel the Ladders were placed ſafely. It had been concluded betweene them that were to giue the aſſault, that they ſhould enter as many as they could by the ſcalado, and tha
                     •
                   the Petars ſhould not play 
                     •
                  vntil an extremitie: ſo that ſurprize was begun by the ſcalado. The Ladders then lincked one within another (for they were made with ſuch an art) were applyed to the wall of ten foote in height, diſtant one from the other three or foure paces.
               The Lords Ionquieres and Souſonbre being vpon the wall, followed with fiue and twentie or thirtie next vnto the Sentinell, caſt the ſais Sentinell ouer the wall, and as the remnant went vp the walls, the ſayd Ionquieres, Souſonbre, with the Lords des Liſtres and Preau, and about fiftie with them ſet vpon the garde, where were ſeauen or eight poore labouring men, for the rich men of the towne were aſléepe in their beds: for as they afterward reported, many of them had paſſed the moſt part of the night in playing and danſing, to whom no harme was done, conſidering the ſilence which they kept.
               A ſouldier of them which were entred, apprehending the great daunger of ſuch a ſmall number in ſuch a mightie and populous Towne, cryed to ſet fire to the Petars: ſo that which was ſet at the gate of S. Gelays, ſhot and gaue the alarume to the inhabitants, it did open the gate with the ſhot.
               The other alſo was fired and brake the drawne bridge, and opened the gate. The Lord S. Gelays and Parabiere, with many other Gentlemen and Souldiers armed entred thereby.
               They who entred by the ſcalado di
                     •
                   ſlide cloſe (although few in number) a long ſtreate, and went to the market place, where ſome of the inhabitants running out of their houſes, made ſhew of ſome reſiſtance, & there was hurt the Lord Harambure. At the ſame inſtant came to thē the Lord Parabicre with his traine, they cryed to the inhabitants to put lights at the windowes, and in the ſtreats, who hearing Viue Nauarre, and ſuppoſing that it was a ſurprize, were affrayde, and obeyed thē, for they durſt 
                     •
                  ot diſobey being in a maze.
               
                  
The other parte of them which had got vp by the ladders, found reſiſtance in a corner of the ſtreate nigh the hoſpitall. For a certaine man of the towne, nāmed prince receiuer of the tallages, riſing early to write letters  to his children, being Schollers at Poy
                        •
                     iers, at the alarum giuen went out of his houſe w
                     •
                  th a broad Target in his left hand, and his ſword in his right hand. But he forgot to ſet the ſcarfe of his Target about his neck, which turned to him diſpleaſure. For hauing reſorted to the Lieftenaunt of the towne, who was accompanyed with ſome of the inhabitan
                     •
                  s and ſouldiers of the gouernours guarde, they with all this companie ſet furiouſly vpon them who had entred, and did aduance into the towne, and did driue them back. But the ſayde Prince, weary with the waight of his Target, either for that he was hurt or otherwiſe, gaue it ouer: So that this being done, the reſt began to wauer. The Liefetenant was hurt, and as diſpairing of his life, put himſelf into the hands of ſome gentlemen, with promiſe of great ranſonie, and therupon he was hidden, that it could not be knowen where he was, vntil after his death.
               The reſt of the people which tooke weapons, did aſſemble together in the ſtreate of the town houſe: they let flee certaine ſhott, but without effect, for incontinently they loſt courage, as it falleth out ordinarily in ſuch ſodayne ſurprizes, ſpecially where the warnings are neglected, as had beene done by this Liefetenant of Niort, diſdaynfully few dayes before.
               Some caſt themſelues ouer the walls, whereof ſome were ſlayn; others were let down with cordes; many retyred into the Caſtell: others did hide themſelues: ſo that theſe few companyes of the King of Nauarre in leſſe ſpace than three quarters of an houre entred, vanquiſhed, and remained maſters of the place, without any loſſe more than of fiue men. There was ſlaine of the inhabitants of the towne, betweene fiue and twenty and thirtie, & yet the greateſt part of them for going indiſcreetly to the place of the alarum with lincks and torches, which ſerued for leuell to the Souldiers in the dark to ſhoote at them.
               When the day began to appeare, the ſouldiers wandred about for the ſpoyle which was made in the houſes, but ſo that it was done without any murther, or rauiſhing of woman or maide. And ſo much as was done, happened becauſe it was impoſſible for the leaders wholy to repreſſe it: For it was a town leagued ful of thē yt had their hands yet defiled with the blood of them of the religion, whom they had euery way cruelly handled, & were rich by the ſpoile of their goods, of ſuch as had deſerued the iuſt indignation of the King of Nauarre, againſt whom they had behaued themſelues no leſſe raſhly than preſumptuouſly. To be ſhort, it was a towne ſurprized by them, in whoſe affectiōs they had kindied the firebrand of teuenge, if the conqueter would haue vſed it: Yet all was doone with as much moderatenes, as the circumſtance of the action, of the place, and of

the perſons with whome they had to doo could permit.
               The richeſt ſorte, and of the greateſt calling, enemies to the reſormed Religion, were quiſt, in redeeming their liues and goods by a ſmall ſum  of money, ſmall in reſpect of the whole. For ſuch as had tenne or fifteene thouſand Francks, were quit for two or three hundred crownes.
               The leaders diſpatched incontinently a meſſenger to Saint Iahn, to the King of Nauarre, to let him vnderſtand the newes of that execution. About nine a clock in the morning, the Lord Malicorne who was in the Caſtell, was ſommoned to yeeld himſelfe and the place, at the diſcretion of the King of Nauarre. There was no meanes for him to yeeld, for all the Ordinance was in the towne: Hoſtages were giuen on both ſides, two Gentlemen, to wit, Deſpaue and Rouſiere, went foorth of the Caſtell for the Lord Malicorne, and the Lord Pont of Corle, with two ſouldiers of the guards of the King of Nauarre entred into the Caſtell, to lette the diſorder that might riſe there.
               The ſeauen and twentith day, the King of Nauarre arriued there with a certaine number of horſemē, he receiued at his comming the ſayd Lord Malicorne very courteouſly, to whome hee permitted to carry out of the Caſtell all that was his, and graunted to the Lady Malicorne to enioy the Abbey of Saint Ligaire.
               
               The eight and twentith, after yt the Lord Malicorne had departed out of Niort, the Liefetenant was found dead in a poore houſe at the gate of Saint Gelays, where he died of the wounds which he had receiued in the conflict, his bodie was brought out to be hanged on a Gibbet before the Caſtell.
               The K. of Nauarre (notwithſtanding) graunted it eaſily to his friends to be buried, although be had deſerued ſome notable marke of diſhonour, euen after his death; for he had liued very ſeditiouſly, and had ſworne to the League, one of the firſt, he had cruelly defiled his hands with the bloud of many innocent perſons, vnder the colour that they were of the religion. And not long before had committed an act, no leſſe odious and cruell, than felonious: for he had cauſed the dead body of the great Prouoſt of France, to bée drawne through the ſtreates of the towne, after hee had béen ſlaine in the fight, nigh the walls of the towne, and that a little before his ſurpriſe, as is afore ſaid.
               There was one Iamart, of the richeſt ſort of the towne taken, who being vpon the point to be put to his ranſom, and to be deliuered as the other inhabitants then were, was accuſed euen by many of the romiſh religion, and of the towne, to haue been a man of wicked life, who had committed many things puniſhable by the lawes. He was conuicted to haue been one of the chiefeſt doers in the ſedition of the League, and had vnworthley, and outragiouſly ſpoken againſt the principall Princes of the bloud, his proces

was made according to the crimes committed by him. This was the onely man, who was iudicially executed at the ſurpriſe. 
               
               There were found in that towne fiue great pieces of battery, carying halfe a foot and an ynch in the mouth, two very long Culuerins, which the Lieutenant aboueſayd had cauſed to be caſt (as he ſayd in diriſion) to ſalute the King of Nauarre, when hee ſhould approach the walls of Niort. There were found alſo two meane culuerins: the fiue canons were made ready a new by workemen, ſpecially called from Paris for that purpoſe, for to bee brought to the army of the Duke of Neuers, for the ſiege of Fonteney, which was intended after the winning of Ganache.
               
               This towne was full of rich men and riches, by reaſon of the ſpoyle of them of the reformed religion, of all the countrey round about.
               There was ſufficient quantitie of corne, to maintaine an armie of twentie thouſand men for the ſpace of two yeres. There was alſo ſound twenty thouſand weight of powder, beſides a maruelous quantitie which euery man had in particular. This is a rule of Gods iuſtice, he that ſpoyleth, ſhal be ſpoyled, he that waſteth ſhall be waſted.
               The King of Nauarre gaue the gouernement of that place, and of the countrey, to the Lord Saint Gelays: the Lorde Parabiere was appointed to dwell in the Caſtell.
               To conclude this booke with the yeare (Chriſtian reader) thou maiſt ſee with thine eye, ye iudgements of God executed vpon his enemies generally for their Idolatry, ſuperſtition, and atheiſme. But ſpecially vpon Henry the third, for obſtinacie, in refuſing (through the hardnes of his heart) to heare the Lorde Chriſt ſpeaking vnto him, and warning him to bee wiſe, and feare the Lord with reuerence, in refuſing the counſell of wiſe & noble Princes Senators, noble men, and faithful friends, and following alwaies the vniuſt and wicked counſels of his mother, of flatterers, and ſicophants, but ſpecially of his domeſticall enemies, by whoſe counſels and perſwaſions he loſt his authoritie, credit, reputation, kingdome and life, as ſhall be ſaid in the booke next following.
               Thou haſt ſeene alſo, how the Lord out of the heauens, from the habitation of his ſeate, hath derided & laughed to ſcorne the pride, arrogancie, and contemptuous preſumptiouſnes of the King of Spayne, hath extended his mightie armie vpon him and his ſeruants, as he did vpon Pharao King of Aegipt, & clothed him with diſhonor, as with a garment, and made him ridiculous, and contemptible in the ſight of the Princes, people, and nations of the world.
               We haue ſeene alſo, how that the Lorde, to puniſh the parricides, murtherers of the ſaints, atheiſme, & execrable life of the Duke of Guize, of his bretheren, father, and vncles, turned him to a ſpirit of ambition, to worke all treaſons, treacheries, villanies, commotions, ſeditions, and rebellions

againſt his naturall King, Prince, benefactor and countrey, couering all theſe execrable enormities, vnder the cloake of Catholick religion, and Gods glorie, by the which he hath wrought his owne, his children, houſe,  famely, bretheren and kindred ſudden fall, being beaten downe on a ſuddaine and vnawares, from the top of high degree, honour, dignitie and wealth, as with a ſuddaine tempeſt: wee haue ſéene on the other ſide, how God (according to his mercie and promiſe) hath preſerued from the ſuares of the enemies of his trueth. Firſt, that great Elizabeth of England, nurce of Gods Church, the ioy of Gods people, hath decked her head with a Crowne of glory, hath cloathed her with honour, hath eſtabliſhed her ſeate with iuſtice and godlines, hath made her the terror of al enemies of Chriſt, and the beauty of Europ.
               
               The ſame Gods (prouidence and merciful kindenes) hath alſo preſerued Henry of Bourbon King of Nauarre, and now of France, from the commotions of the people, and whereas his enemies haue ſet vppon him by land, by ſea, by force, by policie, poyſon, and all other meanes which the angell of darkenes hath been able to teach them, to ſwallow him alone aliue; beholde the Lorde, not onely hath eſtabliſhed him in his owne hereditarie kingdome, but alſo by the meanes of his enemies (though againſt their wills) hath made him a way to place him in that throane of Maieſty, which appartained vnto him by that ſucceſſion, which God had ordained in that kingdome, being one of the moſt famous kingdomes of Europ, and hath made him a victorious conquerour of the wicked, and the reſtorer of that afflicted ſtate.
               But alſo in this booke, we haue ſéene how the Lord, in whoſe ſight is precious the death of his ſaints, before the comming of thoſe miſeries, the Lord hath taken vnto himſelfe the moſt noble, vertuous, and godly Princes, the Princes of Conde and Boillon, and many other noble men, leaſt they ſhould ſee euill daies, whoſe names are written in the booke of the righteous.
               Wée haue ſéene alſo, how the Lorde hath turned the moſt wicked and damnable oath taken, not at the ſtates, but rather conſpiracie of Bloys, to an borrible confuſion, and diſſipation of the wicked: for after that the wicked haue gone continually to wrack and confuſion, and neuer preuailed in any action, but in wrapping themſelues into miſerable treaſons, rebellions and commotions, repleniſhing their ſtreates, with murther and bloud.
               The end of the fift Booke.
            
            
               
               THE SIXT BOOKE.
               
                  THis newe yeare bringeth foorth new euents and ſtrange, full of confuſions, the kings death, and an alteration in the ſucceſſion of the Crowne of France, as it ſhall appeare. Wee haue left the royall Armie vnder the conduct of the Duke of Neuers, weakened with hunger, colde, and hard lodging, amazed with the ſtraunge accidents happened at Bloys, before the towne of Ganache, there preparing all things for the batterie. Alſo wee haue ſhewed what exploytes the King of Nauarre did in the meane while. Now wee will returne from Niort in high Poytow to Ganache, to ſee what would be done there.
               The firſt day of Ianuary 1589. paſſed away with light ſkirmiſhes, but without any great effect. 
               
               The ſecond day, they within the towne perceaued that the enemie was remoouing the Ordinance from the place where it was firſt pitched, and yet they could not know vpon which ſide of the Towne they intended to place it, vntill the morrowe being the third day of Ianuary, when it was ſeene at the Chappell Saint Leonard couered with gabions, and planted within two hundred paces of the wall. They perceiued alſo another batterie in preparing on the ſide of the Poole in a field toward Guinefole, ſo that the batteries did croſſe one another.
               The Winter this yeare was ſo extreame during this ſiege, that the yce did carrie euery where: which thing cauſed great diſcommoditie to them which were beſieged, the earth being ſo hard, that when they began to trench themſelues within, (which was at the arriuing of the Canon) they could not in an houre open a foote of earth, although that they had made pickaxes and tooles for that purpoſe. But this alſo did greatly encreaſe their labour, for at the arriuing of the Canon they had ſaluted the Towne on the ſide of Maſchecow, and being lodged within the ruines of certayne houſes there, had planted gabions, which cauſed them of the towne to beléeue that they ſhould bee battered on that ſide, where they alſo had begun their trenches with much and vnprofitable labour. For as it is ſayd, the ordinance was remooued to another place, now hauing loſt all their former

labour, they are ſet to worke night and day at the trenches, and when they went out of the watch, without reſt or ſleepe they muſt worke at the trenches:  wine alſo fayled them, ſo that in time and toyle ſo extreame many fell ſicke, but ſpecially of the bloudy fluxe.
               The ſame, to wit, the third day a certaine Corporall was ſent by them of the Towne, to ſee whether there was any meanes to enterpriſe vppon that artillerie, but he was ſlaine with a pellet in the breaſt.
               About noone the enemie ſhot certaine voleyes of Ordinance againſt a gate of the Caſtle which openeth into the garden, where they ſawe by the moouing of the earth, that Pyouers were at worke.
               The fourth day, they within the towne at the breaking of the day, perceiuing the preparations for the batterie, found themſelues hardly diſtreſſed, for that they had no trenches againſt the batteries, and that it was almoſt impoſſible to make any for hardnes of the ground, by reaſon of the froſt, and yet they laboured hard about it day and night in that ſort as is aforeſayd. Whileſt the Gouernour and the Captaines were aſſembled to take aduice what was expedient to be done, one of the companie propoſed, that it were good to ſend a Drommer to play with his Dromme toward the broaken Chappell, vnder colour of making exchange of priſoners, and in the meane time to delay the batterie of the enémie. This was concluded, but afterward it was reuoked, by reaſon of the diſaduantage which might enſue, leaſt the enemie vppon that occaſion ſhould thinke, that they fearing the trench did ſeeke occaſion of parley.
               Then the two batteries began, the one did beat the Fort of Beauregard, and that which was made aboue an old gate, as is ſaid aſore: the other battery did beat at the other ſaid Fort which was vnder the gate. That which was made out of the old wall reſiſted the fury of the ordinance farre better then it was thought it would: for from halfe an hower after Sunne riſing vntill Sunne ſetting, it neuer ceaſed to thunder without any intermiſſion, ſo that there was let flie that day aboue eight hundered canon ſhot.
               The night beeing ſo neere, they who were beſieged ſaw no apparance that the aſſault would be geuen, and had not prepared themſelues to receiue the enemy that day, conſidering that the breaches were flanked with two fortes, which were firſt to be forced: notwithſtanding all the French footmen and Swiſſers were ſeene a farre off in battle array about noone, which was the cauſe that they deuided ſpeedily the ſmall number of men which they had to keepe the Fortes: but ſpecially the two Fortes which flanked the breaches on both ſydes. They prouided alſo a certayne number to keepe the breaches if the enemy ſhould proffer the aſſault.
               They were not aboue two hundred and threeſcore perſons which were of ability to defend the breaches, for the reſt were either ſicke or hurt, or els occupied to keepe the fiue Fortes which were without.
               
                  
The Gouernour tooke vppon him to keepe the breach which was at the left hand, with a hole to paſſe to the Fortes if they were aſſaulted, beeing  aſſiſted with twelue men lying in couert, and certaine Harquebuziers.
               The Baron Vignoles was appointed to keepe the breach, which was aboue the gate, with fiue armed men, and fifteene Harquebuziers: and for as much as that number was not ſufficient, the Gouernour appointed the Lord Perrine to aſſiſt them with fiue armed men more.
               When the breaches began to be reaſonable, euery one hauing ſixteene long paces breadth, the whole army beeing in battell array, the enemy began to ſtyrre, and marching with a ſwift pace, ſtouping low, they ſet on both ſides of the Fortes which were aſide of the breaches.
               The enemy ſuſtayned the firſt onſet, wherewith theſe two Fortes receaued them and paſſed throug, halthough that many remained vpon the places, ſaluted by them of the Fortes with ſhot, and with the force of the pikes, yet in a little ſpace they were maſters of the two fortes.
               They might haue defended the ſaid fortes longer, but two cauſes did let them, the one was the ſmall number of the defendants, the other was the death of the Lord Mareſtes yongeſt ſonne to the Lord Sabloniere, and brother to the Lord Vignoles, who after the death of the Lord Ruffigny, commaunded ouer his company and one of the fortes which had befollen him: his was ſlaine with the ſhot of a Culuerin. This his death did greatly haſt the forſaking of that fort: his brother the Lord Vignoles made great mone for him.
               The Fortes beeing wonne, it was high time for them which kept the breaches to beſtirre and defende themſelues: and as they were aſſaulted furiouſly by the enemyes, ſo they receaued them coragiouſly. There was all manner of defence vſed, ſhot, pikes, pomgarnads, fiery hoopes, ſtones, and all other manner of defence were throwen vppon the enemy.
               Many of the enemies hauing the night fauourable, retyred vnder the ſhadow therof, they who did obſtinate themſelues either were wounded, or els remayned dead in the place: in this aſſault happened a thing worthy to bee noted. The Baron Vignoles had a frend in the army named Poyſſon, a man of charge in that ſeruice. This man was greatly carefull for the preſeruation of the ſaid Baron, and deſirous to ſaue him, prayed a Captaine of the regiment of Chaſtiagueray (whoſe Standerd bearer was very ſicke) to geue him his enſigne for that day onely, determined to enter one of the firſt to ſaue his friend, the ſayd Baron Vignoles: the Captaine deliuered him his enſigne according to his requeſt. Poyſſon at the aſſault geuē, was one of the firſt which went vp to the ſame breach, which the ſaid Baron Vignoles kept, intending to haue ſaued him, but the ſaid Poyſſon beeing not knowen by his friend Vignoles, was receaued by two Harquebuze ſhot, which did bear him downe to the ground, ſo that he was carried away.
               
                  
The heat of the fight dured a long hower, and after that time the enemies began to faint, but on the contrary their courage was doubled that  were on the breaches. Euen ſome of the ſouldiers who were gone towards the Caſtell to take breath, after they had retyred within the forts, ioyned themſelues againe to the defenders of the breaches. Then went they apace to worke vpon the enemy.
               There was great diſorder in the retire of the enemie, for moſt part of them did caſt away their weapons, and loſt them in the ditch, and in the fortes which they forſooke. Many were drowned in the ditch, caſting them ſelues downe from the fortes vpon the yce, which (by reaſon of that) brake vnder them.
               The ditches were incontinently lighted with a number of torches and linkes out of the Towne and Fortes, for it was very darke.
               The beſieged in the towne ſpoiled the dead that euening, ſome went out of the Forts vnto the brooke, which doth ſeparat the town from the ſuburbe to get armor. Notwithſtanding, a point of humanity was ſhewed toward the enemy worthy to bee remembred, for they did not hurt ſo much as to take any thing from the enemies, who were left hurt vpon the breaches, and in the ditches, but rather they were had into the towne, their woundes dreſſed, and curteouſly vſed, euen to the day that the towne was ſurrendered.
               This victory is the more memorable, becauſe about fifty men defended the breaches againſt ſuch a multitude: for all the regiments of the Swiſſers alſo aſſaulted the ſame, in witneſſe thereof many of them remayned in the ditch.
               It is alſo to bee noted, that during the aſſault, when they within the towne had ſet fire into a pomgarnad for to caſt it into the ditch, it fell again betweene the legges of the Gouernour, and did burſt without doing any hurt.
               Upon this proſperous iſſue of that aſſault, the Lord Pleſsis gouernour, called all the Captayns and Gentlemen to render thankes to God for his gracious fauour ſhewed vnto them.
               On the ſide of the Towne the Lord Perrine was killed with a ſhot in the head, whereof he dyed within a while after. Captayne Foreſt, and the Lord of Saint Coſmio were hurt in both armes.
               Of the enemies ſyde there were found the fifth day of Ianuary aboue fifty dead within the ditch, beſides them who were drowned, and many which dyed afterward in the ſide of the Towne: i
                     •
                   is certayne that there were found miſſing in that day of the army aboue three hundred, and that one Captayne onely had loſt aboue ſixe ſcore.
               Beſide them whith were wounded in great number, was the Lord Brigneulx maſter of the campe, this man loſt his Sonne at Montagne; now he

hath a blow; let him learne then, not treacherouſly to vyolate the right of Nations, as he did at Mauleon. 
                  
               
               The night after the aſſault was beſtowed in fortifiyng and continuing the trenches.
               This day was beſtowed of the enemie in the burying of the dead. The ſame day in the euening, a drumme of the enemie brought letters to the Lord Pleſsis, gouernour of the place, from the Lord Palneau. When he had receiued them, he aſſembled all the counſell to open the ſayd letters in their preſence.
               The letters in ſubſtance did import, that the ſaid L. Palneau had great deſire to ſpeak with him about a thing which would bring him much contentation, which he ſaid he could not write. In the ſame letters he prayed the Lorde Pleſsis to giue him meanes and ſafe conduct to ſpeake with him.
               All the Captaines gaue their aduiſe, that he could not refuſe that parley, becauſe that the Lord Palneau, ſecond ſonne to the Earle of Carauas, was a faithfull ſeruant to the King, and great friend to the houſe of Bourbon, and deadly enemie to the League, and that by him they might alſo vnderſtand newes of the King of Nauarre, whereof they were in great care.
               The 6▪ day of Ianuary, the Lord Palneau accompanyed with the Captaine Grange, who was of the regiment of Countie Gra
                        •
                     pre, went to the fort of the tower of the Caſtell, made after the forme of a horſeſhooe.
               During this parley, they began the battery with two pieces at the breake of the day: about noone they encreaſed with three pieces more, and continued till night. There were beſtowed that day aboue eight ſcore Cannon ſhot. There were two ſouldiers ſlaine, whereof the one was named Bourg, of the company of the Lord. Vignoles: there was great m
                     •
                  ane made for that man for his great valour, for he was a rare patterne of godlines and vertue.
               The Lord Pleſsis going foorth to that parley, accompanied with the Lord Ayomont, vpon returne, reported to the counſell, that the Lorde Palneau had notified vnto thē, that the Duke of Neuers had determined not to vnbit nor to depart from that ſiege before he had ſalued his honour, and to that end he would ſpare no friend, no meanes, nor authority. That his ſtay there in that ſiege did hinder the affaires of the king of Nauarre more than they did think.
               That the King did beſiege Orleans, by the citadell, where was the Marſhal Haumont, and that the king would vſe the forces of the King of Nauarre againſt the leagued.
               To be ſhort, the Lord Pleſsis, and all others which had aſſiſted him, had gotten honour enough in the defence of ſuch a naughty place, and that

there was no more meanes to ſtand obſtinate in defence of the ſaide place, the ſaid L. of Neuers being ſufficiently informed of the neceſſities, wherein they were as well of men who were greatly weary, as of victualls. 
               
               That if they would hearken to render that place into his handes, he offered vnto the gouernour & gentlemen, armes, horſes and baggage, and to the ſouldiers, armes and baggage, and for the ſafe conduct, the County Granprè, the Baron Poluan and Baſtenay, Captaine of an hundred light horſes, ſhould conduct them ſafely whither ſoeuer they would goe.
               He gaue them beſide, eight dayes ſpace to aduertize the King of Nauarre, of the capitulation, and in caſe that the ſaid King ſhould not giue any ſuccour within the ſayd eight dayes by any meanes, he in his perſon, or his Lieftenant, the ſayd L. Pleſsis and his ſhould ſurrender him the place, and they to enioy the benefite of the agreement.
               There were many gaings and commings vpon this propoſition, and at length the affaires being propounded to the counſell, they did ſtick much vpon the voluntary proffers of the Duke of Neuers, to giue eight dayes to aduertize the King of Nauarre: which made them beleeue that the ſayd king was neither ready to helpe them, nor had ſufficient power ſo to doo, which notwithſtanding was the only hope of them that were beſieged, who otherwiſe could not withſtand if they ſhould be preſſed.
               All things being well conſidered, they determined to hearken to ſo aduantagious proffers, with hope thereby to make the K. of Nauarre priuie to their affaires, and for that intent to ſend Captayne Robiniere with a paſſeporte, that was concluded and ſealed on both ſides the ſixt day at night.
               The ſeuenth day the truce was agreed, and hoſtages were giuen on both partes, and all acts of hoſtilitie ceaſed.
               The ſame day the Lord Robiniere departed with a trompet of the D. of Neuers to goe to the King of Nauarre. The gouernour in the meane while was greatly carefull, to take heede that no man ſhould goe foorth to viſit or frequent with them of the armie, and alſo that none of the enemies ſhould enter into the towne. To preuent all inconueniences, hee made a diligent watch both day and night vpon the breaches, ſo that hee himſelfe tooke his meales, and did lie thereon, notwithſtanding the hardnes of the winter.
               The eleuenth day of Ianuarie, the Lord Robiniere returned from the king of of Nauarre, and brought with him the Lord Rinuile to the Lord of Neuers, who after he returned to the king of Nauarre, obteined leaue to enter into the towne with the Lord Robiniere.
               
               By them, they within the towne were enformed, how the king of Nauarre had marched forward very nigh, intending to ſuccour them, and to venture a battel for that end, but that he fel ſick with a dangerous diſeaſe;

which had hindred the execution of his enterprize.
               They reported alſo howe that the ſaid King of Nauarre had ſent the  Lords Chaſtilion, Rochefocault, Trimouille, & Plaſſak, with the greateſt partes of his armie, to trie how they might enterprize vpon the enemie: but conſidering that nothing could bee attempted without great diſaduantage, they were faine to returne backe. For the Lorde of Neuers had lodged and trenched himſelfe in ſo aduantagious a place, that the towne could not ſayle but fall into his hands, except it were reſcued by the winning of a battell, which thing the time pref
                     •
                  xed could not permitte, being already almoſt expired.
               Notwithſtanding, the twelfth day at night the Lords Chaſtilion, Plaſſak, & Trimouille, went to view the armie ſo nigh that in the darke night ſome ſhot of Ordinance was giuen out for a token of the alarum toward the Porrieres.
               The Duke of Neuers vpon this alarum, feared greatly, leaſt the Lord Pleſsis ſeeing that helpe nigh, would haue receiued ſome ſuccours within the town, interpreting the tearmes of the agreement to his aduantage. But the ſaide Lord Pleſsis would haue done nothing of dangerous conſequence, much leſſe againſt his promiſe.
               The 14. of Ianuarie, the Lord of Neuers perceaued that they within the town, went faithfully to worke, for euery man diſpoſed himſelfe to depart: alſo he vſed much courteſy toward thē who were beſieged, prouiding carts for them, whereof they had need to carie as well their bagage, as thē which were wounded, & cauſed them to iſſue foorth out of the ſight of ye army, leaſt they ſhould bée moleſted by any man. The ſaid Lord of Neuers was in his own at their comming forth with a ſmall companie, he commaunded their matches to be kindled, ſaluting very courteouſly euery man. There were ſome ſouldiers hurt, whome they could not carrie away, he commaunded them to ſtay, with aſſurance to be dreſſed, and otherwiſe courteouſly vſed.
               All the companies were ſafely conducted vnto the Abbey Brilleybant, the companies of the King of Nauarre being lodged at Palneau, halfe a league thence, to whome they ioyned themſelues eaſily: the regiment of the C
                     •
                  unty of Beaupre was left there in Gariſon.
               So then the ſaide Duke of Neuers hauing receaued the towne of Ganache, as is aboue ſaid, on a ſodaine that great and furious army was broaken to pieces, as ſmitten with the finger of God. Many there dyed, many were hurt: they of the League liuing in great miſtruſt, either did diſſemble their actions, or retired to ſuch places of ſafetie, as they thought moſt fit: the artillery returned into the places from whence it was taken. The Lord of Neuers went to Bloys; withall the reſt of the armie as remained with him, whereof a part was ſent to the Marſhall Haulmont, who in the Citadell fought with the inhabitants of Orleans: within a few dayes after,

the Lord of Neuers went from the court, to his houſe of Neuers.
               
               So all the lowe Poytow, which had béene terribly threatned with that  tempeſt, was deliuered by this ſodaine and vnexpected alteration. For the execution which was done at Bloys vpon the perſon of the Duke of Guize, was as an horrible thunderclap, not onely vnto the leagued, which were in the army of the L. of Neuers, of whom the moſt part did conſiſt, and to others who were in multitudes in moſt partes of the realme, but alſo vnto all others of that confederacie which were out of the realme. For the newes fléeing as farre as Lorreyne, the forces of the Duke of Lorreyne, which had blocked Iamets in ye ſoueraignty of Boillon, euer ſince the moneth of Aprill before, were ſo amazed by the vnexpected loſſe, and ſurpriſe of that ſupport, that they taking ſodainely bagge and bagage, as men frighted out of their wittes, brake the ſiege, and retired away: ſo that God there deliuered his Church after a long and daungerous triall, which ſhall induce the poſteritie, to feare and admire the iuſt iudgements of God, who within a moment, and by euents, not forſéene by mans wiſdome, dooth turne vpſide downe the counſels of the wicked, to the ioyfull deliuerance and comfort of his ſaints. Righteous O Lord are thy iudgements, all thy waies are righteouſnes and trueth.
               The army of the King of Nauarre returned to Niort and Fontenay.
               
               It is ſaid before, how after the ſurpriſing of Niort, the King of Nauarre repayred to the ſaide towne, the 27. of December, and ſoiourning there a while, there he gathered the greateſt part of his forces, and about the 6. day of Ianuarie, in this yeare 1589. the ſaid King departed, with ſuch forces as he had from Niort, toward the towne of Ganach, intending to ſuccour them, who were beſieged therein, or elſe to fight with the Duke of Neuers, if he would haue let him. But God who gouerned all things, with an vnſearcheable wiſdome, diſappointed that enterpriſe by that dangerous ſicknes, which fell vpon him.
               The cold was very extreame, and as he is a moſt laborious Prince, after he had béen long on horſeback all armed, a great cold came vpon him, ſo that he was enforced to light downe of his horſe, and goe on foote with a ſwift pace and violent motion to get him ſome heate: and a little after hee had eaten, a ſtrange extraordinarie cold tooke him, with a great feauer.
               About the 9. day of Ianuary it was incontinently perceiued that it was a pleureſie. This happened at a little village called S. Pere: there he was enforced to ſtay, without any meanes to tranſport him to any other place, (by reaſon of the ſharpnes of the ſickneſſe) but to a little Caſtle nigh that village, where being, the ſickneſſe did ſo increaſe that many doubted of his life. He alſo reſolued himſelfe conſtantly to abide the good will of GOD, readie willingly to end his life (if Gods will was ſuch): the thing that only grieued him (as that good King Ezechias) was the néede which the

Church of God might haue of his preſence in France, (if he ſhould fall) and alſo the want of his fidelitie in that kingdome, if in the middeſt of ſo many great troubles and confuſions he ſhould be taken out of this world. Notwithſtanding,  he ceaſed not (as much as the diſeaſe which was ſharpe and violent did permit him) to prouide & ordayne for the affayres of his armie, according as the occaſions did fall out. He was let bloud, and worthily ſerued and ſuccoured by them who were about him, as much as the diſcommoditie of the place could permit them.
               He ſent to all the Churches round about to make prayers and ſupplications for him, which was done with much feruencie and ſorrowe.
               The newes of his daungerous diſeaſe were brought to Rochel in the euening being the 13. day of Ianuary. The congregation was called ſpéedily with the ringing of the bell to repayre to the Temples. This was about ſeauen of the clocke at night, (an houre not vſed to ſuch méetings) the neceſſitie notwithſtanding requiring the ſame. The people aduertiſed of the cauſe, ranne with ſuch multitudes to the places of prayers, ſo that the like was neuer ſeene in that towne. All manner of men indifferently, euen children and apprentiſes forſooke the houſes to repayre to the Temples; the multitude was ſuch, that many being not able to goe in, went home agayne heauie & ſad, anſwering by their priuate prayers to thoſe that were made in publike, with much lamentation and teares. For all men knewe well the greatnes of the affliction throughout all France generally, if God at that time (ſo troubleſome and confuſed) had taken out of this life that firſt Prince of the bloud, whom he had endued wi
                     •
                  h ſo many graces. The ſayd extraordinary prayers were continued for the ſpace of many daies, vntill that the recouering of his health was certainly knowne.
               The rumour of his death was ſpread into diuers places of the Realm, euen at the Kings Court, for the which reports all good and true men did greatly mourne. The great contentation which the leagued receiued thereof dured not long; for the King receiued newes ſhortly after of his recouerie.
               It is ſayd before, how that after the execution done vpon the perſon of the Duke of Guize, the King ſent into the Prouinces to aduertiſe the Gouernours, Magiſtrates and people, of the iuſt cauſes and neceſſitie that inforced him to doo that execution. And interrupting the continuance of the euents which followed that execution, we deſcended into the lowe Poytow, there to ſee what exployts the great royall armie (conducted by the Duke of Neuers) had done there, and alſo what the King of Nauarre did all that while. Now hauing ſeene that armie to haue made ſhipwracke and vaniſhed out of ſight, we will leaue the King of Nauarre being in bed ſicke of a dangerous pleuriſie, expecting health of the Lord which giueth ſaluation vnto Kings, and to reſtore him to his health and ſtrength, and will come

to the matter agayne, and conſider the horrible accidents which followed the death of the Duke of Guize, and of the bounſing Prieſt the Cardinall  his brother.
               After this execution done vpon the bouldeſt authors of the conſpiracie, and the reſt of the heads of the ſame being in holde, there was great hope that the burning fire of all ciuill diſſentions ſhould be on a ſudden quenched, the flaming torches of tumults being put out. But the newes of the ſayd execution of the Duke of Guyze being brought into all parts of the Realme, by them that fled without bootes and ſpurres out of the ſuburbs of Bloys: the report came alſo to the Duke de Mayne, being then with an armie in Liomoys, he taking with him ſuch as would followe him, went out of the Countrey for two cauſes. Firſt, fearing (vppon theſe newes) the neighbourhood of them of Daulphine, Ʋienoys, and Viuarets, who might haue doubled their courage vpon that occaſiō, being there moſt of the reformed religion.
               Secondly, that becauſe of the death of his brother (the hope for the which he and his brother the Duke of Guyze did greatly enuie and malice one an other) with mutuall ha
                     •
                  red, doth now proffer it ſelfe vnto him, without any manifeſt competitour.
               This Duke de Mayne therefore now ſwallowing downe the crowne of France in one morſell by imagination, with as many as would follow him, made haſt into Burgondie, and Champaigne, and there made ſure to himſelfe in thoſe Prouinces as many places as hee could, preparing all thinges to warre agaynſt the King.
               Here it might bee thought ſtrange, how the Duke de Mayne doth ſo cruelly mooue warre and rebellion againſt the King, ſeeing that it was he himſelfe and his coſin, the Duke d'Aumale, who gaue aduertiſement to the King of the conſpiracy, and intent of his brother the Duke of Guyze, as is aforeſayd.
               The queſtion is eaſily reſolued: there is no fayth nor fidelity among them, who do aſpire to the ſame one kingdome, there is no ſociety, be it neuer ſo ſworne and holie. Theſe three, to wit, the Duke of Guyze, Mayne, and Aumale, did affect the Kingdome: but becauſe the Duke of Guyze was more fauoured of the partakers then the other two, he was carryed theretoo, as if it were vpon the ſhoulders by all the partakers, who attaining vnto it, would haue eſtabliſhed the ſame to himſelfe and to his Sonne already in mans eſtate, and to his poſterity.
               The Dukes of Mayne and Aumale (no doubt) did loue more the Duke of Guyze, and would haue had the Crowne rather vppon his head, then whe
                     •
                  e it was: yet according to the rules of the Diuinity of Sorboun, that charity beginneth at it ſelfe, they would haue worne the Crowne of France euery one vppon his owne head, rather then that any other ſhould

haue had the occupying of it howſoeuer great and deare friend hee might haue béene. This emulation about the affectation of the Crowne, was the  cauſe that theſe two, to wit, the Dukes de Mayne, and Aumale, each of thē in reſpect of himſelfe diſcouered the conſpiracy to the King, to the end that he beeing made away, they might march a playne way in the ſame ſteps which hee had traced before them, reſeruing to the craftieſt or mightieſt hereafter to oppreſſe his coſine: for it is not to bee thought that there would haue beene more vnion and loue betweene the Dukes of Mayne and Aumale, beeing but coſins, then there was between the Dukes of Gnyze and Mayne, being brothers.
               Thus wee ſee what ambition did worke in theſe new men by affectation of that roall dignity, which doth not touch them at all, and without any likelihood euer to approch néere vnto, namely rebellion agaynſt their Soueraigne and benefactor, and parricide among bretheren, one to preuent another.
               The newes of the death of Guyze beeing brought into the Prouinces, the moſt part of Towns and Citties from the riuer of Loyre, Weſt, North and Eaſt, being already ſurpriſed aforehand, and ſeduced from the Kings obedience by the Leaguers, vppon the rumor of that execution were ſo greatly mooued (the Duke of Guyze beeing accompted the onely piller of Popiſh religion, by the perſwaſion which the Catholikes had conceaued of him) that they began euery where to wauer, and kindle to a manifeſt rebellion, by the ſetting on of the Leaguers, who were the greateſt part in number euery where. They did greatly by their inuectiues make heynous and odious that execution vppon the perſons of Guyze, and the Romiſh Prieſt his brother, tearming it the Maſſacre committed at Bloys.
               
               And thus the iuſt iudgement of God, iuſtly taking vengeance for ſo many murthers, ſhedding of innocent bloud, and innumerable villanies committed vppon the ſaintes of God, and for ſtopping their eares at the cleere and lowd voice of the Sonne of God, who ſo louingly hath called them by his word & promiſes, by his threatnings and plagues ofpeſtilence, famine and warre, gaue them ouer to a reprobat ſence, with a ſenceles rage to fall to commit ſuch cruelties among themſelues, that no enemy would or could haue deſired or deuiſed greater; their towns and citiesbeeing euery where repleniſhed with maſſacres, robberies, baniſhments and proſcriptions, not committed agaynſt them of the religion, but euen of popiſh Catholikes againſt popiſh Catholikes, of Idolaters againſt Idolaters, of murtherers agaynſt murtherers: ſo the Lord hath ſent euill Angels among them.
               
                  Paris the capitall cittie of the kingdome, as they more hoped vppon the Duke of Guyze then any other did, ſo they ſhew themſelues moſt offended. There were firebrands which kindled the ſedition to the vttermoſt, to wit,

the Ducheſſes of Guyze and Nemours, who with their outcries and lamentations did animate the people to a raging madnes. Thereunto alſo added  the Ieſuits and Fryers (ſet on by the aforenamed) all their inuectiues inſolent and vnreuerent wordes in their ordinary tragicall outcryes, in their Pulpits, and philippicall ſermons to make the people obſtinate, deſperat, and vntractable, to be hereafter reduced to any obedience.
               Other Cities followed the example of Paris, as Orleans, Roen, Anieus, Abeuille, Reymes, and Tholoſe, whereby the conſpiracy and ſetting on of the Biſhop of the place, in moſt cruel maner they tooke the firſt preſident of the court of Parliament, there hanged him vpon a Gibet, and afterward dragged his dead body about the ſtreets, beeing one of the moſt zealous romiſh Catholikes which then could liue in this world; the onely cauſe was that he would not allow their rebellion.
               The King vnderſtanding the great ſturres, perilous flames of rebellion, in moſt part of the townes and cities of his realme, ſuppoſing by impunity, which he calleth clemencie and gentlenes, to quench that fire, which was already too far kindled, writeth his declarations, emporting an obliuion of all iniuries to be publiſhed in all his Parliaments, and other courts in Prouinces.
               Firſt, he ſheweth how oftentimes hee hath borne with the perturbers of his realme, not onely in forgiuing them their offences, whome hee might haue iuſtly puniſhed, but alſo by winning them by all fauours poſſible to be ſhewed, onely thereby, ſéeking the preſeruation of the peace of his ſubiects, and of the Catholick religion, vntill that hee was certainely informed, that they had conſpired againſt his perſon, life, and eſtate, ſo farre as he was inforced to make that execution extraordinarily.
               Secondly, he ſheweth, that although many had béen of that conſpiracy, whome he might haue iuſtly puniſhed, yet for the loue which he beareth vnto all Catholicks, hée hath ſtayed the puniſhment vpon the two chiefeſt authors of the euill.
               Thirdly, he proteſteth that he will haue the edict of reunion obſerued in all poynts, burying al the former offences in perpetuall forgetfulnes, commaundeth his iudges and officers in all his courtes, to make no inquiſition of the former offences, willing all men to liue in peace vnder his obedience, and if not, hee chargeth his officers to make exemplary iuſtice of the offenders.
               The King hauing aſſembled his eſtates, as is ſaide before, ſuppoſing by their help and aſſiſtance, to haue repreſſed the outragious attempts of the houſe of Guize, ſawe himſelfe in the middeſt of them, compaſſed with a company of mortall enemies to his perſon, life, and ſtate. Whereupon deſtitute of authoritie, counſell and help, through puſillanimity, was faine to ſpare the liues of them who were in his power, and of others whome he

might eaſily haue apprehended, who had their hands as déepely in the treſpaſſe, as the chiefe authors themſelues. This was the worke of the Lord, to bring him to the conſideration of his great errors, in refuſing ſo often  the wholſome and brotherlike aduertiſements of the good K. of Nauarre, and other Princes, both within and without the realme, his louing and faithfull friends.
               The more therefore he goeth about with impunity, of moſt grieuous offences, which in his declaration, hee tearmeth clemency, to bring that people of Paris (ſeduced from his obedience) to their duety, ye more that miſerable people condemned of God, and in his wrath, appointed to hauock and thra
                     •
                  dome, for multiplying rebellion, murthers, and confuſions vpon their former murthers Idolatries, and abominations, dooth rage, and like mad dogs, as out of their wittes, doo run headlong, to worke the full meaſure of their deſperat rebellions, accounting the Kings clemency, cowardlines (which they might haue called puſillanimitie in deed) as though hée feared, either to haue them his enemies, or elſe to looſe them from being his ſubiects.
               Therefore hauing committed greeuous crimes all manner of wayes, euen with greedines, at length hauing concluded to withdraw themſelues from their ſoueraignes obedience, the chiefeſt players in this tragedie of rebellion, to colour their diuiliſh paſſions, with the authoritie of Gods law, as though they would haue aſked Gods wil out of his owne mouth, adreſſed them themſelues to the facultie of Theologie, there commonly called the Colledg of Sorboune. For that purpoſe they ſent one Vrban, one of the Magiſtrates of Paris, to the ſayd Sorboune, hauing framed in manner of ſupplication two queſtions, to be reſolued by them.
               Firſt, an populus regni Galliae poſſit ſolui & liberari à ſacramento fidelitatis & obedientiae Henrico tertio praeſtito.
               
               Whether the people of France, may not be diſcharged and ſetfree from the oath of allegeance and obedience made vnto Henry the third.
               Secondly, an tuta conſcientia poſſit, idem populus armari, vniri & pecnnias colligere, & contribuere ad defenſionem, & conſeruationem Religionis Catholicae, & Romanae, in hoc regno aduerſus nefaria conſcilia, & conatus praedicti regis, & quorum libet aliorum illi adherentium, & contra publica fidei violationem ab eo Blaeſis factum in praeiuditium praedictae religionis Catholicae, & edicti ſanctae vnionis, & naturalis libertatis conuo
                        •
                     ationis trium ordium huius regni.
               
               Whether the people may with a ſafe conſcience take arm
                     •
                  s vnto thē
                  ſelues, and make collections and contributions, for the defence and preſeruation of the Catholick Romiſh religion, againſt the haynous practizes and attempts of the aforeſayd king, and all other his adherents, and againſt the breach of publike faith, committed by him at Bloys, in the preiudice

of the aforeſayd Catholicke religion, and of the edict of holy vnion, and of the naturall liberty of the aſſembly of the three Eſtates of the  Realme.
               The ſeauenth day theſe prieſtes of Apollo, after a generall proceſſion of all the orders of the ſaid facultie, and a Maſſe of the holy Ghoſt (adſit reuerentia auribus) ſung in the ſayd colledge of Sorboune, at the requeſt of the Prouoſt, Eſcheuins, Conſuls, & Catholick citizens of the Citie of Paris: the maiſters of the ſaid facultie aſſembled to the number of threeſcore and tenne, hauing debated theſe queſtions (as they ſay) by the holy ſcripture, but ſpecially by the Cannons and decrees of the Popes, al with one conſent (either extreamely wicked, or elſe moſt pernitiouſly ignorant, or both) rendred this oracle out of the bewitching hell of Apollo: to wit, The people of France may doe all things which are propounded in the queſtions againſt their lawfull king and his adherents: onely they required that this their oracle of rebellion, might be ſent to Rome, there to be ſealed by the pope, and be burned with the mark of the ſpirit of diuels, and beare the Image and print of Antichriſt.
               The eight of Ianuary, the ſaid Vrban came to knowe the anſwere of the oracle, which he brought to the counſell of the citie, and after they had peruſed it, taking it for an anſwere of Vrim and Thumim, and a voyce of God, by whoſe authoritie they were put at liberty to doo what they would, with armed hand brought it to the Senate of Paris, which was the ſecond Maieſty of France, and with drawen ſwordes required of the ſame to approoue the ſaid oracle.
               The Senate flatly denied ſuch a wicked, vnnaturall, and diueliſh act to bee lawfull and worthy of the ancient loyalty of France, requiring to take ſome deliberation vpon it; and whileſt they ſatte vpon it, the mutinous rebels (impacient of delay) brake open the gates of the Pallace, and ſeazing vpon the whole bench, caſting them into priſons: ſo now the Senate being carried away in a triumph, all reuerence of Magiſtracie being troden downe, the Temple of iuſtice is poluted, forſaken, and vſurped by robbers.
               The ninth day of Ianuary, the ſeditious doo in haſt chooſe a new counſell, to the number of ſeauen and forty (who ſhould adminiſter the State in ſtead of the kings prime counſell) of the moſt vileſt and factious perſons in the citie, as Rowland Compan, the villanous and inceſtious Picheuard, Louchard, Rue Clerke, Oliuer Seuault, & others of ſuch like ſortes, men neither of abilitie, authoritie, wiſdome nor counſell, but onely becauſe they had ſolde themſelues to the League, to worke all manner of villany, and ſhewed themſelues bitter enemies vnto the King.
               This new Senate of conſpiratours, firebrands of Hell, to repleniſh the Citty with confuſion and miſchiefe, conſidering 
                     ••
                  at to preſerue an vnity

among their company of robbers, they muſt needes haue a head, and rather then they ſhould haue none, they will make one of an old blocke:  they aduiſed themſelues whom they might make that would vphold their miſ
                     •
                  eedes.
               To take ſome of the Princes of the bloud, they knew well them to bee wiſe ynough from leauing their lawfull vocations, to become heades and leaders of theeues, murtherers, and traytors.
               Therefore they concluded to continue the rebellion in the houſe and family where the conſpiracy (the mother of this rebellion) ſprang out, was nouriſhed and entertayned theſe 40. or 50. yeares continually.
               The Duke de Mayne was thought to be moſt fit, as one who in ſo vile an enterpriſe ſhould ſucceede his brother, conſidering that he was brought vp and nouriſhed in the ſame ſchole, learned the ſame bookes, and had proceeded in the ſame degrees as his brother had done, was well acquaynted with ſuch matters from his infancy, will, and ambition, boyling in him as hot as euer it did in his brother; after his brothers death, not much inferiour in fauours of partakers to his brother, though not equall in haugtines of mind.
               He therefore by the earneſt ſute and ſolicitation of his agent and partakers, is made the head of the rebellion, and inueſted in his abſence of that proude and new title of Lieutenant Generall of that ſtate and Crowne of France, which is a Periphraſe of this word King.
               The Duke de Mayne now beeing made manipulus furum, muſt play the King: for he doth aſſemble all the Captaynes of the ſedition, as namely the aforeſayd counſell newly eſtabliſhed with the Dukes Aumale, and Nemours, with other ſeditious perſons, few in number, nothing in countenance nor authority, to hold the States of the Realme as they did tearme them: aſſembled of the Princes, Nobillity, and Commons, when as there was not one Prince, nor any communalty, but few ſeditious perſons.
               The Dukes Aumale, and Nemours, and Cheualier, Aumale, were made gouernours of Paris, to lead the ſeditious people to do ſuch outrages, and robberies, as neuer were done yet in any towne or Citty in this world.
               Theſe three Captaynes of robbers and murtherers, dayly went to the houſes of them which were knowen to be the Kings friends, depriued them of their authorities, if they had any, put them in Priſons, ranſacked their goods, lodged their robbers (whom they called garriſons) in their houſes, whereof many by a wiſe and prouident mynd, foreſeeing the horrible tempeſt and thunderclaps which would fall from heauen, vppon that ſinke of traytors, fled out of their houſes, carrying their liues for a pray.
               The Ladie of Monpenſier, ſiſter to the Duke de Mayne, the Ladyes of Mayne, Aumale, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Nemours, beeing then in Paris, cauſed a booke of

the riche men to be geuen them, ſo that there was no day but they ſent ſome of theſe Captayns to raunſake and cary away the goods of ſome rich  Marchant, or other, vnder colour that they were royals, heretikes, or fauorers of them.
               After many robberies and murthers committed in Paris, the ſeditious people were lead by their Captayns vnto the Loure the royal houſe, where they committed ſuch outrages vppon the goods mouable which did partayne to the King, that the poſterity will ſcarſe beleeue it. They violated the ſeale of France, the ſacred inſtruments of Soueraigne iuſtice, brake it to pieces, & trampled it vnder foot: they did breake and dragged in the ſtréets, in a moſt ſpitefull ſort, the armes of France, Valoys, and Bourbons.
               
               The tenth day, whileſt theſe things were dooing at Paris, the King cauſed an expreſſe commaundement to be publiſhed at Bloys, that all the partakers of the houſe of Guyze, ſhould depart and retire to their houſes with pardon of their offences, ſo that they would remayne faythfull ſeruants vnto him.
               Hee ſent Cotteblanch, Prouoſt of Paris, and the preſident Neuilly to Paris, to ſee whether they could reduce that ſeduced people to their dutye: the Lords Vilaguier, and D'Abin did the like, but neither of them could do any good.
               About the fifteenth day, theſe ſtrange alterations beeing done in Paris, vnder colour of the authority of the States there called, and holden by few ſeditious perſons, letters were ſent from they ſayd aſſembly of rebels there vnto all citties of their confederacy, to go forward in the like outrages and furie as they had done. And firſt to autoriſe their ſeditious procéedings with great & honourable tytles, they call their letters a declaration of the Princes Catholikes, vnited with the three eſtates of France, touching the Maſſacre committed vppon the perſons of the Duke of Guyze, and the Cardinall his brother.
               Firſt, they doo warne their fellowes to beware of any manner of inſtructions giuen vnto them by the King himſelfe, or any others, contayning any excuſe of the execution committed at Bloys vppon the Duke and Cardinall his brother.
               Secondly, they doo aduertiſe them that they haue as yet of that broode, the Dukes de Mayne, Aumale, Mercure, and Nemours, and that the Duke de Mayne hath a great armie in readines to defend them.
               Thirdly, they go about to cléere the Duke of Guize of the crime of treaſon, ſaying, that it is but calumnies of hereticks, deniſed againſt that houſe the ſpace of 25. yeares.
               So, with them to ſpye from time to time, the trayterous attempts and 
                     Note.
                   ſecrecies of the houſe of Guize, is hereſie, and a worke of heretickes.
               Fourthly, they accuſe the King of violating the publike faith, and prophaning

their corpus Domini, as they tearme it, vpon the which hee had ſworne the edict of reunion. 
               
               But in déede the King ſwore the edict, and not to ſuffer himſelfe to bée murthered by the Duke of Guize. 
                  
                     Note.
                  
               
               At length they doo aggrauate the death of the Cardinall of Guize, and the impriſonment of the Cardinall of Bourbon, and Archbiſhop of Lions, and exhort their companies to vnite themſelues and to followe theyr example.
               In the firſt page of this letter was this marke, in the other ſide the Image of the Duke of Guize.
               
               
               Now wee will leaue theſe confuſions of Rebells, aſſembled vnder the colour and name of the States of France, to procéede further, to fill the meaſure of their treſpaſſe, and will goe to ſee what the King doth at Bloys, and elſewhere.
               Immediatly after the death of Guize, the King thought good to make Orleans ſure of his ſide. The Citadell in the middeſt of all theſe tumults and rebellions of Cities, was and did hold for the King. And the Lord Antragues (who a little before had giuen ouer the League) did all that euer he could doo to hold the Citie in the Kings obedience. But the inhabitants being ſeduced afore hand by the Leaguers, partakers of the Duke de Mayne, encouraged by the conduct of Captain Breton, and others, who did promiſe to the inhabitants readie ſuccour from the Duke de Mayne, tooke weapons, and by the confidence which they had in their riches and ſtrength of their walles, did openly reuolt.
               It is commonly ſaid, that the Citie of Orleans is the Citadel of France, as well for the commodious ſituation of the ſame vpon the riuer Loyre, as for the fortifications thereof. Theſe reaſons among others, cauſed the King to trie by gracious and fayre meanes, to bring them backe to their duetie. But reaſon not preuayling, (with a people carried away with paſſion, and ſeduced by the louers of alteration from the obedience of their King) he was compelled to trie by force the meane of the Citadell. He therefore ſendeth the Marſhall Haumont with forces as well of footmen as of horſemen, with him hee ſendeth part of his gardes and the Swiſſers.
               The inhabitants on their ſide goe about by all meanes poſſible to rid themſelues of the Citadell as of a heauie burthen, they doo beſiege it within the towne ſide, doo trench themſelues, and couer themſelues with horſmen and platformes, doo vndermine it to blowe vp that Fort, (which nothing els but onely one of the gates commonly called Porte-bamere) they make iſſues out and euen vpon the Swiſſers with ſome ſucceſſe, they doo thunder and raſe that Fort with ſhot of Ordinance on the inſide thereof. They of the Kings ſide doo what they can, there is a great number ſlaine on both

ſides. The Lord Antragues promiſeth (notwithſtanding) to the King to keepe (during the ſpace of a moneth) the out ſide: (although it were but  broken walls and ruines) during the which time, he might call backe the armie which was in Poytow at the ſiege of Ganache, vnder the conduct of the Lord of Neuers. The inhabitants made two Mines vnder the Citadell, but they were vented by them within.
               About the 17. of Ianuarie, there went forth out of Paris thrée thouſand men, well furniſhed, but young ſouldiours, and not trained vp in warre, to goe to ſuccor Orleans; but they were diſcomfited by the Lorde Montigny, and other Gentlemen, who charged them betwéene Estampes and Orleans: many of them were ſlaine, the remnant were turned home naked.
               The Duke d'Mayne about the laſt day of Ianuarie, ſending ſome ſupply of ſuccour to Orleans, ſtayed ſo their eſtate, which did ſeeme to hang a ſide, that they tooke courage, partly by ruines, partly with ſhot of ordinance, and other meanes ſo wrought, that they of the Kings ſide were inforced to giue ouer the ruines that reſted of that, which was called the citadell. By theſe meanes, Orleans remained hardened at the deuotion of the League.
               So (good Chriſtian reader) thou ſéeſt how the right of God and man is turned vpſide downe: their popiſh religion, which they would ſéeme ſo much to honour, reuerence, and defend, they haue moſt wickedly prophaned, vſing it for a couering of their rebellion: thou ſéeſt how the reuerence of all ſoueraigne power and authoritie, is blotted out of the minds of them, the reſpect of all lawes troden vnderfoote, the ſanctuarie of iuſtice violated and poluted: thou ſéeſt here a damnable and diueliſh anarchie, the ſéeds and foundation of a barbarous and intollerable ſeruitude, laied downe in France by the Duke d'Mayne and his partakers, in a manner in like ſort as Mahomet began his rebellion againſt the empire of the Romans. Therefore yée O Noble Princes, and Nobles of all the Kingdoms of Europe, all men who are the louers of vertue and ciuility, deſirous to reſigne to the poſteritie, good lawes, chriſtian libertie and diſcipline: vp, make haſt to runne vppon theſe accurſed enemies of all mankinde; put out by time that fire which dooth threaten all authorities and powers of an horrible cumbuſtion.
               Now there remaineth but thrée things for the League to bring to paſſe, to ſet vp and dedicate their Idoll which they haue made, to wit, the Duke d'Mayne, and to finiſh that piece of worke, which his brother the Duke of Guize had brought almoſt to an end, if he had not béen ouerthrown by the way.
               They follow on their accuſtomed courſe and method, vſed by them theſe 14. or 15. yeares, to wit, to ſeduce the people more and more, to make the

King hatefull to his ſubiects, that hee may bee forſaken of all men if it be poſſible, and to render the King of Nauarre, abhorted of all men, in  hope, that if they could bring to paſſe, any thing vpon the Kings perſon, by theſe meanes the ſaid King of Nauarre may be excluded from his right of ſucceſſion.
               The firſt poynt to performe, was left to the aſſembly of the pretended ſtates, as it ſhal appeare hereafter: the other two pieces of work were committed to the Ieſuites, Friers, and other of like ſorte: de bacchandi & calomniandiperitiſſimis, for their dignitie runneth moſt of all vpon theſe two common places.
               Whether the King (conſidering the great neceſſities which hee ſhould haue of money, to maintaine a dangerous and long warre againſt the rebels and traitors) had ſent his cōmiſſions vnto his threaſurors, and receauers of his impoſt, to continue the receauing and gathering of tallages and impoſt, as they had done the yeare before, or elſe that the rebells in Paris, vſurping the name of the thrée eſtates of France, had forged ſuch a thing, I am vncertaine. But ſo it is, that if they did not deuiſe, yet they did vſe his action, to ſteale away the hearts of the people from his obedience, and thereby to make their part ſtronger, to a
                     •
                  ure the Kings ſubiects to ioyne hand with them in their rebellion. For immediatly after the Duke d' Mayne came to Paris, they ſet foorth a declaration, bearing the name of the Princes Citties and commonalties vnited, with the thrée eſtates of the realme, where in deede there was not one Prince, onely the Dukes d' Mayne, Aumale, Nemours, and certaine other ſeditious perſons of Paris, Anious, Roen, Orleans, and Abeuile, with their generall counſell, which conſiſted of ſeauen and forty perſons moſt vile; and for their wickednes, picked out of the ſinke of that rebellion, whereof we haue ſpoken before.
               Firſt, they doo ſtill hide their damnable rebellion, vnder the olde ragged gaberdine of defending the popiſh religion: and becauſe the poore people had béen of long time oppreſſed with diuers payments, and greatly impoueriſhed by long continuance of warre; vnto the defence of popery, they ioyne this plauſible ſnare, to wit, to eaſe the people of the former accuſtomed payments.
               Secondly, vſurping the royall authoritie, they forbid all manner of officers to gather any payments, money, tole, impoſt, or tallage for the King, but to pay vnto their officers the tallages, according vnto the rate of the yeare 1576.
               Thirdly, they commaund, that in caſe they haue payed the ſaide ſomms vnto their commiſſioners, and the Kings officers ſhould come to demaund the ſaide ſommes, or ſhould goe about to compell them to pay the ſame ſommes, they to apprehend them, and to bring them vnto the next priſons,

and there proceſſe to be made as vpon publick extortioners.
               Laſt of all, they commaunde all officers, and receauers of the Kings demaynes,  woods, graines, farmers of ſalt garners, receauers of tenths, and others whatſoeuer, to bring, pay and deliuer the ſame to none other, then to them or their officers, and that vpon paine of death.
               It is ſaid before, that after the Oracle giuen out by the facultie of Theologie, in the colledge of Sorboun, the ſeditious brought it to the Senate of Paris, to bee alowed, inregiſtred, and publiſhed, who vppon the refuſing of ſuch a diſloyall treacherie, were all brought to priſon, and there as malefactors detayned. Now vpon the Dukes comming to Paris, they were called, and offered either to remaine ſtill in priſon, or elſe to doo two things: Firſt to alowe and approue the reſolution of Sorboune: Secondly, to ſweare to the new vnion, which was a confederacy of the rebells.
               This Senate, in ol
                     •
                  e time ſo famous and honorable, for feare of this dangerous conſpiratie of the Leaguers, and rage of the people, againſt their alegeance and loyaltie, doo fall to this compoſition, with the generall counſell of the citie aboue ſaide, and the pretended ſtates, to wit, the Senat ſhall ioyne with the rebells, and ſweare with them to perſecute their King by all meanes, without any reſpect of perſon or dignitie, for the execution done by him vpon the perſons of the Duke of Guize, and the Cardinall his brother, the 23. and 24. of December, which they doo tearme with an odious name of maſſacre. This excerable rebellion nowe hath gotten credit, by that ſo famous and reuerent Senat, the ſecond Maieſtie of France, in olde time ſo renowmed.
               The 30. day of Ianuarie, all the chambers of the Senat, with all the officers appertaining to that court, to the number of 326. gathered together, in the preſence of the Duke d' Mayne; the generall counſell aboue ſaide, and the pretended ſtates did ſweare, and ſubſcribe, ſome with their owne bloud (as Catelina in ol
                     •
                  e time, in like caſe) that forme of vnion, which they had concluded the day before, whereof the ſomme followeth.
               Firſt, they doo ſweare and promiſe to God, to his mother, to the Angels, to al the hée ſaints and ſhee ſaints of Paradiſe, to employ their liues, their goods, and all their meanes to the defence of the Catholick religion, and doo proteſt, that all that which they doo in this vnion, is for the ſetting foorth of Gods glory, and for the defence of the holy Church.
               Secondly, they ſweare to defend the citie of Paris, with the ſtate there eſtabliſhed, & alſo other cities of their aſſociation, which then were, or might be hereafter.
               Thirdly, they ſweare to defend the Princes, to wit, the Dukes d' Mayne and Aumale, (for ſo they loue well to be called) the Prieſtes, Lords, and Gentlemen, vnited with them, both in their perſons and goods, with the liberty of the ſtates of the realme.
               
                  
Laſt of all, they ſweare to purſue by al meanes poſſible them that haue violated the publick faith, broken the vnion, franchizes and liberties of the  ſtates (meaning the King) in committing the maſſacre (ſo they cal the iuſt puniſhment) of the Duke of Guize, and the Cardinall his brother, without any reſpect of perſons, dignity or prerogatiue whatſoeuer, and alſo al them who ſhall fauour and aſſiſt the King by any meanes, with promiſe neuer to forſake one another.
               As this rebellious people did rage in the Senat houſe, in the counſell of the citie, and in their pretended ſtates; ſo the people are ſet at liberty to commit al outrages & violences; the poorer ſort are againſt the rich, the vile perſon againſt the honorable, the wicked againſt the vertuous, the ignorant and blinde againſt the learned: to be ſhort, there is nothing but an infernall horror.
               The Ieſuits, Friers, & other vncleane fowles of like feathers, doo rage no leſſe in the places and charges appoynted vnto them, to wit, in rayling moſt villanouſly againſt the King, and ſlandering the King of Nauarre, and them of the reformed religion, for the cauſes aboue ſaide, making their pulpets the trompets of murther, treaſon, and rebellion: for beſide that, they did inuaigh againſt the King in all manner of vile tearmes, and interpreting all his actions maliciouſly to the worſt: they alſo forbad the people, vpon paines of ſpirituall and bodily puniſhment (for if they did, it was a capitall crime) to pray for the King.
               Alſo the inhabitantes of the citie of Rhemes in Champaigne publiſhed an infamous libell, comming forth out of the Ieſuites forge, bearing this title. A grieuous lamentation of the inhabitants of the citie of Rehmes, vpon the death of the Cardinal, Archbiſhop of Rehmes, peere of France, and what may he not be if they would. That libell was ſawced with infamous in
                     •
                  ectiues, vnworthy and outragious ſpeeches againſt the king, by their language: the authors thereof did teſtifie ſufficiently their conſent in the rebellion of other towns and cities. And ſeeing that the prieſts, Ieſuites and Friers, did ſay ſuch a maſſe at the funerall of their Biſhop, it was no marueile if the ignorant people who beleeued them, anſwered Amen.
               And for as much as among thoſe rebellious countreys and cities, there were none of the reformed religion, vpon whome they might ſpew their gall, they called their owne Prieſtes, Parſons, Vicars and Curates, for to ſubſcribe vnto their rebellion, charging them vpon payne of death, not to pray (in their maſſing) for the King. But ſuch as kept an vpright heart to their Prince, and would not conient to their prohibition, but in their prayers or otherwiſe did wiſh well to the King, were executed as male factors: and great fauour was ſhewed them, vpon great intreatie of friends, if they might eſcape with depriuation of their liuings, or

impriſonment, and cary away their liues for a pray. And by ſuch iniuries ſhewed vnto their owne prieſts, they placed ſuch as were fit to ſerue their  turnes, in kindling more and more the fire of ſedition.
               The third taſke appoynted to the Fryers and Ieſuites, was to render the King of Nauarre and them of his part, execrable in the eares of all men, that by the conſent and generall miſliking of all men (if it were poſſible) he might be excluded from his right of ſucceſſion. The occaſion was thus.
               The 26. of December, the King of Nauarre had ſurprized the towne of Niort in Poytow, of the taking it, & of the ſaid Kings gracious goodnes and clemency ſhewed vnto the inhabitants his deadly enemies, which had committed great outrages vpon them of the reformed Religion, againſt his owne perſon, againſt the Princes of the blood, and of late agaynſt the Lord Valette, an officer of the Crowne of France, as it is ſufficiently ſpoken of before.
               Theſe writers of lies (to teſtifie to the world whoſe Children they are) did ſet foorth ſuch ridiculous falſhoods, and execrable calumnies, and that with as much aſſurance, as they tell vs of their lies and lying miracles, which they did worke with their holywater among the ſauadge people of Giapane, whether they be ſure that no man will ſend to enquire about the truth of the matter, with ſo bolde and impudent faces they did auerre moſt manifeſt lies, which out of any parte of France might bee diſprooued within foure dayes.
               The ſham
                     •
                  les pamphlet went abroade with this inſcription: The execrable cruelties committed by the heretiks againſt the Catholicks of the towne of Niort in Poytow.
               
               The fable ſayth, that they of the religon would neuer haue taken that towne, without the intelligences of the politicks (that is to ſay, of them which fauour the king) which were within the ſayde towne.
               It is ſayde in the Pamphlet, that the Kinges officers of Iuſtice were ſlayne, that the Maior and the Aldermen of the towne were hanged.
               That many were hanged, onely for that they would not denie their religion: alſo, that all the Prieſts and Monkes were hanged for companie.
               Alſo a Prieſt was opened aliue before his fellowes (by terror to make him denie God) and his noble partes were pulled out, but they remayned as conſtant as rocks for all thoſe cruelties, and valiantly ſuffered martyrdome.
               That there were innocent perſons killed in ſuch great number through the towne, euen betweene two or three hundred perſons, ſo that the ſtreets flowed with blood and dead bodies.
               
                  
That the heretikes (as the fable ſayth) tooke a woman which reprooued them of their cruelties, whom they would haue enforced to deny the Maſſe;  which thing ſhee refuſing, they filled her belly with powder, and then ſet fire to it to make hir burſt: ſo that (ſayth the lyer) there is nigh three hundered martirs there put to death which are now in heauen. Theſe holy Martyrs may be called in one word, holy 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               All this lying lybell is eaſily confuted, euen by the inhabitants themſelues, by the Magiſtrates, by the Prieſtes, who there do liue in liberty of their Religion, and by all the people, who will teſtify that there was no ſuch thing, nor otherwiſe then is recited in the diſcourſe of the ſurpriſe of their towne, but will teſtify of the Chriſtian mildnes, clemency, and moderatnes of the King of Nauarre and ſurpriſers, to haue béene far greater then euer they could haue expected, or had deſerued at his hands.
               But this groſſe kind of lying was ſpread abroad to haſten the rebellion of the Citties, and to render the people vntamed and hard harted, agaynſt true and dutiful obedience whatſoeuer might fall hereafter: as if to fall into the handes of the King of Nauarre, and of them of the Religion, were to fall among ſauage beaſtes, mad Tygers and cruell Lyons.
               The King conſidering that the more he endeuored himſelfe to winne the rebels by gentlenes, clemency, and promiſing of impunity; the more hardned, obſtiuate, inſolent and bolde they became.
               Seeing that he muſt be driuen by force to chaſtiſe their rebellions, firſt he procéedeth againſt them by order of law. And for as much as the Dukes de Mayne, Aumale, and Cheualier Aumale, he as if it were ſubroged in the places of the Duke of Guyze and the Cardinal his brother: the King doth firſt and chiefly proceede iudicially agaynſt them three by proſcription, as attaynted of fellonie, rebellion, and high treaſon.
               Firſt, the King doth ſhew himſelfe to be a King ordayned and geuen of God, hauing receaued of God that ſword and power which he had not by vſurpation, but by lawfull and naturall right of ſucceſſion.
               Secondly, hee doth ſhew the great benefites, which hee and the Kings his predeceſſors had beſtowed vpon them, and namely, that he hath ſpared their liues (whom he might iuſtly haue puniſhed for their diuers attemptes, fellonies, and diſobedience) for the loue which hee had vnto them and their houſe.
               He ſheweth alſo, how he had ſince this their laſt rebellion, ſent vnto them diuers of his faythfull ſeruants with letters, and euen Heraulds of arms, to let them vnderſtand his good will and readines to put vp all iniuries & offences, and to receaue them to his fauour. But that in ſtead of humbling themſelues, and of accepting his gracious fauour, they became more inſolent: which they haue ſhewed in ſurpriſing his townes, fortreſſes, and in rebelling agaynſt him, his Officers and Magiſtrates, couering their treaſons

vnder the name of Catholike religion.
               Therefore he doth declare the ſayd Dukes de Mayne and Aumale, to  haue forfayted all eſtates, and offices, honors, power, gouerments, charges, dignities, and prerogatiues, which they haue receaued of his predeceſſors, and himſelfe: hee doth declare them attaynted of fellony, rebellion, and high treaſon, commaundeth his Officers to proceed agaynſt them by any maner of way, and agaynſt their poſterity, as agaynſt ſuch as he hath declared them, if they do not ſubmit themſelues by the firſt day of March next following. This proſcription was declared the firſt day of February. The ſame day alſo the King pronounced the like proſcriptions againſt the rebellious and trayterous Citties of Paris, Orleans, Anjous, Roen, Abeuile, and others, declaring them conuicted of fellony, rebellion, and treaſon in the higheſt degree, willing all his officers to proceede agaynſt them, and againſt al them that doo, or ſhall aſſiſt them by any meanes, and againſt their poſterity, as agaynſt ſuch as they be declared, if they do not returne vnder his obedience by the 14. day of march next following.
               The King intending by theſe thunderclaps to call them to their dutie, purpoſing yet to haue forgotten all offences, for the loue which he had to popiſh religion, common to the rebels with him, and for hatred of the reformed religion, gaue them (as is aforeſaid) a certayne day prefixed, by the which tyme if they did not returne to their duty, he determined to chaſtiſe them by force: and therefore the ſixt day of February, hee ſent forth his commiſſions to all Nobles, Gentlemen, and Captaynes, to prepare themſelues with all furniture neceſſary, to repayre to him the 12. of March following. Neither is the ſentence of the King an ydle threatning, but is (as if it were) a condemnation of Gods law, pronounced by the ſoueraigne Magiſtrate, whoſe puniſhments God hath partly executed, and partly hath reſerued to execute hereafter in the fulnes of time.
               About the middle of February, the King vnderſtanding what had paſſed in Paris, how the rebels had enforced the Senat to ſwear an vnion againſt him, his life, perſon and eſtate, did tranſport the exerciſe of iuſtice, and of all his courts, and chambers of Parliament from Paris: and alſo all other courts of iuſtice in the aforeſaid townes of Orleans, Aujous, Abeuile, Roen, and others, to his citie of Tours vpon Loyre, deprauing the ſayd trayterous cities of al offices, dignities, charges, and priuileges, commaunding al his Iudges, Counſellers, & officers of al his courts in the ſaid cities, to repaire to the citie of Tours vpon Loyre by the fifteenth of Aprill next following, there to execute their charges, vpon payne of depriuation of their wages & offices: forbiddeth alſo, that no apparance be giuen by any officer vnto any ſuter, and alſo no parties to appeare in any other place ſaue in Tours onely before his Iudges there, vpon payne to be declared rebels.
               It is ſayd before, how wee haue left the King of Nauarre ſicke in bed of

a dangerous pleureſie, whileſt the League haue nigh filled the meaſure of their execrable treaſons and rebellion. Now the Lord reſeruing that noble Prince, if not to reſtabliſh the flouriſhing eſtate of that Realm, yet he hath  raiſed him as it were out of his graue, to prolong the vtter diſſipation of it, and in the middeſt of the horrible confuſions thereof, to reunite the hearts and mindes of the godly and vertuous, to ſaue ſome corner of the ſayd Realme, for a place of refuge for the remnant of the Iſrael of God. Behold therefore O great King, the Lord hath reſtored thée to health, ſtrengthened thine armes to warre, and thy hands to fight; he hath girded thée with force, conſtancie, wiſedome and iuſtice; the Lord of Armies doth call thee to reſtore true religion, iuſtice, iudgement, Diſcipline and peace, vtterly decayed through the malice of thine enemies; be ſtrong and faint not, for the Lord will put a great worke in thine hand to execute. Followe the vocation of God, and the Lord will be a ſhadowe at thy right hand to kéepe thée from euill: doo good things with good meanes, and thou ſhall ſee thine enemies to fall before thy face, thou ſhalt pitie them and do them good.
               Whileſt the King doth ſo thunder the threatnings of Gods lawe, and the claps of his iuſtice agaynſt thoſe Rebels, forſaken and reiected of God (as is afore ſayd); the King of Nauarre perceiuing the King to be in diſtreſſe, perſecuted and diſpoſſeſſed out of his Towns and Cities, euen out of his owne houſes by his enemies abroade, and to liue in great miſtruſt of his domeſticall enemies, who did daily eate bread at his owne table; did greatly lament his caſe, keepeth himſelfe quiet beyond Loyre, ceaſeth from all acts of hoſtilitie and exployts of warre, leaſt he ſhould encreaſe his affliction and heauines. And deſirous greatly to make a proofe of his fidelitie towards the King, and to croſſe the actions of the leagued rebels, proffereth peace to the King, and watcheth diligently that his enemies might not ſet foote in any place where hee had meanes to make ſure for the kings ſeruice, as for the eaſe of them of the religion. So that after the taking of Niort, (as is afore ſayd) in the latter end of Ianuary the inhabitants of S. Meixant and Maillezay, two Townes nigh neighbours of Niort, yeelded themſelues vnto him. The Lord Aubiguy was appoynted Gouernour of that Iland.
               About the 14. of February, the King of Nauarre hauing recouerd his perfect health and ſtrength, with part of his forces tooke the field marching toward the riuer of Loyre. The inhabitants of Lodune, Liſle, Bouchard, Mirabean, Chaſtelerault, Vinonne, and other places and Caſtles of the countrey of Turenne and Poytow, offered to open the gates of their townes vnto him, and alſo proffered vnto him their ſeruices. He receiued them very courteouſly, and without innouation of any thing; he ſuffered them of the Romiſh religion to liue with all libertie with their ordinarie exerciſes: onely he commanded them of the reformed religion, with the exerciſe of the

ſame, there to be eſtabliſhed, commaunding them of both religions to liue in amitie and peace. 
               
               About the ſame time many Townes and places in diuers parts of the Realme (which before did ſeeme to bee at the deuotion of the Leaguers) were made ſure for the Kings ſeruice, as well in Bourgondy as in other Prouinces, and among others, the Towne and Caſtle of Sancerre in Berry was ſeazed for the King. That Towne had béen greatly defaced in the former warres: for the walles of the Towne had béen raſed by the Lord Chaſtre, Gouernour of Berry, who did put a Captaine within the Caſtle for the kéeping of the ſame, and to bridle the inhabitants there who were all of the religion. But after the death of the Duke of Guize, the Lord of Requien of the houſe of Montigny, Captayne of the Kings gardes, ſeazed both vpon the Towne and Caſtle, (the which Towne notwithſtanding it was without walles, yet being ſituated on high and in a ſtrong place by nature) hee vndertooke to fortifie the ſame, by the helpe of them of the religion, who did ſo reſort thether from euery where daily, that the ſayd Lord Requien waxed ſtrong there (as hee is a valiant man) employed himſelfe with them of the religion, to make warre againſt the rebelled Leaguers for the Kings ſeruice.
               About the 23. of February, the King of Nauarre being at Chaſtelerault, tooke occaſion to ſeaze vppon the Caſtle and the Towne of Argenton in Berry by the meanes which followe. That place doth pertaine to the Lord▪ 
                  Monpenſier, but it was graunted to the Lady Dwager of Monpenſier, ſiſter to the laſt Duke of Guize, by her contract of marriage, hauing that honour ſhewed her, to haue married the Duke of Monpenſier, Prince of the bloud, and father to this Duke yet liuing.
               In the beginning of this laſt warre of the League, the caſtell of Argenton ſtrong and well furniſhed, was made ſure for the League, the towne remayned at libertie as being not ſtrong, and commaunded by the Caſtell. But after the death of the Duke of Guize, the gariſon of the Caſtell was increaſed double, intending thereby to aſſure the towne: alſo the gariſon vnderſtanding of the taking of Chastelerault, (which is not farre of) by the King of Nauarre, fearing that which afterward happened vnto them, they ſent to the Duke d'Mayne for ſuccour, who ſent certaine Captaines with their companies from Orleans. They of the towne refuſing the aſſociation of the rebellion of the Leaguers, and willing to remaine faithfull to the King, doo aduertiſe him of all their eſtate and good wil towards him, doo require ſuccor of him, as well againſt them of the Caſtell as others, which did approach to ſeaze vpon their town. The diſpatch could not bée in ſo ſhort ſpace, but that in the meane time, they of the towne and of the Caſtell fell at variance vppon the matter, each party truſting in the ſuccour which they hoped for.
               
                  
The King of Nauarre aduertiſed of al this, and of the ſuccour ſent, they there by the Leaguers nigh aduaunced, with certaine troupes of horſemen,  determined to make them agrée; and vſing his accuſtomed celerity, it fell out with him ſo happely, that hee preuented them in a moment who were ſent from Orleans, ſending before ſome of his gardes, who entred on a ſuddaine into the towne, to the great amaze of the gariſon of the Caſtell. At the ariuing of the gardes of the king of Nauarre, there was a hot ſkirmiſh, and ſome were killed on both ſides: few of the King of Nauarre his gardes, but many more of the gariſon; but when the Leaguers of the Caſtell ſaw the companies of the King of Nauarre, firſt they were amazed, and ſhortly after, conceauing a great terror yéelded the place.
               After that the King of Nauarre had taken poſſeſſion of that place, he appoynted the Lord Beaupre gouernour there, where he eſtabliſhed the exerciſe of the reformed religion with liberty and ſafety, in ſtead of the romiſh religion, as in other places.
               The King of Nauarre returned to Chastelerault, where conſidering how the King was in great danger, both abroad and at home, how hée had euill counſell giuen him, pittying his eſtate, and conſidering that hee could not bée moued, neither to make, nor to accept of his ſeruice for his defence: conſidering alſo that the Leagued rebels waxed ſtrong, and the King weake, he putteth forth a proteſtation, bearing date the fourth of March; wherein he ſheweth, that notwithſtanding his affaires, and eſtate of them of the reformed religion was neuer ſtronger, who within thrée yeares, hath borne the fury of ten mighty armies, whereof ſome had béen beaten to cloutes, the others haue béen ſcattered as duſt in the ayre; hee doubteth not, but the ſame God will ſtrengthen him with the ſame force, and will defend alwaies hereafter his iuſt cauſe and innocency: yet hee dooth proffer them, that if the King will hearken vnto peace, hee was neuer ſo willing to imbrace it. Furthermore, hée proffereth himſelfe to heare reaſon, and to bée taught by a conference and a counſell, promiſing that if he be conuicted by the word of God to be in any error, he will reuoke it, and bring all them of the reformed religion to doo the like. But to bring him out of that religion, wherein he hath béen borne and brought vp, euen from his cradell; with the dint of the ſword, he warneth them, that therein they haue taken a contrary courſe, by which they will neuer preuaile.
               Laſt, hee dooth adiure all the ſtates by the name of God, by the aſhes of their anceſtors, by the loue of their natiue countrey, to counſell the King to this ordinary courſe, or elſe to deuiſe ſome better if they can, by the which they may ſtop the ſubuerſion of their countrey.
               About this time came the excommunication rowling from the capitall, and thundering, like vnto a 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , of the olde Comedy, pronounced againſt the King, for the execution done at Bloys, vpon the

perſons of the Duke of Guize, the Popes champion, and the Cardinal the ſaide Popes Chapline, and the impriſonmént of the Cardinal of Bourbon, 
                   and the Archbiſhop of Lyons, ſhot out of the belly of Frier Sixtus, at the ſute of rebels. With the ſtinke of this 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   of Frier Sixtus, came forth out of the bottomles pit of hell a number of Ieſuites and Friers, and ſuch miſbegotten monſters, to raile, to accurſe, & defame their lawfull and naturall King and Prince ordained of God, without any remorſe of conſcience.
               Many of the Leaguers, who after the death of their Captaine had hanged downe their heads, had retyred to ſuch places as they thought ſure far them: ſome other who had forſaken their faith, their promiſe, and oath giuen to the League, now conſidering foure accidents which had happened, and ſeen to fauour the affaires of the rebels, doo rebell a new, doo forſake their King, whom God, nature, thankfulnes, and nobility commaunded to dye at his feete.
               Firſt, the vnſeaſonable lenitie, or rather puſillanimitie of the King, who had ſtated the execution of iuſtice for ſuch notorious and hainous treaſons committed, not againſt him, but againſt GOD in his perſon, whome God had conſecrated to that high dignitie, vpon the heads onely of Guize and the Cardinal his brother, and in the impriſonmēt of ſix of the chiefeſt, without proceeding any further.
               Secondly, Fryer Sixtus his excommunication, by the which they ſuppoſed (though not in conſcience but in paſſion onely) themſelues to be ſet at liberty to doe whatſoeuer without any grudge of conſcience.
               Thirdly, the beating away of the kings gariſons and forces out of the citadell of Orleans by the Duke de Maine, therein ſuppoſing in a manner (for ſo is the blindnes of mans paſſion) to haue conquered all France.
               
               Laſtly, the euill counſell of leagued diſſemblers and diſſembling traytors, whom they knew to be about the Kings perſon in great number, wayting for opportunitie to deliuer him priſoner to his enemies, or elſe to diſpatch him out of his life with one blow; knowing that by their counſels, his forces diminiſhed, his cities and ſtrong holdes were ſurprized, his enemies waxed ſtrong. But ſpecially they feared greatly the playes and tricks which they had taught Charles the ninth his brother and him, which they had played many times with them of the religion, they I ſay feared at length to bee ſnared in the like ſpringes. Therefore all theſe things wel conſidered, they begin euery where to ſtrike the alarum, and prepare themſelues to the battell, againſt God, their King, their countrey, their li
                     •
                  erties, and the graues of their fathers.
               So that the Lords Briſſak, Chaſtre, and Boyſdauphin, to whome a little before the king had forgiuen great treaſons, who a little before had promiſed with an oath, obediēce to the king, who did ſhewe a ſemblant of

great ioy, for the execution done at Bloys, they priuily doo ſteale away and breaking their fayth, promiſe and allegeaunce to their king, reuolted agayne  to the enemie.
               
                  Briſſak went to Angers, where he thought to cauſe that Citie to rebell agaynſt the king: for ſome of the citie of Angers, had hitherto diſſembled their affection and good wills, whch they had to the league and rebellion, as well becauſe they had the king at Bloys and Tours, who looked to them neerely and narrowly, as for not hauing the meanes to execute their enterprize. But now at the reuolcing of Briſſak, they made him head of their enterprize, for to ſeaze vpon the Caſtell (one of the ſtrongeſt places in all France). And for to bring their counſell to a good paſſe with ſpeede, fearing leaſt by delay they might be preuanted by the king, being ſo nigh them; therefore they followe a ſhort courſe: for firſt they trie what corruption may doe. They doo promiſe to the Lord Pichery, gouernour of the Caſtell, an hundred thouſand crownes, and to entertaine foure thouſand footmen, ſo that he would keepe it for the league.
               The Lord Pichery (as a faith full ſeruant to his Prince) refuſed all thoſe proffers: whereupon the Lord Briſſak with the reſt of the rebells within the towne did aſſault the Caſtel, and fortified themſelues by all meanes, with trenches and barricadoes vpon the ditch of the ſayd Caſtell.
               Whereuppon the Lord Pichery aduertiſed the King of the ſtate of his affayres and attempts of the Lord Briſſak, and inhabitantes of the towne.
               The King ſent the Marſhall Haumont with the regiment of Picardy, and part of his guardes, who were admitted into the Caſtell by the Lord Pichery, who opened vnto them the great bridge of the ſaid Caſtell.
               Aſſoone as the Marſhall Haumont entred into the Caſtel, although the rebels were in farre greater number, yet the ſkirmiſh began: then was it tyme for the enemy to packe away in haſt, many of the rebels were ſlayne. There they were taken priſoners to the Kings vſe ſo many as yeelded one hundred throuſand crownes for raunſome. Some were executed in the towne, and chiefly ſome Ieſuits and Fryers, who had beene the firebrands to kindle the combuſtion, and the trompets of the rebellion.
               The Lord Briſſak (head of the rebellion) there ſaued himſelfe by flight with few of his company, and ſeazing vpon the townes of Mans, Alençon, and Faleze, cauſed the inhabitants there to rebell agaynſt the King.
               About the ſame time (the Duke Mercure deſirous to get the fauour of the townes and people, to aſſure better the dutchy of Britaine to himſelfe) tooke vpon him the name of protector of the Romiſh Church in that prouince of Britanie, by the helpe of the Biſhops, and other rabble of that ſinagogue, who preſcribed certaine formes vnto the Ieſuites and Friers, whereby in theyr ſermons, to bring the people to that deuotion.
               Although Chriſtian Reader, thou mayſt eaſily perceaue by the whole

courſe of this his hiſtory, how from time to time the houſe of Guyze, who were not ſo much by nature as to bee admitted into the ſociety of the Nobility of France, at the firſt made a fayre wether, after that preferred them  ſelues before the Princes of the bloud. And when through too much lenity of the houſe of Valoys toward them, they had obtayned that, they haue practized to ſteale away the hearts of ſubiects from their natural Prince, & at length haue enterprized vpon his life. And when by a ſingular prouidence, God had deliuered the King out of their ſnares and clawes, and ſee they are not able to depriue him of his life, they doo depriue him of his Crowne ad dignitie. Firſt by the iudgment of Sorboune. Secondly, by the aſſotiatiation with they haue ſworne to preſent him to death by all meanes poſſible. Thirdly, by taking away from him the name of King, though not in plaine tearmes, yet by paraphraſe: as when one taketh vpon him to be the protector of the Crown of France, y• other protector of the Church, and giue the ſame to themſelues, which proper
                     •
                  y is and hath beene the office of the king of France. For the Kings in France haue had alwayes that honour (as due vnto them by right) to be Protectors of the Crowne, Dignitie, State, Kingdome, Church and people of their dominions, and neuer yeelded that title to any man, neither durſt euer any man vſurpe that title, vntill this yeare 1589. by theſe two companions, to wit, the Dukes de Mayne and Mercure.
               
               But it may be obiected, that the ſame title hath béene geuen and taken to the King of Nauarre, as protector of the reformed churchs of France, and therefore they do that which the heretikes haue taught them.
               To this it may be anſwered, that the caſe is not alike, for the reformed churches were forſaken of the King without any cauſe, at the ſolicitation of flatterrs, ſycophantes, and clawba
                     •
                  kes, who to bring the King to that confuſion that hee is come v
                     •
                  to, did hold his kingdome into troubles and ciuill warres, by litle and little to entrench vpon his authority, & at length to tread him downe vnder feete. That part therefore of the Kings ſubiects, which was the beſt, though not the greater in number, being wrongfully put from the Kings protection, and aſſaulted euery where, haue recourſe, not to a ſtranger, nor ſtrange bloud, the firſt Peere and Prince of France, who after the King hath moſt intereſt to the Crowne, him they haue requeſted to protect them vnder the Kings authority, againſt the violences of them, who did ſo counſell the King to forſake the protection of his people.
               But theſe companyons, what hath moued them to vſurpe theſe tytles: The King did neuer forſake the Crowne, nor the Romiſh Church in godliues that way, in zeale, in integrity, and auſtericy of life, in wiſedome, prudence and fortitude, to defend the romiſh Church: he hath paſſed all the Kings of all ages, he hath beſtowed his forces, hath ſpent his goods, hath

ventered his life diuers times, hath made ſhipwracke of his honor for the defence of the Romiſh Church. What neede therefore had that church of  any other protector then their owne King, whoſe bountifulnes and liberality they ſo oftentimes haue tryed:
               Whileſt theſe things did ſo paſſe at Angers, the citty of Nantes vppon Loyre began to hault, by the ſecret practiſes and treacheries of the ſeditious Leaguers, who were within the cittie. But when the newes came of the taking of Angers, and of the execution done vpon ſome ſeditious Ieſuits, and other Fryers, the rebels at Nantes tooke the alarum in this wiſe: for the Ladyes Martignes, & Mercure, wife to the Duke of Mercure, gouernour of Britayne, tooke occaſion thereupon to haſten the rebellion: for beeing aduertiſed that many of the cheefeſt officers of iuſtice in that cittie, as alſo other good Citizens faithful to the King, ſeeing the practiſes which were wrought in their cittie by the Leaguers, did diſſwade theyr fellowe citizens to geue eare to ſuch ſeditious perſons, and aduiſed them rather to remayne faythful vnto the King, then to draw vpon themſelues the Kings wrath with a cruell and mortall warre.
               For to breake the good purpoſe and intents of theſe men, and to chaſtiſe them for their too great fidelity to their King: Theſe Ladies ſent for two Captaynes of the towne, well knowen for their ſeditious practiſes & great affection to the traytors; they ſhewed vnto theſe two Captaynes their paſſions, with great amplifications of the thinges paſt at Angers.
               
               They began by many inuectiues and ſpitefull ſpeaches againſt the K. to ſhew how the King had put to death a great number of Prieſts and Friers, who were taken at the winning of Angers, how he had taken the chalices and relickes, and wholly became an heretike: then with much lying they fell to talke of them whom they would haue to bee taken priſoners in the citty, charging them that they ſought to bring into their cittye the K. of Nauarre, with all his troups, with determination to haue the cittie ranſacked, to take away their goods, liues, and religion, and that therefore it was needfull they rayſe the people to rebellion out of hand, to ſeaze vppon them which were faythfull to the King, and make the citty ſure for the League.
               The chiefeſt Captaine appointed for this execution, was one Gaſsion a Gaſcoine, brought vp in the houſe of Martignes, and greatly affected to the League.
               An order before that time was, that the ſaid Gaſſion for one halfe yeare commaunded in the caſtell, and the Lord Crambok, who was faithfull to the King, the other halfe yeare; this man no authority then at all. The counſell of theſe two accurſed women was quickly executed by the ſaid Gaſsion, hauing for that time the rule of the caſtell. The people vpon theſe furmiſes were armed, the ſtreats were fortify to with Baricadoes.
               
                  
The firſt execution of this rebellion, was the apprehending of foure ſcore of the moſt notable men and richeſt families in all the Citie; and among  the reſt were the Lord Miron the Kings threaſurer in Britaine, the Lord Bourin a great Lawier, and one Doctor Rogues Dean of the facultie of Phiſicke, and many other faithfull ſeruants of the King, who were put in ſtraight priſon in the Caſtle, their houſes were ſpoyled and goods rifled.
               The Citie being thus made ſure for the League by the Rebells, the countrey about was not free from that tempeſt; light horſes are ſent into places moſt ſuſpected; many gentlemen are taken priſoners abroad, without reſpect of age, qualitie or religion: ſuch as did eſcape with the loſſe of their goods, thought to haue ſped well.
               In like manner, the Citie of Rhemes, head Citie of the lowe Britaine, (which had behaued themſelues modeſlie enough hetherto) might greatly haue fauoured & aduaunced the treaſons of the Duke Mercure, if he could haue got it to his deuotion. But for that purpoſe, firſt it was needfull to haue the helpe of the Biſhop of the place, named Emare Hannekin, ſonne to a citizen of Paris; for the ſtage play could not bee well ſeazoned with mirth, except a Prieſt might play the diuels part. Sir Hannekin therfore beſtirreth himſelfe all that euer he can to bring his treaſon to paſſe; but his credite being there yet vnder age and ſmall account, he taketh the Biſhop of Dole of the noble of Eſpinay, to countenance the play, being alſo aſſiſted by a citizen named Botelier, who was much beholding to the ſayd Sir Hannekin, becauſe he was ſuch a louing ghoſtly father to his wife: he had alſo ſome other citizens, & ſome of the court of Parliament there, men of faction, who ſecretly ſet their ſhoulders to that worke. All this bleſſed companie, by the counſell of theſe two ſedicious Prieſts, deuiſers of rebellion againſt their naturall and lawfull Prince, doo raiſe vp the people in armes, giuing to vnderſtand (though moſt falſly) that the Lord Huuanday, Lieutenant generall for the K. in that countrey, the Lord Moubarot gouernor of the Towne, and the Lord Aſſerake who accompanied them, would haue oppreſſed the libertie of the Towne, and brought in garriſons to ſacke it. Vppon this falſe rumour ſpread abroade by thoſe two lying Prieſts, the people armed did ſeaze vppon the Market place, and fortified the ſtreates with Barricadoes.
               The Duke Mercure (who then was a petie King at Nantes) aduertiſed of theſe things ſo paſſing at Rhemes, and deſirous to enlarge his newly ſwallowed vp kingdome of little Britaine, doth gather forces as great as he can, and fayning to goe to 
                     Ʋaunes to the States of the countrey, taketh his way to Rhedon, and turned vp ſhort to Rhemes, where he arriuing was receaue
                     •
                   with great ioy of thē of the League, he put garriſons within the tower of the Fuller, within the gate of S. George, & in the white gate.
               
                  
It was time then for the Lords Huuanday, Montbarot, and Aſſerak, to keepe themſelues cloſe within their houſes, being ſought out for no leſſe  matter then for the price of their liues. The Lord Montbarot had ſeazed vppon the tower of the gate Mordeleſe: hee was ſummoned by the Duke Mercure to yeeld the ſayd tower into his hands, which thing he refuſed to doo, ſaying that there he was placed for the King and for his ſeruice. Vpon this refuſall the Canon was brought before the Tower, and many houſes pearced, to make it ready to the battery. There was no appearance to ſuſtaine a battery, much leſſe to hope for any ſuccour: which thinges béeing conſidered, the Lord Montbarot agreed and yeelded the place with honorable conditions both for himſelfe and his fellowes.
               By theſe meanes Mercure remained maſter of the place, whereof hee changed the whole eſtate and gouernment, placing therein men at his deuotion: there he cauſed a Ieſuit moſt bitterly, ſeditiouſly, and vnworthy to inueygh and rayle agaynſt the King: he diſpatched a Captaine Spaniard named Iohn with his company to ſcoure ye country, hee did execrable oppreſſions, robbing and ſacking all indifferently, he tooke many gentlmens houſes, which he robbed, & many men whom he cruelly entreated, and put to great raunſoms, ſparing neither Nobles nor others of the romiſh religion, for that onely they were faithfull to the King.
               This exploit done, Mercure gathered as great forces of men of warre as he could, and from thence tooke his iourney toward Fongeres in the low Britayne, a towne which he had gone about long before to ſeduce, and had the chief
                     •
                  ſt of the inhabitants at his deuotion, they receaued him very willingly: and hauing the towne he agreed with the Captaine of the caſtell, who ſolde him the place with all the moueable goods and furniture therein belonging to his maſter the Marqueſſe Roche, for the ſumme of fifteen thouſand crownes which he receaued.
               In Aprill the Lord Bordage and other Gentlemen of the religion, accompanied  with few men, tooke the town of Vitre, belonging to the yong Lord Laual: which thing when Merceur (who was then at Fongers) vnderſtood, hee ſent a Gentleman of Britaine named Tailowet, with certaine companies of men of warre, and the commons of the countrey, whom he raiſed vp in armes to the number of ſixe thouſands: they beſieged Vitre the ſpace of fiue wéekes, but the place was valiantly defended by the ſaide Gentlemen and their ſmall company.
               During this ſiege in the moneth of May, they of Roen (hauing receaued  letters from the King, by the helpe of ſome honeſt and faithfull men) came againe to their right wittes, and returned to the Kinges obedience, with whom they agréed for the impunity of that offence which was paſt. They tooke priſoner the Lord Charroniere, whome Merceur at his departing to Fongeres, had left there gouernour: they tooke alſo the Spaniſh

Moore, to wit, Captaine Iohn, and many other of that faction and behauiour, if the Lorde Merceur had béen there, it had béen an eaſie thing to  haue taken him alſo.
               Whileſt theſe things were a dooing on both ſides, the Lord Morlak entred into the Caſtell Ioſſelin, the ſtrongeſt place of all Britaine, for the Kings ſeruice. The Lord Saint Lauuers, a Captaine of the Leaguers, with certaine companies, enterpriſed to ſurpriſe the Towne, and ſo to kill Morlak therein, chooſing for the executiō of his purpoſe, the day which they call holy Friday, a day of great deuotion among the Papiſts, leaſt of al ſuſpected, and ſo to haue taken it when they ſhould haue béen buſie about their ceremonies and enchauntings: ſo he ſurpriſed the towne, but not the Lord Morlak, who did holde the Caſtell.
               Whileſt theſe broyles did ſo paſſe in Britayn, in other places alſo (as if it were at a day appo
                     •
                  nted) the traiterous Leaguers tooke Molins in Borbonnoys, ſituated vpon the riuer Allier, which riſing out of the Mountaines of Anuergne, falleth into Loyre at the towne Charite. That place was well defended by the Lord Roſtayn: but being ſet on when the Gariſon was abſent, for lack of men the towne was caried away to the Leaguers.
               About the ſelfe ſame time, the faction of the League in the citie of Bourdeaux ſhewed themſelues, and attempted to ſurpriſe the towne againſt the King. They had conſpired an accurſed practiſe, both againſt the Marſhall Matignon (the Kings gouernour there) and alſo againſt the towne, and good inhabitants, who were knowne to bée faithfull to the King: their intent was to ſtab the ſaid Marſhall Matignon, to ſ
                     •
                  aze vpon the citie and Caſtles, and to kill all them that ſhould not bée of their ſide. The traitors had made a great preparation of ſhippes at Browage, had ſtayed many ſhippes which were bound to Newland for fiſhing, to fauour the enterpriſe vpon Bourdeaux.
               
               Vpon Eaſter euen, therebels there vppon the watch word, roſe vp in armes, part of them did ſeaze vpon the gate of Saint Iulien; and part of them had incamped themſelues at another ſide without the citie.
               The Magiſtrates of the citie ſéeing this commotion, with ſtrong hand went toward them, who had ſtayed vpon the gate Saint Iulien, the rebels did reſiſt the Magiſtrates, and beate them back. The Marſhall Matignon taking part of the Gariſons out of the Caſtells, with the aſſiſtance of the inhabitants, faithfull to the King, dooth march with ſome forces a foote through the ſtreates of the towne, toward the gate that they had ſeazed vpon. The rebells ſéeing this power comming againſt them, without any fight began to faint, and in a while after to run away, and ſhift for themſelues, yet could they not ſo ſpéedily auoyde, but there was fiue ſlaine vpon the place, & many of that conſpiracie were apprehended. There were two executed, one a captaine of the citie, and the other was of the ga
                     •
                  des of the

Marſhal, who declared the whole conſpiracie, and accuſed a great number, and of the chiefeſt of the citie. They who had remayned within the towne,  fearing to be detected, by reaſon of a guiltie conſcience; the night folowing left behinde them their maker, whome they ſhoulde haue ſwallowed downe whole and aliue the next day following being Eaſter day. They leapt ouer the walls: for on the morow, a great number of ropes were found hanging at the wals, by which they ſlided down: the greateſt part of them retyred to Browage, and ſhortly after the King ſent eyght hundred Launce-knights, there to bée in Gariſon to kéepe the reſt in their duetie.
               Whileſt theſe rebellions were a working in Britayne, and other places and Prouinces of the realme, the King vnderſtanding the greateſt part of his realme to be reuolted from his obedience, and how a great many Noblemen and Gentlemen whome he hath forgiuen at Bloys, and let ſcape vnpuniſhed, abuſing his lenitie, or rather accounting it (as it was in trueth) puſillanimitie, had turned againe to his enemies, began to fal in great miſtruſt, and to deſpaire both of himſelfe and of his eſtate. The Leaguers who were about his perſon, to increaſe this his amaze, aduertiſed him (though falſely for the moſt part) that the Spaniard, the Princes, and States of Italy, the Dukes of Sauoy and Lorreyne, had ſworne the reuengement of the death of the Duke of Guize. Alſo they perſwaded him, that he was not in ſafety at Bloys, and therefore aduiſed him to retyre to Tours: this counſell they gaue him, not for any care which they had of his ſafetie, although that God turned it to the beſt, but for that they thought to haue more aſſiſtance there, to performe their wicked intent purpoſed againſt him, that citie being great and populous, and where were many of the chiefeſt Leagued, who had promiſed their helpe to the traitors.
               They tolde him alſo how the King of Nauarre with great power approched, and was already at Saumour to paſſe ouer Loyre for to inuade the Realme.
               The king not knowing what to doe, nor whom to truſt, and perceiuing thē that were at Bloys for the moſt part to be his ſecret enemies, & to haue intelligēces wt the rebels, in the latter end of March departed from Bloys, and remoued to Tours, being wel aſſured, that at al extremities he ſhould haue the King of Nauarre (whoſe fidelitie and valour he knew well, howſoeuer the Leaguers of his counſel did terrifie him of his forces) there nigh at hand and ready to ſuccour him, although that ſo oftentimes hee had been deaffe at his moſt reaſonable counſells.
               The king being at Tours, the firſt thing which hee did was in the beginning of Aprill, there he depriued the Duke Mercure of his gouernment, of lands, dignities, offices and prerogatiues to him granted by him, for his treaſons committed againſt his Maieſtie in his gouernment.
               
                  
In the beginning of Aprill the king being at Tours, and perceiuing the great dangers which compaſſed him about on euery ſide, hauing many  Leaguers of his counſell and about his perſon, the Citie for the moſt part leagued, bent againſt him: by the meanes of ſome of his ſaythfull counſellers, as of the Marſhals Biron and Hautmont and others, and conſidering more deepely the reaſonable and modeſt proteſtation of the K. of Nauarre, who in his great proſperitie (yet of late craueth for peace) deſireth to be taught proffereth his ſeruice to the king, willeth them to deuiſe ſome good wayes to remedie the horrible confuſions which doe ouerflow France, began to hearken to ſome good and moderate counſell, as to take ſome truces with the ſaid king of Nauarre, & to vſe his counſell and forces for his iuſt and lawfull defence.
               In the moneth of March following, after the taking of the Citadel of Orleans by the rebels, and the ennouatious which they had made in Paris, in the changing of the State, and treading downe vnder foote the kings royall authoritie: The Dukes of Mayne and Aumale began to ſhew ſuch ielouſies and ſuſpitions, which ambition did worke in their hearts, as it did before in the two brethren, to wit, the Dukes of Guize and Maine. For the Duke de Mayne was caryed to the vſurpation of the Monarchy after his brothers death, as if it were vpon the ſhoulders o. rebells, and would haue had been ſory, if his couſin (the Duke de Aumale) ſhould haue had either the whole or elſe any part thereof in ſuperioritie, but rather deſirous that he ſhould depend of his commaundements, and therefore did holde him ſhort, with ſecret practizes and factions.
               The Duke d' Aumale would haue beene glad to haue had all to himſelfe rather than his coſin, and if not all, yet he thought to get as good part in the cake as he might; but the factious were not ſo fauourable vnto him as to the other. Fearing therefore ſome Guizien trick (ſuch as hee was well acquainted with) to be played againſt him by the helpe of the mutinous Pariſiens, he putteth on a good countenance, and after infinite ſackings, riflings, and manifolde robberyes committed vpon the rich Marchaunts and others in Paris (for in thoſe dayes all rich men were either royalls or hereticks) he departed out of the Citie into Picardy, where he thought his parte might bee ſtronger, and hee mought bee in greater ſafetie.
               
                  Mercure on the other ſide, for his part, was content if he might make ſure vnto himſelfe the Dutchie of Britaine, ſuppoſing that the throte of his ambition was not ſo wide as that he might ſwallow down the whole kingdom & Crown of France, yet betweene them 3. the glorious name of the League, and holy vnion, holy Church, and holy Catholick Religion did rowle among them, and were patched by the Fryers and Ieſuites, for an olde gaberdine to hide vnder all their treacheries againſt the king,

and robberies againſt his ſubiects. All theſe things did flie abroad vnder the authoritie of the newe great generall Protector of the Crowne of  
                  France, to wit, the Duke de Mayne, to whome that title was giuen by conſpirators aſſembled at Paris, vnder the name of States, as it is afore ſayde.
               All theſe three did well agree together in reſiſting the kings authority, and oppreſſing the kings ſubiects euery where, euery man reſeruing to himſelfe his owne thoughts: yet would they not be kept ſo ſecret, but that their enuies, ielouſies and enimities, ſometime would flame out, ſo that they could be euidently ſpied by other men.
               The Duke d'Aumale abſented himſelfe from Paris, and in the Ile of France, Picardie, Brie, Tartenoys, and 
                     Ʋermandoys, went about to doo his buſines as well as he could, & his part as ſtrong as ſtrong might be, made with thoſe great ſummes of money which for his ſhare he had made of the ſpoyle of the rich men of Paris. The Citie of Paris is one of the greateſt Cities in the world, but doubtles the greateſt in Europe. It is deuided into three parts. The one and the greateſt part lyeth in Belgik, on the banck of the riuer Seyne, in a low, fayre and plaine ſituation: That part is called the towne. Among other edifices on the lower end by the riuer nigh Newgate, is the kings houſe called the Loure, and right ouer againſt it on the other ſide of the ſtreete, is the auncient houſe called L'hoſtel de Bourbon: about a mile and a halfe vpon the ſame ſide of the riuer is the town houſe, called by a temple nigh to it, Saint Iahn en Greue. There is a long ſtreet from the pont anchange directly to Saint Denis warde, called Saint Martins ſtreat; which deuideth that parte of the Citie well nigh through the middeſt.
               The other part lying in the celtick: on the ſouth ſide of the riuer is the Vniuerſitie, leſſer than the former part, it is full of Monkeries, Fri
                     •
                  ries, and Nunneryes, of all feathers and colours vnder the heauens. So that a man comming out of a ſtrange countrey, and ſeeing ſo great diuerſitie of fantaſies, would think himſelfe to wander into a countrey of monſters, or a Citie of mad men: but if he conſider well he ſhall finde himſelfe in the middeſt of Sodome, ſo cleane is their conuerſation. Beſide theſe infernall Locuſts, there is a great number of colledges and houſes of learning, for the which cauſe it is called the Vniuerſitie, wherein are chiefly two colldges, to wit, Sorboune and Nauarre: Sorboune is a colledge where Diuines and ſtudents of Diuinity cheefly haue allowance: and beſide, it is an aſſociation of Diuines wherſoeuer they haue taken degrees; it is more famous than Nauarre by reaſon of their ignorance, but Nauarre is greater in liuing and multitude of ſtudents.
               This Vniuerſitie was founded, (or rather reformed I feare me from better to worſe) by Charles the great, by the helpe of his ſchoolemaſter,

one Alboinus an Engliſhman, ſometime ſcholler of the learned Beda, who as it ſeemeth changed the former order of ſtudie, and faſhioned them to the forme of doctrine laide downe by the learned S. Auguſtine. This  forme there continued vntill yt time that a viſiō was ſeen in the ayre, to wit, a man naked, hairy and deformed, carying a wallet ful of ſtones, & gnawing on a ſtone which he had in his hand. Immediately after, that forme of ſtudie was changed, and diuinitie reduced to vaine ſpeculations, carnall Philoſophy, and f
                     •
                  iuolous queſtions, without edifiyng or breeding any knowledge or wiſedoms in the ſtudents. Then began Ariſtotle to beare ſway in the Diuinity ſchooles, and to fitt in the chayre of Moſes. The Biſhop of Paris called Lombard, went about to amend the fault, and to haue pulled him downe out of that ſacred chayre, propounding to the ſtudents a book of common places (ſuch as it was) called commonly Magiſter ſententiarum. Then came the begging Fryers with their wallets full of ſtones, and among them Scotus, and Thomas Aquinus, they layd down a forme of their dreames & queſtions, they turne the bread of life into ſtones wholy. There came after them worſe then theſe, & more ignorant: theſe harpyes defile both the word of God, & this booke of ſentences (though not pure before) wt vnneceſſary queſtions and vnlearned gloſes: to be ſhort, as many writing Fryers, ſo many Alcorans they conceaue and bring forth: they did reuoke the ſtudie of Diuines from Gods word, & the reading of the learned antiquitie, whoſe monuments they buryed in duſt in their libraries, to the deſcanting of Scotus, Thomas, & the book of Sentenices with their corrupted dreames, pro & contra. After that, theſe frogs (riſing out of the infernall gulfebeing) ſtriken with giddines, as they of Sodome at the dores of Lot by the angel of the Lord, were deuided among themſelues, and to ſhew that they were no more of Chriſts people, tooke other names, and would be called by the names of their maſter, ſome Scotiſts, ſome Thomiſts, ſome Simmoniſts: but rather they ſhould be called by their qualities, Socciſt, Momiſts, and Fooliſts.
               This palpable darknes of Aegipt was had in admiration, as the onely wiſedome of the world, fed and entertained by theſe ſeducing Friers and Monks, vntill the waſting of that noble, and in olde time famous Greece, by Amorith the prince of the Turkes. For then many learned men being the keepers of pure learning, flying from that barbarous and cruel tiranny, repayred ſome into Italie, ſome into Germany, ſome into France, who were entertained by the liberalitie of Princes, and common wealths, by whoſe exile we were deliuered from ye darke bondage of ignorance, which the legions of Fryers had brought into the world.
               About the ſame time, the moſt noble arte of Printing was reuealed of God vnto a noble man of Germany, whoſe name ſhall be bleſſ
                     •
                  d for euer in the generation of the righteous, wi
                     •
                  h facilitie to performe the worke

which hee had determined.
               
                  Francis of Valoys, firſt of that name (a prince whoſe fame no age to come  ſhal blot out of mens remembrance) with his princelike liberalitie reſtored in this Vniuerſitie a purer learning, and an eaſier traditine, by calling thether famous men of all parts of the world. This his liberalitie, the Leaguers for the ſpace of this twentie yeares, haue vſed to the ſupplanting of the ſtate of his poſteritie.
               The third part of that Citie, is an Iland betweene the Towne and the Vniuerſitie, called commonly the Citie; that Iland is of the forme of an Egge. It is beautified with three ſpecial things: firſt, the palace of iudgement, which heretofore had béen a Sanctuary of iuſtice. Secondly, a moſt ſumptuous and rich Hoſpitall, the like whereof is not in the world. Thirdly, the Temple of our Lady, much like vnto Diana of Epheſus Temple, the Biſhops ſeate, and a ſinke of Idolatry.
               The Suburbes bee of a wonderfull greatnes, and may bee compared with a great and ſumptuous Citie.
               As this is great and large, ſo is it populous to admiration, ſurpaſſing the report which may be made thereof. The moſt ſort of the inhabitants is a raſcall people of all ſorts of handicrafts, and of ſeruile nature. The people generally is of ſmall ſtature, ſwartie of complexion, of countenance like Spaniards or Italians, fewe like one to another, as it is commonly ſeene among them that are a mingled ſinke of diuers Nations, not like Frenchmen; they are craftie and deceitfull, great bablers and pratlers; ſuſpicious, mutinous and factious; cruell, cowardly and effeminate, lewd of life and behauiour, deſperatly ſuperſticious and idolatrous, fooliſh and ſottiſh ſo generally, that through all France they are prouerbially and reproachfully called badins de Paris, that is, a malapert ſot of Paris; of nicenes and purpoſed folly, diſguiſing and corrupting their tongue and going.
               The Duke de Mayne perceiuing the King almoſt deſtitute and forſaken of his ſubiects, compaſſed about with enemies, at home with domeſticall foes, in the Citie with vnfaithfull ſubiects, abroad in the field with ſedicious and rebellious robbers; thought to haue a fit opportunitie to oppreſſe the King. Therefore in a great heate he doth gather and muſter a great and mightie armie of the baſeſt ſort of this people, but ſpecially of ſuch as were deſperate and had nothing to loſe, and had conceaued good hope to doo well their buſines with gayne and aduantage, cauſed the Citie to prouide for them: they were lodged in the ſuburbes and ſmall Townes about Paris.
               
               The Duke hauing this great armie, doth from weeke to weeke, from day to day ſo delay his iourney, repreſenting to himſelfe continually the valian
                     •
                  nes, victories, faithfulnes and celeritie of the King of Nauarre,
                  
who was not a dayes iourney from Tours, who would not ſuffer the King to be oppreſſed, nor eaſily ſurpriſed. Theſe mutinous and rebellious companies  did commit ſuch intolierable inſolencies, that the people both in Paris and about did cry out and complayne with great diſcontented mindes, both of theſe oppreſſions, and alſo of the ſcar
                     •
                  enes of victuals which did growe in the Citie, by reaſon of the long ſoiourning of that armie about Paris.
               
               To pacifie therefore the vprore, about the middle of Aprill he did venture to goe foorth, and taketh the field, making great boaſt that now within fewe dayes he truſted to reduce all France to the obeiſance of the League; and the leaſt of his promiſes was, that he would bring the King to that paſſe that the moſt mutinous fellowes in Paris deſired to haue him. Taketh order for the ſafetie of the Citie: and whereas in the alteration of the ſtate of Paris done in Ianuary laſt, they had made eighteene Colonels and Captaynes of ſo many wards as the Citie was deuided into: euery Colonell ſhould haue twelue hundred horſemen and footmen to walke about the Citie and to the Boys of 
                     Ʋicennes, leaſt that Caſtle ſhould be ſurpriſed by the enemies: the Lord of Mayneuille being left gouernour of the Citie with a ſtrong garriſon beſide, to ſee well that in the abſence of the great Protector of the Crowne of France, the malcontent people of Paris ſhould not enterpriſe againſt him, and exclude him from their Citie, if at any time for feare of the King of Nauarre he ſhould runne away.
               So the Duke de Mayne bringeth this holy and inuincible armie (for ſo it was commonly called) into Beauſſe, where was ſome good ſtore of victuals, which aboue all things his holy armie deſired. So that as well to eaſe the countrey about Paris, as to haſt his wicked intent, he bringeth his armie as farre as Vendoſme, wherein hee entred by the helpe of them who were of his confederacie. There hee tooke the Kings great counſell priſoners, ſo that none could eſcape but one; he ſeazed alſo vpon many other weake Townes in that champian countrey, where hee ſtayed very long doubtfull of minde what to doo, whether he ſhould go néerer to Tours or goe backe. To goe further, he feared the King of Nauarre being ſo nigh a neighbour: to goe backe, ſhame (his great bragges and promiſes made to the rebels of Paris) would not ſuffer him. Concluded therefore to ſtay in Beauſſe, where lodging and victuals for the taking were to be had without money, liuing in hope, and watching ſtill for ſome conuenient occaſion to execute his damnable purpoſe vpon the Kings perſon, by the intelligences which hee had with the Leaguers of the Court, and of the Citie of Tours.
               
               During his ſoiourne in Beauſſe, he made the like bragges and promiſes to the Nobilitie and people, as he had done in Paris. The Wallons which were in his armie conſidering that nothing was done, and lacking money,

determined to retyre home: but with much adoe were ſtayed, vpon promiſe that great forces were expected from the Duke Aumale out of Picardie, and that ſhortly they would goe about their buſines handſomely like  good fellowes, and that one houre would make them men for euer.
               In the latter end of April, the Leaguers of Poytiers began to ſtir againſt the King, and to make that great and large Cittie ſure for the League, & holy v
                     •
                  ion: vpon the newes thereof the king ſent the greateſt part of ſuch forces as he had to reſcue that piece which was of great importance. The Leaguers aduertiſed the Duke de Mayne (who was about Vendoſme) of the ſtate of the affaires, and how the King was left deſtitute of the greateſt part of his forces, now imploied about the reuolt of Poitiers, how that he might come eaſily (and without finding any reſiſtance) to lodge in the Suburbs of Tours, or the Abbey of Marmonſtier neere by: and that they would ſo prouide within the citie, that by the helpe of his frendes the King might be diſpatched, or deliuered into his hands aliue.
               The Duke de Mayne vpon theſe intelligences, ſetteth order for the ſafe keeping of Vendoſme, and marched toward Chasteaurenault, the towne & Ca
                     •
                  tell hee battered: he layeth alſo the ſiege before Saint Oine, nigh Amboyſe, where the Countie Brienne was appointed by the King for the keeping of that place, intending the night following by ſtealth to haue reſorted to Tours, to execute ye enterpriſe of the Leaguers (which were in the court, and the Citie) vppon the Kings perſon. And that hee might be ſure to worke ſafely, he had ſent into Picardy to the Duke of Aumale his coſin, praying him to ſend him ſuch forces out of Picardy as he might, putting him in hope by ſome new ſupply of ſuccour, to bring to paſſe the thing which they had moſt deſired: but the towne of Gaulis, which by the means of the Lord of Thore, was reduced to the Kinges obedience, hindered that this new ſupply could nether be ſo great, as was expected, nor could come in any time to do him ſeruice. Of theſe forces of Picardy, it ſhall be ſpoken hereafter: but for this time wee will leaue this great Duke to batter Chasteaurenault, and Saint Oine, and will ſhew what was done in other places at the ſame time.
               The King conſidering that the enemy with a puiſſant army was on his armes, and ſtayed for nothing but to know what aſſiſtance he might haue of the Leaguers, of the court and of the cittie to worke his feat: knowing alſo the infidelity of his ſubiectes and ſeruants both in the court and in the cittie, and on euery ſide, and almoſt diſpoſſeſſed of his Crowne and Kingdome, is enforced for the ſafety of his perſon, to caſt himſelfe into the armes of his mortall enemy (as he was made beleeue by the Sycophants, who alwayes had béen moſt in eredit with him) but in very deed, his moſt profitable and neceſſary frend, if long before he had vſed him. Truce therfore at length is concluded betweene the two Kings: and among other

things it was agréed that the King of Nauarre ſhould haue the Pont de Sel, a Towne vpon the riuer of Loyre, betweene Saumour and Nantes, tight againſt  
                  Angers, for the ſafety of his paſſage. But ſome difficulty beeing made at the ſurrendring of the ſaid Pont de Sel, by the Captayne: the King graunted him the towne of Saumour vpon Loyre. The ſayd towne was receaued for the King of Nauarre, by the Lord Pleſsis Marlin, to whom the ſayd King gaue the gouernment thereof.
               But now before wee proceede further to ſhew the accidents which happened after this vnexpected reconſiliation of theſe two Kinges, wee wil ſearch out what hath happened in other countreys.
               After the death of the Guyze, the Duke de Mayne ſent into the Prouinces, but ſpecially into Normandy, to perſwade the people that the Countrey men might arme themſelues without any leaue or conſent of the Nobility, who were not of their ſide, for the defence of the Catholike religion, & their liberty, he hired ſpecially in Normany the prieſts, monks, Friers, Ieſuits, & ſuch rabble of woolues with ſummes of money, in their Sermons to ſtir the people to riſe agaynſt their Soueraygne, and to take counſell agaynſt the nobility.
               The means or arguments (which theſe Atheiſts both for money will ryſe agaynſt God his ordinance, and ſet the world in an vprore, to pollute the earth with bloud) were theſe. The King (ſayd they) with great veh
                     •
                  mency and amplifications hath murthered the Cardinall of Guyze, impriſoned the Primat of Lyons, and hauing touched two of the Lords annoynted, and layed handes vppon two chiefe. Pillers and rulers of holy Church, ouer whom neither hee, nor any of his had any power or iuriſdiction agaynſt fayth and promiſe, and hauing violated the publike faith at the States at Bloys, the King was no more childe of the Church, was excommunicat, baniſhed out of the Church, and caſt out of the communion of Catholikes: and therefore the people were not bound to obay him any more, but that it was lawfull to perſecute him by all meanes poſſible, as the holy faculty of Theologie had alſo of late determined; but rather that it was lawfull to murther and to deſtroy the King, and perſecute them by all means poſſible that wil not league themſelues and beare armes againſt the King. They dayly preached alſo that the King was a protector of heritikes, and had intelligences with them, and that he ſought nothing more then to ſtabliſh hereſie in his kingdome.
               And for as much as examples do both moue and encourage to doo, or diſcouraging from dooing, they encourage the ſimple and ignorant; firſt declared themſelues enemies to the King, renounced his obedience, gaue forth vilanous, vnworthy and traiterous ſpeeches of him, ſo as nothing more vile may bee named and ſpoken. Theſe were the deuout prayers of ſuch deſpiſers of God and all godlines in their Pulpits, to the which the

People ſaid Amen.
               But after the truce was taken betweene the two Kings, then they had a  large argument to walke in, they cryed out that he ſerued himſelfe of the forces of heretickes: & no maruel if they cry out now when they ſee a whip prepared for their backes, and that now they are further from bringing to paſſe theyr wicked thoughts th
                     ••
                   euer they were.
               By theſe execrable, outragious, and ſeditious inue ctiues of theſe damnable Ieſuits and Fryers, hyred to ſound the trompet of rebellion in a maner throughout all France, but ſpecially frō the riuer of Loyre, north, weſt, and eaſt, and among other Prouinces, Normandy was ſo infected with their poyſoned and deteſtable rebellions, that there was not ſo much as a Uillage to bee found, where there was not ſome of all qualities dronken with their cup of abominations.
               It is ſayd before, how the King had pardoned Briſſak, Boyſdaulphine, and Chaſtre, with many others, who within a while abuſing the Kinges facility, and aſcribing their impunity to the Kings pu
                     ••
                  llanimity, fled and reuolted to the League agayne. After this reuolt, Briſſak and Boyſdaulphine went to Angers (as it is ſayd) and procured that great Citty to rebell: but after the reducing of the ſayd Cittye to the Kings obedience by the Marſhal Haumont, the ſaid Briſſak and Boyſdaulphin fled, and in their flight cauſed by the meanes of their partakers the Citty of Mans (which was already wauering) to rebel againſt the King. To theſe 2. manipuli furum reſorted the Lords la Mot, Serrant, Touchet, Angeruile and Normandiere, who by theyr treacherous ſolicita
                     •
                  ion procured almoſt all the townes of Normandy to rebell and to open their gates to them, as Roan, which was reuolted long before, Luſeulx, Falaize, Newhauen, Seas, Bayeux, Argenton, and afterward Alcencon: all theſe opened their gates to the rebels, who afterward a moſt in a litle ſpace conſumed them. There remained Caen, Conſtances, & few other towns in baſe Normandie in the kings obedience, by the good and prouident counſel of the Lord de la Veaue, Beuuron, the Preſidents Aulbiguy, and Lizeres, and ſome other loyall and Noble men.
               We ſée how the cities of Normandie for the moſt part, at the ſolicitatiō of Briſsak, Boyſdaulphine and others, whoſe names ſhall be knowne hereafter, and by the preaching of the furious and frantick Ieſuites and Friers, are brought from the Kings obedience, to a damnable rebellion. The countrey men alſo and peſants, were induced by the ſelfe ſame meanes to rebellion, vnder colour of the defending the Catholick religion, and hope of libertie.
               There is in high Normandie, a certaine place called la Chapelle Gantier: thereupon the perſwaſions of the deſperat Ieſuites and Friers to countrey men, were ſtirred vp to rebellion, both againſt the King and the

Nobilitie, and began to commit horrible exceſſe and cruelties: by reaſon of this beginning, all the rebels in Normandy were called Gantiers: theſe  Peaſants ioyned to themſelues a number of Prieſtes, but ſpecially the Prieſtes of Sees, and a great number of bedlem Friers, furious Ieſuites, Parſons, and among others, the Parſon of Vimonstier, the moſt peſtiferous, deſperat, and ſeditious firebrand of all Normandy.
               
               About the 19. the King vnderſtanding of this rebellion in Normandy, and foreſéeing the miſchiefe which might enſue, if this euill were not in time remedyed, thought good with all ſpéede, to ſend the Prince Montpenſier, generall Lieutenant for his Maieſtie into that Prouince, to reduce them into the true way of their duetie and obedience: and commaunded the Lord Saint Cire, one of his counſelers, and Maſter of the requeſts of his houſe, to accompany and aſſiſt him.
               The King to bring this ſeduced people in the right way of iuſt obedience, gaue charge to the ſaide Prince, to offer pardon and impunity vnto the rebels, in caſe they woulde liue quietly and peaceably vnder his gouernement. Secondly, hee diſcharged them of the third part of all taxes due vnto him, hoping to haue a better opportunity, and more happie ſeaſon woulde come when he might gratifie them in ſome greater matter.
               Thirdly, hée gaue a forme of an oath to the ſaid Prince, to commaund all men to liue peaceably vnder his Gracious gouernement, and to forſake all Leaguers, and aſſociations whatſoeuer: and in caſe they would refuſe either to returne vnder his protection, or elſe to take that oath, he gaue him authority to chaſtiſe them with ſtrong hand, as traitors and rebels.
               About the 30. the ſaide Prince departed from Tours, accompanied with the Lords of Backeuile and Archant, and came to Luce, where hee vnderſtoode that Boyſdaulphin, and la Mot, Serrant, and other rebels, had ſurpriſed the towne of Mans, and purpoſed to méete with him to ſtop his way.
               The 31. day, this noble Prince of the houſe of Bourbon, paſſed hard by the noſe of the enemies, and came as farre as Alencon, where hée found the inhabitants amazed, for the ſurpriſing of the towne of Mans by the enemy, whome the rebels alſo had enueigled to enter into their rebellon, and confirmed them in their obedience and duetie toward his Maieſtie. There this noble Prince, with great deuotion and ſolemnitie kept his Eaſter: and hauing taken order for the ſafetie of the towne, appointed the Lorde Reuty gouernour of the ſaid place, with two companies of ſhot on horſeback, to kéepe the towne and Caſtell; and to make roades in the villages about, to repulſe the rebells when they ſhould come to forrage, and conſtraine the inhabitants to pay them taxes, and other tributes due to the King.
               
                  
The 4. day, the Prince vnderſtanding that the citie of Sees, were minded to ioyne to the rebels, and had refuſed to take the oath, according to the preſcribed forme of the King, purpoſed to paſſe that way, and ſent worde  before to the Biſhop and inhabitants, that they ſhoulde open the gates for him: who vpon a ſhort conſultation, anſwered that they were ready to receaue him: and being met by the citizens a great way out of the towne, hée accompanied with the Lordes of Bakqueuile & Archand, and their troupes paſſed through without any ſtay. The ſaid Prince ſhewed vnto the Biſhop and the inhabitants, that he came from the King, to offer pardon vnto the rebels, and that the King ment to deale fauorably with his ſubiects, to make account of them, according to their duety and obedience towards him, to chaſtiſe the rebels & obſtinat. The inhabitants proteſted (though with fained lippes) of their loyaltie, affection and obedience toward his Maieſtie.
               The departing from Sees, met with the Lordes de Hallot, and Creueceur his brother, with a good and honorable tronpe of nobilitie, to whome they proffered with many protections faithfully to ſerue the King, as long as breath was in their bodies.
               The 5. of Aprill, the Prince departed from Eſcouche, had intelligences that the Lords Touſchet, Angeruile, Normandiere, Captaines of the rebels, with many La
                     •
                  nciers, and a good number of footemen, haue come forth out of Falaize, and marched on to ſtop the Princes way, and went as farre as a village called Perrefit, diſtant two miles from Falaize, where they being met by the Lords Bakqueuile, Archand, & Creueceur, were ſo charged, that they ſtood little to the fight: for the Prince (leading the maine Battaile beginning to appeare, they fled and left behind them) Touſchet, Angeruile, and Normandiere, their chiefeſt leaders who were taken priſoners, and brought before the Duke, who were redeliuered into the hands of thoſe that had taken them, till ſuch time as hée ſhould call for them againe. All the companies of theſe rebels were hewen in pieces, the Prince loſt not one man, there was none hurt of his ſide but only the Lord Chammont in the head, and in a ſhort ſpace after cecouered.
               That ſame day, the Prince Montpencier came to Falaize, where the enemies made a ſhew, as though they would haue ſet open the gates for him, intending ſome ſurpriſe againſt him. The Prince hauing no Ordinance to force thē, tooke his way to Caen, where he entred about ye ſeauenth day of Aprill; all the faithfull Citizens welcomming him with theſe ſalutations often reiterated, God ſaue the King, and my Lord the D. Montpencier; & in token of an vnfained ioy, they kept that day holy day. The Lord Beuuron accompanied him to his lodging, which was the houſe of the preſidēt Aubigny: thether came the L. Verune to do reuerence to the Prince, who receaued him courteouſly, and highly commended him for his loyall

ſeruice to the King, in kéeping the towne within his obedience.
               The ſaid Prince ſoiourned in Caen about ten dayes to ſet all things in  a readines, as well for the ſafety and defence of the Citie, as for to aſſault the enemy, and to ſcoure the country. During the Princes ſoiourne, there ariued the County Thorigny, and af
                     •
                  er him the Lord Longannay, with a great troupe of Gentlemen, who were courteouſly receaued and imbraced, with great thankes for their good affection toward his Maieſtie, promiſing to aduertiſe the King of their duetifull ſeruice, and to requi
                     •
                  e it in particular, as occaſion would ſerue.
               About the 15. of April, the Prince Montpencier hauing done al things that were there to bée done, and gathered ſuch forces as hée might: and by the aduiſe of the Lord Saint Cere, he concluded to warre vpon the rebels, and to make them to leaue that which they hold ſo faſt in the countrey, and becauſe they had the chiefeſt townes, he reſolued to carry a long ſome pieces of artillery, to force them if poſſible he might. Therefore he ſent away before Monſieur de Hallot, Batreuile, Archand, with the regiment of Monſieur Tracy, the companies of the Captaines Saint Denis, Maillot, Radier, Chauuaine, Daulphin, Roqueuile, Glaize, and other voluntary Captaines to attempt vpon Falaize.
               
               The Sonday, to wit, the 16. of Aprill, hée like a good Catholick, cauſed a proceſſion to be made, and a ſermon, and a certaine forme of prayers to bée dayly ſaid for the ſafegarde of the King, and the good ſucceſſe of his affaires againſt the rebels.
               The 17. the Prince hauing appoynted officers ouer his treaſure, money, victuall, and artillery, departed with two Canons, and one baſtard Culuerine, hoping at the leaſt to drawe the enemy to the field, ariuing at Falaize: he lodged at the Abbey Saint Iahn. On the other ſide, the ringleaders of the rebels, as Briſſak, the Lords of long Champ, the Barons of Eſchaufour and Tubeuf, aſſembled the flower of their rebell forces, within the towne of Falaize.
               
               The 18. of Aprill, they laid their Artillery to batter, and hauing beaten downe thrée towers, they ſent a Sergeant and ten Souldiours to view the breach: but ſéeing that they would haue enticed them to enter into the towne, to haue intrapped them, and conſidering that the wall was yet too déepe, the Prince ſounded the retraite.
               And vnderſtanding that the rebels had taken from about Aigle, Orbeck, Sees, Argenton, Vimonstier, and other places néere thereabout, a company of more then ſixe thouſand Gantiers, wel appoynted for Muſkets and Harquebuſes as might bée among theſe peaſants, they intermingled ſome ſeauen or eight hundred good Souldiours, ſuch as they could come by; ſome alſo of the Nobility of the weaker ſort: to theſe companies of rebellious robbers, reſorted a great number of Prieſtes, Cāons, Monkes,

Friers, Ieſuites, and ſuch ſtinking poyſoned vermine: the Lord Briſſak accompanied with the Barons of Eſchaufour, the Lords Vieupont, Roqueuual, Beaulieu, and Annay, and other Captaines receaued them, and  conducted them the right way to Falaize: to them repayred the Baron Vernier with his forces from Damfront. The Lorde Pierrecourt alſo came with ſuch forces, as hée could make out of Ponteau de mer, and Ange, and Houfleur, ſuppoſing to haue incloſed the Prince, betwéene the Towne of Falaize and theſe great forces, and ſo to haue ſurpriſed him and his power.
               The Prince hauing intelligences of the enterprize prouided for them, remooued his artillery from the trenches, and ſent away his cannon to Courcy, and with the Culuerine reſolued to encounter the enemie in the plaine field.
               The enemies had lodged in three ſeuerall villages, not farr diſtant a ſunder betweene Argenton and Falayze, to wit, Pierrefit, villiers and Commeaux: The Prince Montpencier appoynted the County of Thoriguy and Longaunay, and the Lord Vickes the elder brother, to lodge betweene the ſaid villages and Argenton, there to ſtay them if they ſhould ſeeme to recoyle back.
               He ſent alſo the Lords of Bakqueuile, Archand, and Benuron, with their companies, to enuiron them on the other ſide.
               The 20. day ye prince himſelf, ayded with the L. Hallot, & Creueceure his brother with the whole armie, and being on the top of a hil, commaunded the Lords of Emery and Surene, Marſhalls of the field, to aduance the infantry which was on the left hand, with the Culuerine, which they did: theſe footemen were lead by the Lords of Saint Denis, Maillot, Radier, Roqueuile, Chauuayn, Daulphine, Glayze and others, all ſo well reſolute to encounter with that rabble of rebels, that they made no delay, but ſkitmiſhed ſtraight with a hot on ſet on both ſides: but aſſoone as the culuerin had begun to play in their faces, they began to bee amazed, and Briſſak himſelfe cauſed his Cornet to turne bridle, and retyred from the danger with a number of horſemen as hardy as himſelf. The rebels notwithſtanding ſtoode to the fight, but when the Culuerine roared once againe, and they ſ
                     •
                  w the Lord Vaumart, one of their chiefeſt leaders with fifteene others carried away with the ſhott, they began to quauer. Then the prince commaunded a freſh charge: hee marching formoſt of all his companies, which was giuen ſo hot and fierce, that al the rebels were put to the chaſe, to yeeld, and to fall downe before them, whom God had armed with authoritie and force, to reuenge that moſt damnable rebellion. This firſt encounter was vpon two thouſand, who were lodged at Pierrefit; they were all ſlayne or take
                     •
                   priſoners, few onely excepted.
               The prince hauing aſſembl
                     •
                  d his troupes agayne, immediatly ſet vpon

the third village named Viliers, where were another company of rebels conducted by the Baron Tubeuf: they were all put to the ſworde,  ſaue the Baron Tubeuf, and a few others who were taken priſoners.
               And becauſe the night drew neere apace, the Prince thought good with all ſpeede to aſſault the other companies of rebels who were at Commeaux, who were about a thouſand or twelue hundred men, conducted by the Lord Beaulieu.
               
               This company had trenched and fortified themſelues, and therefore the moſt part of thē were ye cannons, prieſts, monks, fryers, & Ieſuites, of the Citie of Sees, and many perſons of the countrey round about, who would ſhewe ſome proofe of their valour, and how they could fight better with a Caliuer then with their Portiſſe: but at length it was found that they had more ſkill in iugling a Maſſe and making of Gods, then in handling their weapons: among them was the Parſon of Vimonſtier, a deſperate and ſedicious Prieſt. The Lord Beaulieu was their captain, who at the firſt onſet the ſayd Lord Beaulieu was taken among the firſt in the forcing of the Fort, who being carried away by the Captaine Chauuayne before the Prince, ſayd, that there were within that Fort at the leaſt ſeauen hundred well armed and appoynted.
               The Prince vnderſtanding that, commanded the Lords Bakqueuile & Archand to get into the Fort, and for that purpoſe he left them the Culuering, and went that night to Eſcouche, where he arriued about eleuen of the clocke in the night. And aſſoone as he was gone, the rebels of Comeaux vnderſtanding how their fellowes had ſped, yéelded, with their liues onely ſaued, who were immediatly diſarmed and brought to Eſcouche to the Prince.
               There the Duke ſoiourned all the next day being the 21. of Aprill, to take the view of the priſoners, who were in great number of all qualities of perſons.
               The ſame day the Lords Hallot, Bakqueuile, Beuil, Bellefontayn, and Archand, went abroad with their companies, to ſee if they could méet with any ranging Rebells, where they miſt not much to haue taken the Baron Vernier.
               
               The ſayd Baron and Briſſake with the reſt of their complices, retyred in great ſpeede to Argenton, fearing to be as kindly hit on the hips, as their fellowes had béen.
               The 22. day the Prince leauing the Lords of Harcourt, of Saint Mary, Venoix and Saſſay at Eſcouche, went to Courcy, where hee vnderſtoode that the Lord Pierrecourt was lodged with ſome Launciers not farre of, he mounted ſtraight on horſebacke and went to finde them out, but he had diſlodged a little before they came to the place.
               Here (Chriſtian Reader) marke the preſence of God in the aſſiſting of

a good cauſe, and handled by perſons of lawfull calling.
               Firſt, thou ſeeſt how the King heretofore in the warres againſt the K.  of Nauarre had not proſpered, but all things haue fallen to his owne charges, diſhonour and ſhame, becauſe he perſecuted him without a cauſe, and ſuch perſons were put in truſt of his affayres, and aduanced themſelues forward, intending vnder that colour to ſupplant their maſter. Now, when the King hath a iuſt cauſe in hand, and put men in truſt that are lawfully called, bearing a true and vnfayned heart to the King, kingdome, Crowne and Countrey, ſuch as bee the Princes of his bloud, and other of the true Nobilitie of France, the Lord alſo is of his ſide and fighteth for him, maketh him victorious, and reſtoreth to him his authoritie by ſteps, as it ſhall appeare hereafter.
               Secondly, here is a notable thing happened, which neuer did happen vnto any Captaine that euer I haue read, ſaue vnto that noble Athenian Conon, that a Captaine had obtayned three noble victories in one day, but vnto this noble Prince of ancient and noble raſe.
               Thus the Prince Montpencier by theſe victories, gaue a taſt vnto the rebels of the cup of their treaſons, and ſo did driue them into Townes and Holds, that afterward it was rare to ſee any rebels abroade, except it were when they had neede priuilie to ſteale out to robb their nigh neighbours of their goods. Hauing done this exployt, he purpoſed to bring the artillerie from Courcy, and returne to the Citie of Caen, intending ſhortly after to be in the field agayne, and to carrie by it vntill he had ſubdued the countrey to the Kings obedience agayne.
               By a pertinent digreſſion I haue ſhewed what noble and profitable exployts the Prince Montpencier hath done in Normandy againſt the Rebels, now we will returne to continuance of the narration interrupted.
               It is ſayd before, how the King ſeeing himſelfe in extreame danger, made truces with the King of Nauarre, and deliuered him the Towne of Saumour, for his ſafe paſſage and repaſſage ouer the riuer of Loyre, which he committed to the Lord of Pleſsis Marline.
               
               Few dayes being expired, after the deliuering of the town of Saumour, the King of Nauarre went thether to the great contentation and reioyſing of all the inhabitants, and of all the Nobility round about well affected to the Kings ſeruice, and good of the realme. Liberty was geuen by the K. of Nauarre to all the inhabitants concerning religion indifferently, as hée had done in other places.
               The King of Nauarre hauing ordered all things at Saumour, about the 17. day of Aprill went foorth and beſieged the Caſtell of Briſſak (the Lord thereof beeing a traitour, and a rebellious Leaguer) and tooke it by compoſition.
               The 18. the King of Nauarre paſſed all his Forces beyond the riuer of

                  Loyre ouer the bridg of Saumour, and within few dayes ioyned with other forces which ſtayed for him, gathered out of Normandy, Mayne, Anjou, 
                   
                  Perche, Beauſſe, and other countries beeing betweene Loyre, and Seyne, intending ſhortly to ſee face to face the army of the rebels, conducted by the Duke de Mayne.
               
               Thus the King of Nauarre, greatly iniuried and offended ſo often, and at the requeſt, and for the pleaſure of the Duke of Guyze aſſaulted, now commeth to reſcue out of danger captiuity and death, him that had perſecuted him ſo long with all the forces of a mighty kingdome, he commeth (I ſay) with a choſen army, not onely great in number, but alſo in valour: ſo that euery common ſouldier might haue ſupplyed the roome of an Officer.
               Goe on O great King, put on the armor of God, & follow his calling, this day thou haſt obtayned a greater and more famous victory, then at the day of Coutras, in ouercomming the deſire of reuengement, which vpon diuers occaſions might haue riſen by the frailty of mans nature.
               The 21▪ the King of Nauarre hauing paſſed ouer the riuer Loyre, and ioyned with his forces, gathered out of the Countreys aboueſayd, ſetteth forth a declaration, ſhewing the cauſes of this paſſage.
               Firſt, hee ſheweth that hee is called to enter into this action by God, by nature, by the lawe, and by the iuſt approbation of his Prince, which cauſes do moue him to determine to imploy his lyfe, his meanes & power, for the reeſtabliſhing of ye Kings authority, reſtoring of the realm, and for the defence of good Subiects within the ſame decayed, and oppreſſed by the treaſons of the Leaguers, vnder the colour of godlines and iuſtice.
               Secondly, he proteſteth to hold for enemies onely them, who haue declared themſelues enemies of the realm by theyr rebellion, and outragious inſolencies committed againſt the ſoueraigne magiſtrate and iuſtice: promiſing notwithſtanding to receaue to mercy them, which (deceaued by the enticements of the rebels, or feare) rather then by their owne malice haue aſſociat themſelues to the ſaid rebels.
               Denounceth therfore to all Prouinces, Cities, Commonalties, Churchmen, Nobles, Magiſtrates, Captaynes, Souldiers, Borgeſes, Citizens, and all other of any degree whatſoeuer, to retire ſpeedily from the ſociety of thoſe traitors and rebels, and to returne vnder the obedience of their naturall and lawful Prince and King: but ſpecially willeth the Church men (whereof ſome haue rendered themſelues inſtruments of the former treacheries and rebellions) to loue peace, and to keepe themſelues within their bounds, returning and abiding vnder the obedience of their King.
               Thirdly, he proteſteth that this his paſſing the riuer of Loyre (by the commaundement of the King) is for their defence, and therefore taketh all

the Kings faithful ſubiects vnder his protection, but ſpecially the Church men, forbidding vpon payne of death all his Captaynes and ſouldiers not  to proffer any iniury vnto any of them, their goods or places of exerciſes, willing alſo all the aforeſaid perſons to repayre vnto the king, or vnto him, to haue and receaue paſporte, and protections, that the faythfull may be diſcerned from the Rebell.
               Fourthly, he turneth his ſpeach to the foreſaid perſons, admoniſhing them to conſider the horrible euils which haue already and ſhall riſe out of that damnable rebellion. To the Cleargy hee ſpeaketh, to conſider how godlines is euery where choked in the middeſt of thoſe tumults, the name of God blaſphemed, and religion deſpiſed.
               The Noble men he prayeth to conſider how theyr order muſt needs fall, with the ruine of the King, Crowne, and Eſtate.
               The Magiſtrates hee warneth to repreſent before their eyes what execrable violating of iuſtice will follow, by the examples of the Parliaments of Paris and Tholouſe, carried away Priſoners as in a triumph by raſcals, and vilanous perſons.
               The commons hee aduertiſeth to thinke how they are eaſed by theſe tumultes, where their goods are expoſed to the pray of the vileſt ſort, their traffike interrupted, their huſbandrie altogether turned into waſt, and deſolation.
               Laſt of all, he exhorteth all men to endeuour themſelues to bring what they can to remedy theſe euils, which ye rebels haue procured to the realme, which cannot be done without a good peace, neither can that be obtayned, but by the returning vnder the Kings obedience, reſtoring his royall authority, and reeſtabliſhing of iuſtice: hee aſſureth himſelfe that God who geueth ſaluation vnto Kinges, will aſſiſt him in this enterpriſe and iuſt cauſe.
               
                  Auuergne is a Prouince in France, full of hilles and mountains, wherein there be three Cityes, ſituated in forme of a triangle, and not diſtant farre one from another, to wit, Rion, Clermont, and Monferrant: the Kings long before had eſtabliſhed at Rion, beſide other courts, a ſoueraigne court of his treaſurers, & receauers. This Citie had receaued the League, and had committed rebellion agaynſt him, in ſhaking off the yoke of obedience. Therefore the King about the 24. of April, ſeeing their obſtinacy in their rebellion, do reuoke from the ſaid Towne of Rion all his courts, and doth tranſport the ſame to the Citie of Clermont, commaunding all his officers of al his courts in that citty, to repaire to the ſaid Clermont, and there to execute their charge.
               About the ſame time alſo the King doth adiudge all the goods of the Dukes of Mayne, Aumale, and of the Cheualier Aumale, and of the voluntary inhabitants of the cities of Paris, Roen, Amiens, Abeuile, Rhemes,
                  
                  Orleans, Chartres, Mans, Lyons, Tholouſe, to bee forfaited to his crowne for their treaſons and perſeuerance in the ſame, aboue the time prefixed vnto them, which was the 15. day of March laſt paſt, and ordained commiſſioners  to ſell the ſayd goods and lands to his vſe.
               The King of Nauarre in the meane time ſcoureth the countrey, and prepareth himſelfe to receaue the Kings commaundement: and vnderſtanding that the Duke de Mayne was lodged at Vendoſme, and Montoyre, the 28. of Aprill he determined to ſurprize ſome of the enemies, and about foure a clock in the morning, taking eight hundered horſemen, and one thouſand ſhot on horſbacke, went to bait at Chaulx in Anjou, ten long leagues from Saumour: departing thence, & hauing already gone forward three leagues, he receaued newes how the Duke of Mayne had brought his forces to Chasteaurenault, and had ſent part of them to beſiege the County of Brienne, who was at Saint Oyne, nigh Amboyſe.
               
               The King hearing of the ſiege of Chaſteaurenault, and Saynt Oyne, by the enemy, hauing him ſo nigh neighbour: and fearing that he would come to lodge in the Suburbs of Tours, being in danger to be deliuered into the hands of them, by the intelligences which they had wi
                     •
                  h the leagued of his Court, and of the Citie: he did diſpatch diuers Poſtes both to Saumour, & alſo to other places to the King of Nauarre. And about three leagues from Chaulx toward Vendoſme, hee was aduertyzed by three Poſtes, that the King ſent for him: whereuppon the ſayd King of Nauarre turned bridle, and came that night to lodge at Maille vpō 
                  Loyre, within two leagues of Tours, after he had beene 24. howers on horſbacke, and immediatly ſent word of his comming to the King. The King vnderſtanding of his being ſo nigh him, did greatly reioyce, knowing that the enemy neither would nor durſt enterprize any thing whileſt he was ſo nigh his perſon.
               The enemy ſent certayne companies in the euening with a great brauade, and tooke a Suburbe of Tours, where they defloured a Mayd, who had fled into the Church before the high alter, & in the armes of a Prieſt: but hearing that the King of Nauarre was at hand (without any leaſure to take breath) they retyred preſently.
               The King of Nauarre reſted himſelfe and his troupes the next day, but the 30. of Aprill (beeing the Lords day) in the morning, the ſayd King of Nauarre iudging that it were neceſſary for them both to ſee one another, thereuppon to take ſome certayne reſolution of their affayres, beeing alſo requeſted by the King (although his counſell had diuers opinions of that interuiew) hee ſent to the King by the Lord of Mignouuile, that he was gone to ſet all his troupes in battaile array at the Pont la Mot, a quarterr of a league from Tours, and thatif it ſhould pleaſe his Maieſty to come to the Suburbs, he would kiſſe his Maieſties hands, and would receaue his commaundemēts to execute the
                     •
                   according to the neceſſity of the affayrs.
               
                  
After the ſaid King of Nauarre, with all his troupes had ſtayed about two houres, the Marſhall Hautmont came to him from the King, to pray  him that he would paſſe ouer the riuer, to come to him to Pleſſ
                        •
                     s les Tours, where the King with all the court ſtayed for him. That thing he immediatly determined to doo, leauing of all ſuſpitions, and deſpiſing the counſell of many, who would haue him to differ that interuiewe vntill another time: conſidering alſo, that there was no apparance of danger, he paſſed ouer the riuer at the bridge of Saint Saphorine, & went to méete the King, accompanied with the Marſhall Hautmont, and many of his nobilitie, and his gardes, leauing the reſt of his forces to ſtay for him at the paſſage.
               He found the King ſtaying for him, in the alley of the Parke of Pleſſis: there was ſo great throng, as well of Courtiers as of the inhabitants of the Citie, who ran thether from euery where, that the two Kings ſtayed the ſpace of halfe a quarter of an houre, ſtretching their armes one toward another, before they could touch one another: ſo great was the preace; for the place (though very ſpacious) would not receaue the multitude, ſo that the trées were loaded with men to beholde that bleſſed méeting. The embraſings, the ſalutations, were reiterated diuers times of both Kings, with a ſhew of mutuall ioy and contentation.
               The reioyſing of all the Court, and of the people was incredible: for all men did crie by the ſpace of halfe an houre, God ſaue the King, a voyce that had not been hard either at Tours, or in any place elſe where the King had béen in more then foure moneths before. Another acclamation followed the firſt; God ſaue the Kings, God ſaue the King, and the King of Nauarre: all men praiſed God, and bleſſed that happie and long deſired reconſiliation.
               The two Kings parting then
                     •
                  e, entred into counſell, where they were the ſpace of two houres: and after the counſell, they tooke their horſes and roade together, accompanied with the Court vnto Saint Anne, which is halfe the way to the Suburb called Roches, the ſtreates were ſo full of people, that it was hard for them to paſſe: all the way ſounded with acclamatio
                     •
                  s and voyce of ioye, for the hope which euery one had conceaued, that theſe two Kings being ſo vnited, would ouercome their enemies, and reſtabliſh the ſtate of the kingdome, and would end the miſeries which had vexed France ſo long.
               The ſaid King of Nauarre, departed from the King at Saint Anne, repaſſed Loyre, where his troupes ſtayed for him, & lodged at the Suburbs of Saint Saphorin, nigh the bridges end.
               The morrow after, being the firſt day of May, about ſixe a clock in the  morning, the King of Nauarre entred into the towne, to goe to ſalute the King. All that morning was employed in counſell, vntill ten a clock,

that the King would goe to Maſſe; where hée was accompanied by the ſaid King of Nauarre vnto the Church doore: from thence hée went to ſalute  the Princeſſe of Condy and County, ſtaying for the Kings returne from Maſſe. Afterward the ſaid King of Nauarre, as long as hée made his aboade there, oftentimes viſited the King, and tooke counſell together for the common benefit of the realme.
               The ſame day, the ſaid King of Nauarre obtained of the King, for them of Sedan ten thouſand Crownes for to helpe them in their affaires, with letters written vnto the Duke of Lorreyne, commaunding him to make warre no longer vppon Sedan, declaring that they were vnder his protection.
               Whileſt theſe things were a dooing at Tours, the Duke d' Mayne did batter Chasteaurenault; but vnderſtanding of the interuiew of the two Kings, at the ſelfe ſame houre of the interuiew hée brake the ſiege, and in haſte retired to Vendoſme. The King as is before ſaid, ſtoode in great danger, to be either murdered or elſe deliuered to the enemy, by the intelligence which the Duke d' Mayne had with ſome traitours which were of his counſell in the Court and in the Citie. Now by this bleſſed reconſiliation, here is a great change to bée ſéene on a ſuddaine; for by this, the King is put out of feare, liueth out of danger of the rebels, is fortified by ariuall of this mighty Prince and army vnlooked for; the hearts of all good ſubiects are herewith encouraged, and the conſpiratours are terrified: for the Duke of Mayne being at Vendoſme, and in the territory there abouts, with a mighty army of traitors, had committed ſuch inſolencies vppon the people of their owne League and vnion, that the countrey was repleniſhed with outcries, curſes, and imprecations. Feare therfore of the King of Nauarre, and of ſome inſurrection of the people of the countrey, conſtrained him firſt to place part of his army in gariſons, in the townes of Beauſſe, Anjou, Mayne, and Perche, to make hauock of all that he left behind, and afterward to returne to Paris.
               
               The Duke d' Mayne hauing ſo deuided his army, with one part of the ſame, giueth to himſelfe many alarum in that retire to Paris.
               
               It is ſaid before, how about the beginning of Aprill, the King conſidering the reaſonable proffers of the King of Nauarre, who in his great proſperity, and when he might haue enlarged his authority farre and wide throughout al France, proffered peace and ayd vnto the King, to his great diſaduantage: at length neceſſitie inforced the ſaide King to conclude a truce with the King of Nauarre for a whole year, beginning at the 3. day of Aprill 1589. and ending the ſame day of the ſame moneth, in the yeare 1590. incluſiuely.
               The conditions of the ſaid truce were agre
                     •
                  d vppon, and promiſed to be obſerued by the two Kings, the 26. of Aprill.
               
                  
Firſt, in publication of the ſame truce, the King with a long diſcourſe doth proteſt of his conſiancy in the Catholick religion, and oppoſeth the  proofes which he hath ſhewed from his youth vp, as well in his priuat profeſſion and exerciſes, as in purſuing the contrary religion by all meanes, and reſtabliſhing the ſaid romiſh religion, in places where it had béene aboliſhed, againſt the calumnies, falſe reports, and ſlaunders of the Leaguers.
               On the contrarie, ſheweth how his enemies haue taken the pretence of religion, and diſcharging the people of ſundry exactions, to make aſſociations to ſtrengthen themſelues, to repleniſh the realme with tumults and confuſions: whereby they haue giuen opportunity to the heretickes, to aboliſh the Catholik religion, and to enlarge theirs, and they themſelues haue by ſundry cruelties and extortions, oppreſſed his ſubiects of the Catholick religion: he complaineth that the Leaguers hauing attempted againſt his perſon, and proclaymed an open war againſt him and his authority, who through their iniuries, haue enforced him to call the King of Nauarre to his naturall and lawfull defence, againſt their rebellions and treaſons.
               Secondly, he declareth how the King of Nauarre, acknowledging his duty toward his Maieſty, and pittying the miſerable ſtate of the realme, ſubuerted & brought to a lamentable confuſion by the Leaguers, hath inſtantly required peace of him. Whereupon by the aduiſe of the Princes of the bloud, officers of the Crowne, and Lords of his Counſell, he hath concluded a truce; and ceaſing from all hoſtility throughout the whole tralme, therein comprehending the County of Veniſſe, and ſtate of Auignon, belonging to the Pope, the ſaid truce to begin the third day of Aprill, and to continue a whole yeare.
               The conditions of the ſaid truce are as followeth.
               Firſt, that the King of Nauarre ſhall not, during the time of the ſaid truce, employ his forces within, nor without the realme, but for his ſeruice, and at his commaundement and direction.
               Secondly, that whereſoeuer the King of Nauarre ſhall come, he ſhall alter, change, nor innouat, nor interrupt the exerciſe of the romiſh religion, nor ſhew any diſpleaſure to the Prieſts, nor to the places of their deuotions.
               Thirdly, that whatſoeuer place, Towne, Citie, Caſtell or Fortreſſe, he ſhall take by any meane whatſoeuer, immediatly deliuer the ſame to the Kings pleaſure.
               Laſt of all, the King graunteth to them of the reformed religion, the liberty of their conſciences whereſoeuer, within his dominions, and the exerciſe of the ſame in places were it was exerciſed at the time of the concluding of this truce: alſo that they all ſhall enioy their goods whereſoeuer,

ſo that likewiſe they ſhall ſuffer the Catholikes to enioy the freedome of their religion and goods, in places which are in their power. 
               
               This was proclaymed and recorded in Parliament the thirtie day of Aprill at Tours the day of theyr interuiewe.
               About the ſame time in like manner, the king of Nauarre did ſet foorth a declaration of the cauſes of theſe truces: wherein firſt he doth proteſt, that in all theſe ciuill warres, he hath armed himſelfe and his friendes againſt his will, nature and neceſſitie en
                     •
                  orcing him ſo to doe, and ſheweth that his warre of the League began vnder a pretence and ſhadow of religion, but in very deede is found a war of eſtate. Proteſteth that his great deſire hath beene alwayes to doe ſome good and acceptable ſeruice to the king. Complayneth of the malice of his enemies, diſguiſed and coloured with fauourable pretences to ouerthrow the State. Commendeth the king, who at length hath with a good iudgement diſcerned his innocencie from their malice, through ſo great and thick miſt of colours and calomnies of his enemies.
               Secondly, he ſheweth that the Leaguers making the world beleeue to warre againſt the reformed religion, whome they doe cal heretikes, neuer went to ſeeke them out where they were, but abuſing of the kings authoritie and power, which they had 
                     ••
                  il in hand, & to that end haue by the ſaid forces, ſurprized the townes and fortreſſes which were furtheſt and leaſt ſuſpected of religion.
               Thirdly, he ſheweth that they haue not vſed their preachers and Ieſitites to conuert the pretended hereticks as they ſhould haue done, but in all places where they haue borne the ſway, haue made them ſerue for trompets of ſedition and firebrands, to ſound the alarum, and to ſet the whole Realme on a fire, and miſerable combuſtion, to rayſe the ſubiects againſt their prince, to ſeduce them from the obedience of their magiſtrats, to diſpoſe them to tumults, alteration and noueities, whereby they haue procured an horrible deformitie in the Realme, a generall and incredible rebellion, by the which they haue baniſhed all pietie and iuſtice out of all Cities and places which are vnder their tyranny.
               Fourthly, he ſheweth the cauſes of this their reconſiliation and interuiew, to haue been no reſpect of religion at all: But that he for his parte pitying the miſerable ſtate wherunto the enemies had reduced the realm, when he mought haue vſed the publike calamities of the ſaide ſtate for to doe well and aſſure his affayres, forgiuing all iniuries and diſcurteſies receaued vnto the realme, hath offered to the king his life, and meanes to aſſiſt him to reſtabliſh his authoritie: which proffers the king of his clementie and goodnes accepted. And vpon that acceptation (that hee might the better haue meanes to doo him good ſeruice) the ſayd King bath conciuded a generall truce throughout all his Dominions for a whole yeare, including

therein the Countie of Veniſse and ſtate of Auignon.
               
               Laſt of all, hee chargeth and commandeth all them of his ſide and religion,  to keepe the conditions of this truee inuiolable, forbidding them to enterpriſe, innouate, or alter any thing either in religion or policie, in any place of the Kings dominions.
               And as the King of his gracious goodnes had giuen libertie to them of the reformed religion, to enioy the freedome of their conſciences & goods, he willeth alſo the like libertie to bee giuen to the Catholikes, who are in the Prouinces, Townes or Cities, holden by them of the reformed religion, ſo long as this truce ſhall endure.
               Among all other Prouinces, which through rebellion had forſaken the Kings obedience, Picardy and the Ile of France had waded moſt déepely in that rebellion, hauing generally reuolted, Calis and Boloigne excepted. In the Ile of France there is a ſmall Towne named Seulis, in the way bewéene Champaigne and Paris, that Towne alſo had rebelled and ioyned to the vnion of the League, a Towne of no ſtrength, neither in fortifications nor ſituation.
               About the beginning of Aprill, the Lord Thore of the houſe of Mommorency, went vp and downe in the Towne of Seulis, conferring with the good and faithfull inhabitants of the ſayd Towne, who with his good and graue reaſons reduced them to the Kings obedience.
               About the beginning of May, the ſayd Lord Thore within the ſpace of three dayes, made a choyſe and muſter of able men out of the villages of  the Dutchy of Mommorency, ſo that as well of his companies as of the inhabitants of the Towne, he made a ſufficient number of reſolute men to the number of two thouſand, able to ſtand againſt any forces that ſhould ſeeke to aſſault the Towne, furniſhing the ſame aboundantly with victuall and munition, and all neceſſary things for the kéeping and defence thereof. This he did, not that the place was of any ſuch ſtrength, but repoſing his truſt in God, who is a defender of a iuſt cauſe, and in the courage & faithfulnes of the inhabitants and ſouldiers there. The Pariſiens amazed to ſee the ſ
                     •
                  daine reducing of the ſayd Towne to the Kings obedience, did all their diligence to put out that fire kindled ſo néere them.
               The Lord of Mayneuile (whom wee haue ſayd the Duke de Mayne had left gouernour of Paris) in great haſt with a company of Pariſiens well armed, came to beſiege the ſayd Towne of Seulis. The Duke d'Aumale with a braue companie of horſemen and a ſort of footemen, arriued incontinently there after the Lord Mayneuile; ſo that on a ſodaine they beſieged the Towne, being at the daſh to the number of foure thouſand men.
               The fourth day, the Pariſiens and other partakers and fellowes of the vnion, came poſting from many places, being well horſed and furniſhed, and found themſelues that day before that Towne to the number of ſixe

thouſand men.
               The fift day they ſent to Paris for Ordinance, whereof three were ſent  them, to wit, two Canons and one Culuerine: and becauſe none would enterpriſe to conduct the ſayd Ordinance, this way was deuiſed.
               In the alteration which was made in the Citie in Ianuary laſt, they had appoynted a Captain for euery warde of the Citie, which be eightéen, which by turnes ſhould haue out of his warde twelue hundred men, to march to the Boys of Vicennes nigh Paris, to keepe that Caſtle from ſurprizing by the Kings friends. Captaine Aubret his regiment was appointed that day to that charge, to wit, to conduct the Ordinance, to whome was added the companie of Captaine Compan; they (leauing for that day the kéeping of the Caſtle Vicennes, their baggage, apparell, and prouiſion of victuall, which was gone before through the gate S. Anthony) went through S. Martins gate, where the Ordinance was gone before, vnder the charge of one Brigard, Procurator of the Towne-houſe. They ar
                     •
                  iued with theſe three p
                     •
                  eces at Seulis the ſixt day of May in the euening. At their arriuing they ſaluted the Towne with a peale of that Ordinance.
               At the noyſe therof, they of the Towne on a ſudden came to the Towne walles, and offered to make as great a breach in the wall as they would demaund, and ſo to eaſe them from taking ſo much paynes as to vſe the Canon ſhot.
               The Duke d'Aumale preſently ſent to ſummon them to yeeld vnto compoſition: they within promiſed to make an anſwere the morrowe following.
               Vpon this anſwere, a Poſt of the Towne went to Paris to bring them good newes, which encreaſed greatly by the way, as the manner is: there the report went that Seulis had proffered thréeſcore thouſand Crownes, ſome multiplied that to one hundered thouſand, for their rau
                     •
                  ſome.
               The 7. day, they of the Towne gaue their anſwere both by portraiture and by mouth: for they all night had portrayed on a cloath the Dukes de Mayn & Aumale hanged on gibbets, & the Dutcheſſe Montpenſier kneeling at the feete of them with her head all vncouered, weeping and wailing and tearing her haire, which they cauſed to be ſet on the morrow (being the 7. of May) to bee ſpread vpon the walles, the people crying with vile and reproachful ſpeaches, that the ſame was the portraiture of the compoſition that they demaunded.
               Vpon the ſight of this picture, and words ſpoken out of the wall: they ſent agayne to Paris for more Ordinance, to beat the Towne to duſt, for they had ſworne ſo to doo.
               The Pariſiens made excuſe, that they lacked Bullets, and ſuch Pieces as they demaunded.
               The cauſe of this excuſe was not lacke of will to do ſo much miſchiefe

as the other intended to haue done: but for feare of the ielouſies betweene the Duke de Mayne and Aumale: for the Duke Aumale had béen greatly,  and oftentimes deſired (after his departure from thence) to returne to Paris, which he denyed to doo. The Pariſiens therefore fearing that Aumale hauing ſuch forces as hee had at Seulis, and expected dayly from the Lord Balagny, and hauing ſtore of Ordinance and munition, either might turne all theſe forces agaynſt them, or keepe them ſhort from hauing any victuals out of Picardie, or to make a third faction, and to ſtriue with the Duke de Mayne about the ſtate, and ſo weaken their party, to expoſe them to be a pray for the King.
               The Duke d' Aumale, ſeeing that there was little ſuccour to bee expected from Paris, ſent to Peronne, where he had ſixe pieces of Ordinance, and out of Anjous one, which were conducted to Seulis by ye Lord Balagny, gouernour of Cambray.
               
               About the 13. day of May they of Seulis made a ſally out of the Towne with a hundered horſemen, whereat they that beſieged the towne were ſo amaſed, that they thought beſt to flee: ſo the Pariſiens caſting away their armor, fled, and hid themſelues in buſhes on euery ſide.
               Of theſe hundered horſemen, fiftie returned into the towne, and the other fifty kept the field, for to ayde any that might come to ſuccour them.
               About the 15. of May, the Lord Balagny with his companies of Wallons, Cambreſines and Picardines, came and ioyned to the D. Aumale, with ſixe pieces of Ordinance, which hee had taken at Peronne and Anjous, as is aforeſayd.
               The 12. day of May, they began to batter Seulis, with ten pieces of battery, and within a while hauing made a great breach, the enemy confuſedly gaue the aſſault, who was repulſed with ſome loſſe.
               The ſame day about noone, word came to the enemy that the Duke of Longueuille, accompanied with the Lordes of Humieres, Bonniuet, la Nowe, Giury, Meſuiller, and Tour, and other nobles of Picardy were at hand to the number of a thouſand horſemen, and three thouſand footmen to reſcue the towne of Seulis.
               
               Whereupon the Lord Balagny pitched in campe the beſt power of his men, and beeing then accompanied with the Lords of Mainuile, of Saiſſeual, Mezieres, and Congy, with others, approched ſomewhat neere to the Duke of Longueuille, in good hope to diſcomfit him. The horſemen of Cambray, and the Wallons alſo firſt charged the footmen of the Duke of Longueuille. The ſaid footmen departed themſelues in the middle, & gaue roome for the ordinance to ſhoot: which at the firſt volye made a great flaughter of the Cambreſines and Wallons, who lyking not that play, recyred backe with greater haſt then they went to it: but afterward they came all to a ſet battaile, fought ſtoutly on both ſydes, and with great courage:

but the Ordinance of the Duke of Longueuille made ſtill ſo great ſpoite of the enemy, that conceauing a great dread they began to wauer,  neither could the Duke d' Aumale, nor the Lord Balagny by any perſwaſions encourage them, nor bring them to good order agayne: ſo the confuſion and terror encreaſing, the whole army which beſieged the towne, fled away preſently.
               The Duke of Longueuille his power, with the power which was in the Towne, iſſuing forth, did ſo follow the chaſe, that with handy blowes they killed as many as they could ouertake. There remayned ſlayne of the rebels vpon the place betweene fifteene hundred and two thouſand, as many were ſlaine in the chaſe, beſides them who were ſlayne in the Villages by the countrey people. All the Ordinance and munition of warre, bagge & baggage was left behind. The Duke d' Aumale had a blow which did him no good, the Lord Balagny had an other which did him no great hurt: hoth of them fled to Paris in leſſer company then when they went to Seulis.
               
               The Duke d' Aumale the 19. of May went out of Paris, fearing there to be welome, and miſtruſting the ſnares of de Mayne, mutiny and factions of the Pariſiens, he retyred to Saint Denis.
               
               
                  Balagny remayned in Paris, faining there that hee would take order for the gathering of the Souldiers, breathing out cruell threatning what hee would doo, and promiſing to the Pariſiens, that a new ſupply of Wallons would come out of the low Countrey: he cheareth the people of Paris, who were ſmitten with the dread of Iericho. The ſelfe ſame day, the rebels of Rion in Auuergne, had an ouerthrow no leſſe then this, but the particularityes are not knowen vnto me for lacke of inſtructions.
               We haue inſerted by digreſſion the iudgements which God hath executed vpon the rebels, before Seulis. Firſt, how they were conuicted of treaſon and felony vpon the walles of Seulis, and there their cheefeſt Captains hanged. Neither was that a play of boies, but the worke of God, which by that fearefull picture would haue admoniſhed both the headlings and vnderlinges of that rebellion, of their offence, of his iudgements executed vppon rebels in all ages, and put them in remembrance of their duty.
               Secondly, wee haue ſeene a blow geuen of God) vnto ſuch vnfaithfull Traitors, deſpiſers of Gods Ordinance) in earneſt of heauier plagues, if through repentance they do not returne to their dutifull obedience.
               Now wee will returne to ſhew the effectes of the meeting, and interuiew of the two Kinges at Tours the 30. of Aprill.
               It is ſayd, how the Duke de Mayne tooke a fright as ſoon as he heard of this interuiew, returned to Vendoſme, where ſoiorning a few dayes, hee ordered his army, placed part of them in garriſons in diuers townes and holdes, as is ſaid.
               It is ſaid alſo, how he had ſent to the Duke Aumale, to ſend him ſome

ſupply of horſemen out of Picardy, that he might be the better able to geue the blow ſo long intended. 
               
               The King of Nauarre taking for ſome dayes counſell with the King, about the publike affaires, made ſome light roads in the Countrey about which was leagued, expecting to haue al his forces in a readines to do ſome exploit. At length the ſaid King of Nauarre vnderſtanding how that the Duke de Mayne fled with parte of his army: about the thirteenth day of May followed him ſo neere vppon the heeles, that he put all ſtraglers which were left behind to the ſword, and did ſo ſcoure the countrey of Beauſſe, that not one of the enemyes durſt ſhew themſelues abroad out of their holdes.
               Whileſt the King expected certayne regiments of Suiſſers, and other forces, which did dayly prepare to come to hi
                     •
                  , th
                     •
                   King of Nauarre ſoiorning in Beauſſe, about Boyſgency, had ſent the Lord Lorges to ſcoure the countrey toward Chasteaudune and Bonaual, and retyred to his houſe of Lorges nigh Marcheſnoyre.
               
               The Duke d' Aumale had ſent the Lord Saueinze with ſome companies of Picardy, but ſpecially the Lords of Broſſes, with ſixe or ſeuen ſcore gentlemen, al the choiſe of the Nobility in Picardy, that were fauouring that ſide, and ſoiorned at Chartres.
               
               This Saueinze tooke with him his companies of Picardy, and Arcleinuile: for the Duke de Mayne gouernour at Chartres, accompanied with fifty horſes, intending to haue ſurpriſed the Lord Lorges, Arcleinuile went before to view the countrey, and to know who ſtirred in the fieldes.
               The 18. of May, the King of Nauarre ſent the Lord Chaſtilion, accompani
                     •
                  d with the Lords Fouqueroles, Charboniere, Harambure, Mony, Reſny, Saint Sere, Freſillon, and Chambalame, and other gentlemen to make warre with two hundred horſemen, and as many harquebuziers, and by Boyſgency vnderſtood that theſe troupes of Picary, ſent by the Duke d' Aumale, came that way to haue met the Lord Lorg
                        •
                     s: the Lord Chaſtilion therefore with his companies directed his way toward Bonaual, and tooke with him the Lord Fonquerantes, with twenty of his gentlemen for ſcoute, they met Arcleinuile with fifty horſes with him. The Lord Chaſtilion maketh towards him to charge him, and ſo vſed the matter that they killed ſixe men of the enemy. Arcleinuile hauing no great lyking of that play, retired and gaue the alarum to the reſt of the troupes, a quarter of a mile comming orderly vnder the leading of Saueinze: he had 30. Harquebuziers of the Lord Forceuille, and many other Gentlemen of name, making in all the number of ſixe hundred men.
               The Lord Chaſtilion changed his pace with a trot, for to entertaine them. Charboniere and Harambure, with their companies of light horſemen were on his left wing on the other ſide.
               
                  
                  Saueuze ſetting forth before his Harquebuziers, ſet his company of Launciers in rankes, and commeth a great pace without breaking ranke  for the ſpace of a quarter of a mile. The Trompets ſound the charge on both ſides.
               The Lord Chaſtilion caſteth about a little to ſtay for his Harquebuziers, he deuideth his horſmen into two companies, and hauing placed his footmen, goeth to the ſkirmiſh.
               
                  Saueuze commeth forth very brauely and couragiouſly, galloping for thirty paces, his Harquebuziers on horſebacke gaue the onſet neere ynough.
               The Lord Chaſtilion his footmen receaued them, who after the firſt Harquebuziers were diſcharged, euen during the fight ruſhed in among the horſmen, killed many horſes with their ſwords: of the Lord Chaſtilion his men were ſlayne one that had beene of the King of Nauarre his guardes, and two ſouldiers of the garriſon of Boyſgency and no more.
               
                  Saueuze, who on a ſudden had bent him ſelfe againſt the light horſemen, charged ſo furiouſly the Lord Chaſtilion, that the firſt rankes were broken, which hee vnhorſed and layed along, and eight or ten of his gentlemen incurred the like miſfortune, among whom was the Lord Mony, Roſny, Saint Sere, Freſlon, Chamberlan, and among them three were hurt with Launces & twenty or thirty of their horſes ſlaine. The Broſſes ſet vppon the rereward of the Lord Chaſtilion which were greatly diſtreſſed.
               At length the Lord Chaſtilion, and others that were ouerthrowen, recouered themſelues, and fell a fighting with their ſwordes on foot, and he aduaunced ſo far that he was hurt in the face.
               In the meane while the Lords Harambure, Charboniere, and Fonquerules with their companies, ſet vpon Saueuze and his troupes ſo furiouſly, that they entred and brake a ray, put the enemies to flight in ſuch ſort, that they could not gather together agayne. There were ſlayne ſome of their Captayns, all the gentlemen of Picardy, and aboue threeſcore in the flight, ſo that there were aboue two hundered of the enemies ſlayne: but ſpecially all the Harquebuziers, two cornets were taken, and the bearers ſlayne, forty Gentlemen were taken, and among them Saueuze and Forceuile: Many of account were hurt. The Lord Chaſtilion loſt but thrée men, as is aforeſayd: this execution was done nigh Bonaual about foure a clocke in the after noone.
               Here (Chriſtian Reader) may wee ſee the great goodnes and mercy of God, which calleth ſinners and tranſgreſſors to repentance, ſending them meſſengers and tokens of his wrath, & denouncing them aſſured deſtruction: for firſt at Seulis the Lord repreſented vnto the heads of the league. the greatnes of their treſpaſſe by the painted puniſhment deſerued.
               
                  
Secondly, the Lord proſpered the Kings armies with three noble victoryes in two dayes, in the ſig
                     •
                  t in a maner and hearing of three great and mighty rebeiled citiyes, to wit, at Seulis, nigh Paris, and at Rions in Auuergne, 
                   and at Bonaual, not far from Orleans. Furthermore the Lord hath executed yet moſt terrible iudgements ſince, becauſe they deſpyſed theſe gracious war
                     •••
                  gs, by conſuming them with a long and continuall diſeaſe, as if it were with a phiſike, carrying with them the worme of the conſcience, oppreſſ
                     •
                  d with famin, peſtilence, ſword, and with intollerable bondage vnder the Leaguers.
               The King of Nauarre after this ouerthrow of Saueinze and his companies nigh Bonaual, about the 22. of May being at Boyſgency vpon Loyre veneath Orleans fiue leagues, writeth a louing letter to the rebels of Orleans, to proue what reaſon and fayre offers might do with them, wherein he ſheweth to them.
               Firſt, that he hath foreſeene and forewarned France of the euils which this laſt ciuill Warres would bring, and proteſteth of the diſlyking of it at all times. And although his proteſtations and warnings haue béen little regarded, notwithſtanding the iniuries which he hath receaued, yet wil he not fayle in his duty toward his countrey, but will ſéeke the meanes to cure her diſeaſe, or die wi
                     •
                  h it both in generall, and particular.
               Secondly, aduiſeth them to conſider the cauſes of their rebellion to bee in themſelues, and not in other men: for it cannot be for any religion, or any violence, or neceſſitie which hath enforced them thereunto; but a wicked and raſh minde, which maketh them pretend a feare of ſome euill that may come hereafter: and ſo doing they make themſelues vnfortunate, and caſt themſelues in a miſerable ſtate. And in preuenting a fault that may bée hereafter, they doo commit a manifeſt and heynous crime: in going about to ſtop an euill, which they doo imagine to ſee a farre of, they doo procure to themſelues innumerable euils: to aſſure a libertie to their children, which no man will hinder, they doo throwe themſelues into a preſent bondage: To make ſure (as they ſay) their ſtate and goods, they yéeld themſelues to be ſpoyled and robbed.
               Put them in remembrance of the calamities which will accompanie their rebellion and their obſtinacie in the ſame, as that they doo drawe a cruell warre to their gates, whereby they ſhall be continually in feare and alarume; by it they ſhall haue need continually of an armie to gard them; by it they ſhall ſee their houſes, their fieldes, their vines ſet on a fire, their wiues and children ſpoyled, their traffique ſtopped, their huſbandrie waſted: and all this they are like to ſuffer for going about to reuenge another mans naughtie quarrell, and for to make their backes to be footſteps for other men to get vp vnto the ſcaffold of their ambition: which if it doth fall

(as it cannot ſtand) it will quaile, ſtiffle and vndo them.
               Thirdly, admoniſheth them to call to remembrance the fidelitie and loyaltie  of their anceſtors to Charles the 7. whom they defended againſt England and the moſt part of France, which had conſpired againſt him, and exhorteth them alſo to remember their oath naturally giuen, to keepe their fidelitie, loyaltie and duetie inuiolable to their naturally Prince.
               Laſt of all, hee aſſureth them of the Kings clemencie and gracious fauour, and proffereth them his meanes to further the ſame, if they will returne vnder his obedience.
               Afterward the King of Nauarre ſcoured all the countrey of Beauſſe, hauing enforced the rebels to keepe in their Holds.
               At length the King hauing receaued certaine regiments of Swiſſers, and encouraged with theſe good beginnings againſt the rebels, (knowing the God of battailes to be of his ſide) in the latter ende of Iune gatheres all his forces together, and came in perſon to his Campe▪ Helpe commeth to him from all parts of the Realme, his armie encreaſeth daily in number, fame and power. The ſtate of the King thus ſuddenly, many Cities begin to entreate vpon peace.
               Thus the King hauing recouered part of his authoritie, and in good hope to recouer the whole, and more then euer he had, by refuſing the counſell of ſtrangers, and following the good, wiſe, ſage, and diſcreet counſell of the Princes of his bloud, and other his noble and faithfull counſellers, ſubiects and friends; he marcheth directly toward Paris to begin the puniſhment, where this vnthankfulnes, treacherie and rebellion had begun. He taketh Pontoys, S. Clow, ſeazeth vppon Poiſſy, S. Germayne, Charanton, and other Townes round about Paris. Meloune and Corbeil he had fortified and holden euer ſince the beginning of the rebellion.
               The Princes of Germany and Italy ſent Ambaſſadours vnto him, doo wiſh him well, doo proffer him money and men to repreſſe that barbarous  treacherie of his enemies. Some of the firſt conſpirators alſo through diſpayre, flee vnto his mercie. Finally, all things now fall contrary to their expectation and traiterous deſires, without any hope to looke any more (ſo long as the King liueth) for any condition of agreement or ſuretie of life. To be ſhort, the caſe is altered.
               For the King leading his power nigh Paris, to compaſſe it round about, and hauing all the Townes about, beginneth ſo to diſtreſſe it, that either none or ſmall ſtore of victuals could be brought into the Citie.
               The conſpirators begin to tremble at this newe and ſudden chaunge: therefore the heads of the traitors ſeeing themſelues ſo hardly beſet, doo enter into counſell to determine vppon the extremitie of their affayres. One among the reſt declared the daunger wherein they liued; he ſhewed that the mindes of the Nobilitie were mutable and inconſtant, fawning

alwayes on Fortunes ſide. He ſhewed alſo that the fearefull Cities could not be kept faithfull vnto them, and that vppon the ſight of any imminent  danger, they would be ready to reuolt agayne to the King.
               Alſo hee diſcourſed how the Cleargie were couetous, and neuer gaue but very little of their owne to their Kings, and therefore there was ſmall hope that they would giue to them who might but intreat for it. And thus ſtood their caſe at home.
               From abroade (ſayd he) leſſe hope was to bee looked for: for the Spanyard was olde and carefull for the quietnes of his owne familie, vnto whom it was more ſecuritie that France ſhould bee troubled, then vſurped by any other then himſelfe.
               The Italian Princes are circumſpect and wiſe.
               The Germanes are couetous and miſers.
               The Pope is ſubtill, craftie and inconſtant, gréedie for his owne gayne, and turning with euery blaſt of fortune: therefore he concluded, that there was none other remedie remayning for them but to dye or runne away, except one thing could bee brought to paſſe, to wit, the death of the King, which (if they would auoyde their aſſured vndoing) was to be laboured by all meanes poſſible, and that there was no other remedie for redreſſe of their diſtreſſed eſtate.
               In this counſell ſat the Duke de Mayne (as a King in hope) Aumale, Nemours, the treacherous Biſhop of Lions, whom the King a little before had pardoned and ſet at libertie, the Lords Roſne, Boyſdaulphin, Briſſak, Sagonne, the 47. choſen for the counſell of the Citie, as aboue ſayd, the ſeuentéene Colonels appoynted ouer the eightéene wardes of the Citie.
               All this bleſſed company hauing heard the diſcourſe aboue ſayd, and ſéeing with their eyes vengeance to be at the doore, concluded the condemnation and execution of the King ſpeedily to bee diſpatched and murthered, but the meanes are found very difficult to bring ſuch a famous act to paſſe. Now therefore they muſt ſearch out ſome way to bring ſuch a bold and daungerous enterpriſe to poſſibilitie: he that ſhall happily vndertake that feate, ought to bee willing, bold, ſturdie and quicke handed, and a man ſo qualified, that without any ſuſpition may haue a ſpeedie and ſure acceſſe to the Kings perſon. Many offered themſelues to be the executioners of that vilanous act. But it was conſidered that they could not paſſe through ſo many gards and doores without ſuſpition, which if they ſhould bee taken, by torments they would be made coufeſſe the matter, and that would be a ca
                     •
                  eat to him to looke more diligently to himſelfe, which would bring the matter to impoſſibilitie.
               Many are ſolicited thereunto by great and fayre promiſes, and lacked no good will, but onely courage. But aduiſing themſelues of the Kings more then ſuperſticious heart, concluded to make choyſe of ſome ſaucie deſperat

wretch, who couered with the cloake of hypocriſie, might pearce through all the gardes of the Kings houſe without any ſuſpition or examination. 
               
               To ſpie out ſuch a one as would vndertake to atchieue ſuch a deſperate parricide, was committed ſpecially to one Pichnard an inceſtuous & moſt vilanous perſon. This Pichnard therefore to giue ſome good grace to this tragedie, brought in a Frier to play the diuels part, & ſuch a one as might at all times aſſure himſelfe of free acceſſe. And for as much as among all other ſects of idolatrous Friers, the Dominicans were moſt welcome to the King, he made his choyſe of one of that order for the determined execution, as ſhall hereafter be declared.
               But we will by a digreſſion ſhewe the holines of that order of Dominican Friers and others, that it may appeare that it is not newe nor contrary vnto Frierie and Monkerie to bee hold, readie and ſtrong to commit all vilanie.
               All about one time out of the bottomleſſe pit of hell (by a iuſt iudgement of God to reuenge the vnthankfulnes and idolatries of the world, and to fill the meaſure of iniquitie of the ſpirituall Sodome by Antichriſt) there iſſued two frogges with lying ſpirits to ſeduce vtterly the world, to wit, Francis in Italy, and Dominick in Spayne, two miſbegotten monſters in all reſpects one like to another, ſaue onely in their haire and king of francie.
               Theſe two ſeducers like in hypocriſie, ignorance, ſuperſtition, idolatrie and rage, were poſſeſſed with diuers ſpirits of francie. For Francis was a franticke ſot, ignorance it ſelfe, made onely to make the world laugh with his follies, and yet by his follies (ſuch was that accurſed age) he gat himſelfe a great fame and reputation of holineſſe, and drewe after him an infinite number of diſciples of the like humour to his.
               
                  Dominick in Spayne was of a hotter francie, ſo that it may bee ſayd of him as of Caligula, vrceus conflatus ex luto & ſanguine, immanitate oppletus. For his owne Friers doo write of him, that whileſt he was in his mothers wombe, ſhe dreamed that ſhe was deliuered of a Dogge that held a burning Torch, wherewith he kindled a fire in the world and ſet it to combuſtion. What this mad Dogge did in France, the horible murthers which he cauſed to be committed vpon the Albigeoys, who (after the cruell conflicts of the Waldenſes with Antichriſt) had reſtored the Goſpell in Guien, Gaſcoyne and Languedock, but ſpecially in the territorie of the Citie Alby, as alſo the raging follies which was committed at Tholouſe were incredible to report, except his owne diſciples had written them in his legend.
               His diſciples after him haue ſhewed no leſſe furie and rage in diuers reſpects, but ſpecially vppon the moſt noble Emperour Henry the 7. of the noble houſe of Bauierne, who did poyſon him with the powder of beaten

Diamonds mingled in his challice, when they did miniſter to him ſuch a communion as they had deuiſed of their owne. For that cauſe onely that the good Emperour wiſhed, & had ſome ſpeaches about the reforming of the  Church.
               But the accurſed rage of the Inquiſition (which doth conſiſt moſt of Dominican Fryers) hath ſo farre ſurpaſſed all the tyrants that euer were, that O yee Buſiris, Perillus, Phalaris, Nero, Caligula, Domitian, Heliogabalus, and thou vnnaturall houſe of Otheman, and yee that are famous for any notorious wickednes, reioyce, for your infamy is iuſtified by the raging cruelty of theſe Atheiſtes, Sorcerers, Negromancers, Idolaters, Enchaunters and Parricides, the accurſed Dominican Fryers, and the whole rabble of Friery and Monkery, againſt the Church and Chriſtian Princes.
               I leaue off the hipocriſy, enchauntments and ſorceries, which theſe companions played at Berna and Orleans: no maruaile therefore if wee heare neuer a pleaſant tale, but of the deedes of Friers: wee neuer laugh but at theyr follies; we neuer wonder but at their impudency; we are neuer aſtoniſhed but at their furie; we neuer tremble but at their rage; we neuer ſee a mery play, but a Frier playeth the Deuils part. Pichnard therefore conſidering all things, as is aforeſaid, thought good to pick out ſuch a one as was brought vp in Dominiks ſchoole, well practiſed and exerciſed in the affaiers of their order. Whereuppon he ſolicited one Iames Clement, another S. Dominicke in all reſpects, in ignorance exceeding, ſo that he knew no more then his Portiforia, ſuch a one as for his lewdnes, and for beeing taken often tymes in ſtewes and whorehouſes, had béen by the order of their diſcipline diuerſly puniſhed.
               This Frier Iames was in great fauour before with the lady Montpencier, ſiſter to the late Duke of Guyze, being her confeſſor, not for any good quallity in him, but becauſe hee was a luſty ſturdy ghoſtly father among Ladies of her religion, & could giue her ſuch good counſell as could pleaſe her well.
               
                  Pichnard perceaued this companion to bee a fit inſtrument to execute their damnable and deuiliſh ſentence, made motion of the matter to him. The Frier, although very deſirous of the Kings death, yet willing that it ſhould be done rather by another then by himſelfe, feared to thruſt himſelfe into that aſſured danger of a preſent death, was vnwilling to heare any more of that.
               Fryer Iames is called in. There were the Dukes de Mayne, Aumale, Nemours, the Lordes Roſne, Sagonne, Briſſak, Boyſdaulphin, Villeroy, and ſuch good Catholikes, and to fill the meſſe there was Pagarola, Fryer Sixtus his Chaplaine, a very louing Prieſt, and one that can write very louing letters to the Curtiſans of Rome, to giue them ſuch ſpirituall counſell

as he can ſkill. They had (poore ſilly Frier) Iames Clement vnder benedicite: there they ſhewed to this accurſed parricide what a good deed he  might doo to deliuer holy Church from the tiranny of Henry the third, who was become an heretike, and that with one blow hee might procure peace to the whole realme, and a bleſſed quietnes to the holy Church.
               They ſhewed vnto him, how his order had done many times ſuch good ſeruice to holy Church, as in ridding away the Emperour Henry the 7. who intended to perſecute holy Church.
               They let him vnderſtand, how among all other order of Friers, his had deſerued the greateſt praiſe in ſpilling daily the bloud of heretikes as water in the townes, and citties of Spaine, and Jtaly, and all for the honor of God and exaltation of holy Church. But this pinch would be the nobleſt act that euer was done by any man: the rememberance thereof ſhould remaine for euer, and his name ſhould be made immortall thereby, and if he ſhould die, he ſhould dye a glorious Martir, as Thomas Becket did in England.
               Afterwad he was brought to the Ladies, catholike and chaſt women, the Ducheſſes of Montpencier, Guyze, Aumale, Nemours, Foyeuſe, the mother and the holy Virgin the Ladie Saint Beufue, who as a ſpeciall fauour had beſtowed the pockes of late vpon the Duke de Mayne, and beſide diuers of the principall leaguers in the time of her Virginitie. This Lady is of ſuch holynes, that ſhee is neither a maide, nor wife, nor widow: in this company were Thais, Lais and Bacchis of Corinthus, all holy Catholike women. They began to ſhriue the Frier, if they were men, or if they could be ſo tranſformed into men, that they might haue acceſſe to the tirant, they could finde in their harts to ſtabbe him: that is a ſpeciall point of honor which they do proffer him to doo ſuch a famous deed. It is hereditarie to his order to exalt the Church, and to deliuer it, hee is a man endued with ſtrength, they haue béen his good Ladies, they haue fauoured him greatly and pleaſured him in any thing that euer he requeſted. What, will hee not do ſo much at their requeſt: they muſt die all, and all the citie of Paris; what a good deede it is to ſaue the liues of Princeſſes, Ladies, good Citizens, deuout Prieſts and religious men of ſo many innocents, whoſe death the tirant had ſworne, with the razing of the cittie. If he refuſeth to do that good deede, they thinke him not to be that man that they tooke him for.
               They ſhewed him how eaſy it was to performe it: for there were many Leaguers, and their partakers in his counſell, in his court, in his chamber, in his campe, in his gardes, who would aſſiſt him: and if any danger ſhould ſtirre, they would defende him and reſcue him, and that none would bee ſo hardie, as to proffer him a blowe: for elſe Frier Pagarola would fome like a boare and thunder like a deuill againſt them.
               
                  
What and if it ſhould happen, that he ſhould die for holy Church, then he ſhould be happie to deſerue the name of Martir, & that his brother Frier  
                  Sixtus would make him a Sain
                     •
                  t.
               But if hee returne ſafe (as hee ſhall no doubt) God forbid elſe) hee ſhall be well rewarded in money, hee ſhall haue a Biſhopricke for his paines: Frier Paugarola will procure Frier Sixtus to make him a Cardinall, for a Frier will doo for a Frier, and who knowes not that by theſe meanes hee may be made Pope, after Frier Sixtus is weary of his roome.
               To bee ſhort, if hee will not do it, he ſhall ſee with his eies his good Ladies, all his order, all the good Catholikes of the whole citty of Paris put to the ſword, the cittie razed (for the tirant hath ſworne both he ſhall die himſelfe an aſſured death ere it bee long) the holy Maſſe, the holy Saints, Images and relikes, the Churches ſhall all be deſtroyed, and the heretikes ſhall haue all thinges: all theſe miſchiefes cannot be auoyded but by his death.
               By theſe perſwaſions, the accurſed Fryer (otherwiſe ready ynough to all miſchiefe) is induced to commit one of the moſt villanous parts which euer was committed in France. So Sathan hauing poſſeſſed his hart, the Fryer perſwadeth himſelfe, that an Angell hath appeared vnto him, and commaunded him to kill the King: he opened this to another Fryer which was greatly eſteemed in Paris, by reaſon of a good opinion of great holines which the people had of him. The other Fryer doth encourage him, promiſeth him, that by doing ſuch a holy deed, he ſhall deliuer the Church, and ſet the whole realme at quiet, baniſh warre, and reſtore a moſt aſſured and perpetuall peace, as Iudith did deliuer Betulia by the death of Holofern
                        •
                     s.
               
               Behold (Chriſtian reader) the King condemned to dye, the executioner to commit the parricide ſought out by Pichenard, perſwaded by the heads of the League, and ſome Ladies belonging to them, deluded by Sathan, confirmed in this deluſion by another Frier as good as himſelfe, with aſſured promiſe of a moſt ſure and conſtant peace. Frier Clement deſireth to knowe how he may doo it ſurely and ſafely.
               The Leaguers therefore enter into deliberation about three things, to wit, the acceſſe to the Kings perſon, the ſtroke and ſecrecie. As for the firſt poynt to conuey him to the Kings perſon, they conſidered his coate, which for the reuerence and loue which the King did beare to it, would prepare him the way.
               Secondly, whereas the rebels in ſeazing vpon Paris after the death of the Duke of Guize, had taken the Senate priſoner, and did as yet hold a great many priſoners, and among other the firſt Preſident of the Senate named the Preſident Harlay. They had alſo in like ſort many of the chiefeſt Citizens for bearing good will to the King, or becauſe they were rich,

(as is aforeſayd) whom they detayned in like manner priſoners. The ſayd Lord Preſident and ſome of the ſayd Citizens, procured to write letters  vnto the King, which ſhould bee deliuered to Frier Iames Clement. They taught him alſo a leſſon contayning matters of importance, with commaundement that they ſhould not be diſcloſed vnto any man but vnto the King onely, and that in ſecret.
               As for the ſtroke, it muſt néedes bee deadly too; for els it would but increaſe their miſerie, and ſuch a blowe could not bee giuen but by a ſecret weapon that might bee hidden eaſily about him: for otherwiſe if it could be perceiued, it would make the King more warie hereafter and carefull of himſelfe. But what could be more fit then a knife, which might bee eaſily conueyed in the Friers ſleeue, and whoſe noyſe might not detect the treacherie. But yet there was another miſchance to be preuented, for the woūd of a knife might light vppon ſuch a place as could not be deadly, they finde the meanes to worke ſurely, that if he cannot kill him out of hand, yet that at length it may be his death.
               Therefore Frier Paugarola (Frier Sixtus his Chaplaine) muſt bleſſe the knife with ſome poulderdoribus of Rome, which ſuch men as he is doo commonly carry in ſtore for great holines among other holy reliques of Rome, hauing greater force thē their Agnus dei, or any other agios: others they haue to worke miracles, and ſuch as the maſter Frier in Rome dooth vſe to giue in a drench to his friends, when hee is wearie of their companie to make them giue roome.
               But becauſe ſuch waightie matters cannot bee kept ſo cloſe very long, but will vent out: therefore leaſt the ſmoake of this execrable intended parricide ſhould flee ouer the walles of Paris, and ſo by giuing intelligences, their haynous vnnaturall and helliſh treaſon and murther might bée preuented, it was diligently prouided that no man ſhould goe out of Paris before the exployt were done. Therefore the gates were ſhut vp and carefully kept, and all the iſſues at the Suburbes end ſtraightly and narrowly watched, that no man could goe to tell tales out of the ſchoole.
               Now the Frier hath on his hypocriticall coate, his letters in his hand, his leſſon in his head, his poyſoned knife in his ſleeue, order is taken that no intelligences may be giuen, the way is made plaine before this diuelliſh murtherer, euen as farre as to the Kings gate, the doores are made open to him by theſe meanes, the execution is to bee performed ſpeedily, leaſt delay ſhould diſappoynt his enterpriſe. This murtherer accompanied with the other Frier, who had confirmed him in his reuelation or illuſion, wherewith Sathan had deluded him: (as is aforeſayd) the 21. of Iuly, which by the newe heauen of the Popes making, is the firſt of Auguſt, out of Paris taking his way to S. Clow, which is a Towne vpon Seyne beneath Paris two ſmall leagues, and comming to the Campe, he tolde them whome hée

met firſt, that he had letters from the firſt Preſident and certaine other Pariſiens well affected to the king, which contayned matters of great importance,  and beſide that, hee had great and waightie things to diſcloſe to the King.
               The King being ſcarce ready, and aduertiſed of this accurſed Friers comming, commaunded that he ſhould attend, and that ſpeedily hee ſhould be admitted to his ſpeach: the Frier did attend with his letter in his hand, which he ſaid was from the firſt preſident detained priſoner.
               The King being made ready, and at ſuch an houre as he was wont to enter into his oratory, and when it was not lawfull not for the Princes of the bloud to haue acceſſe vnto him, cauſed that ſauage murtherer to be called to him.
               The Frier came before the King with a bolde countenance, the King looking merily vpon him, ſaid theſe words; amice ad quid venisti? The Frier making a low and humble reuerence, euen to the ground, gaue the King the letter, which he ſaid came from the firſt preſident of Paris: which letters when the King had read, aſked the Frier what newes hee brought from Paris: the Frier anſwered that hee had matters of great importance to declare vnto him. Whereupon the King commaunded two Gentlemen, who waited and ſerued him at his vpriſing, to goe foorth out of the chamber, and ſat downe in a chayre, to heare what the Frier would ſay.
               The Frier drew nigh to the King, and falling vpon his knées, began to tell a tale: the King ſtouping ſomewhat low, to heare what the Frier was about to ſay, gaue more attendance to his words than to his fingers. The Frier drawing ſoftly his knife out of his ſléeue, ſtabbed the King there with in the lower part of the belly, and made haſt to get away.
               The King amazed at the ſuddaine and vnexpected ſtroak, cried out, and laying hand vpon a dagger that lay nere him, ſtroak the Frier, who partly for the blow, & partly for feare, fell preſently down. Vppon this noyſe, the Lordes came running into the Kings chamber, and after many woundes ſlew that curſed Frier.
               Some doo report that the King commaunded that hee ſhould not bee flaine, but taken vp and examined, which declared who ſet him on, and the authors names of ſo vile treacherie: the wound was preſently dreſſed, and as the report went, ſeauen ſtitches made in it: at length the wound being dreſſed, hee was laide on his bed, and ſlept a little vppon his paine and griefe.
               After his ſleepe, hee made his praiers vnto God, and with a loude voyce, made a confeſſion of his faith, and of the féeling which he had of his redemption, adding there unto this feruent praier.
               
                  
                  IF it bee to thy glorie O God, and the commodity of thy people, graunt me, I moſt humblie deſire, firſt pardon of my ſinnes, and then ſome longer 
                   
                  dayes of life. But if it be otherwiſe, I thanke thee moſt highly O Father, that thou dooſt barre me hence forth from the thraledome of ſinne, whereby we moſt oftentimes procure thy wrath againſt vs, and therefore I am ready, moſt willingly to come where thou calleſt me.
               
               The King hauing made an end of his praiers, ſendeth for his brother the King of Nauarre, and for the chiefeſt Lords of his court, gouernours and captaines, but ſpecially for the heads of the ſtrangers, to the intent that if it were Gods will that hee ſhould dye, they might knowe his laſt will.
               Firſt, ſpeaking to the King of Nauarre, commended vnto him the charge of his Realme, the gouernement of his ſubiects, the lawes of France.
               
               Often times he repeated wordes, whereby hee charged the ſaid King of Nauarre, to haue a ſpeciall care to keepe Chriſtes flocke in vnity and concord, and to preſerue the godly and ancient inſtitutions of the realme, requeſted him that by all meanes he would pacify the matter of religion in France, and not to alter any thing therein, but by the aduiſe of a generall or naturall counſell lawfully called: which things the King of Nauarre promiſed to doo.
               To the reſt of Princes, Lords and Noblemen he ſignified, that the lawfull ſucceſſion of the royall ſtate of France, fell not to any other then to the perſon of Bourbon, and declared at that time the King of Nauarre firſt ſucceſſor: he prayed and exhorted the whole company to acknowledge him, and to be faithfull vnto him, willed them alſo to proteſt in his preſence, all with one voice the acknowledging of him, and to promiſe true obedience vnto him, as to the true, lawfull and naturall heire of the Crowne: willed them alſo to cauſe the like promiſe and acknowledgement to be made in the Campe, by all true and faithfull Captaines and Souldiers, that could not be preſent at that aſſembly, conſiſting as well of Frenchmen as ſtrangers. In all theſe ſpeaches he ſhewed himſelfe of a good cheere, which cauſed all men to hope that hee ſtoode in no danger of death.
               The ſaid King ſent preſently letters to all Prouinces and Cities, to aduertiſe them how things had paſſed at S. Clow, and of his will and laſt Teſtament, requiring all his faithfull Subiects to proteſt the fulfilling thereof.
               The ſecond day toward the euening, there appeared in the King accidents, prognoſticating an aſſured danger, not ſo much through the nature of the wound, as through the poyſoned contagiouſnes of the weapon wherwith the wound was made; ſo that all remedies being vſed by the Phiſitions

and Chirurgions, to preuent the danger, and nothing preuailing, the King called againe to him the King of Nauarre, and other Princes and  Lords, before whom he greatly bewailed the accurſed ciuill warres which had béen the vndooing of his houſe, his nobility and realme, and the breeders of ſo many treacheries and treaſons, whereof he feeleth the ſmart, imputing the cauſes thereof vnto himſelfe, in that hee had alwaies preferred the bad and violent counſell of his ſecret enemies, before the good, wiſe & moderat admonitions and warnings of the Princes of his bloud, and many other Princes, ſtrangers and faithfull friends: willeth him to make a iuſt reuenge (for example ſake) vpon the authors of ſuch a vile act.
               The King of Nauarre, with the reſt of the Princes and Nobility departing very ſorowfull and diſmaied, the King called for his Confeſſor, to whoſe eare he confeſſed his ſinnes, and hauing craued pardon for his offences, ſaid, that he had a ſenſible feeling that they were forgeuen him through Chriſt. The Mediatour deſired to communicat of his ſacred body, and that all might heare that he had receaued fréely of God the forgeuenes of ſinnes, in like caſehe not onely forgaue the conſpiratours, but alſo the very murtherer and procurers of the murther: ſo the poyſon preuailing and ſcattering it ſelfe through, did infect the noble parts, whereby the night following the 22. of Iuly he yeelded his ſoule vnto God.
               Here Chriſtian Reader thou mayeſt ſee with the eye notable examples both of Gods iuſtice and mercy, ſhewed vppon this noble King of a noble kingdome, iſſued out of noble Kings.
               Firſt, how this King hauing obſtinatly perſecuted the Goſpell, partly for hatred, partly at the pleaſure and ſolicitation of Prieſtes, and Fryers, and other ſycophants, and clawbackes, who were continually about him, and ſet him on ſtill, that vnder the colour of catholike Church, and rooting out of hereſie, they might weaken him, ſpoile him of his authority, of his Kingdome, and at length of his life. For they neuer gaue ouer, nor left him at reſt vntill they had ſnatehed his forces out of his hand, and kept his armies alwayes in their hands, or of their friends and partakers, then by calumnies, ſlaunders, libels, ſeditious preachings had procured the contempt and hatred of his ſubieets agaynſt him. Moreouer vpon oportunity they ſeazed vppon his Townes and fortreſſes, expelled him out of his owne houſe, ſeat, city, of his kingdome, and of his realme, condemned him twiſe to die: and at laſt executed that condemnation with hipocriſy and treachery, which thing they could not bring to paſſe by force.
               Who did all theſe vnnaturall iniuries vnto their naturall King: They whom he had ſo far fauoured, as to expoſe his goods, his ſtate, his credit, his honor & his life, for the defence of their iuglings, filthy pleaſures, pride, ambition and atheiſme, to wit, of the Prieſts, Monks, Fryers, and Guyzes, in whoſe loue, fidelity, and force he truſted more then in God. But behold

with trembling the iudgements of the Lord, which are all righteous and pure. This King had not harkened vnto Gods wiſedome which-cryed  in the ſtreates of the Citie; O ye fooliſh how long will yee loue fooliſhnes: Gods wiſedome therefore forſooke him in the day of calamitie, and ſo his table was made an occaſion of fall vnto him: ſo that his familiar friends with whom hee tooke ſweet counſell together in the temple of their Gods, haue lifted vp their heeles agaynſt him.
               This ſecond iudgement of God is alſo to be conſidered with feare and trembling. The famous Gaſpar Coligny Admiral of France, with a great number of the chiefeſt Nobilitie of the Realme, were moſt vniuſtly and cruelly murthered in the yeare 1572. the 24. of Auguſt. This King being then King Charles the 9. his brother and Duke of Anjou, who iſſued out of noble raſe, not regarding his degree, debaſed himſelfe ſo farre as to become the chiefeſt Captayne of an accurſed ſedition, and procurer of ſuch a murther as hated both of God and man, the fame thereof ſhall be execrable and ſtinking in the eares of men for euer. And after the murther moſt cruell indignities were ſhewed vpon the dead bodies of the ſayd Admirall and his fellowes, who after were carried to bee hanged at the place where men executed for exemplarie iuſtice are hanged in chaynes, called Mon
                        •
                     faucon, which lieth right againſt the place where the King was murthered on the North ſide of the riuer Seyne: ſo that euen as Pompey after the poluting of the Temple of Ieruſalem, did neuer proſper; but after many calamities ſuffered, came to Alexandria, where in the hauen, as a man ſhould ſay, in the ſight of the Temple, he was villanouſly murthered by them whom he truſted. Euen ſo this King after that murther (thereby hauing poluted the Temple of iuſtice) neuer proſpered, and from the Lord deliuered into the hands of vile and baſe men whom he truſted, was brought to receaue the puniſhment for that murther, nigh to that place where they had executed the vttermost poynt of infamie, vppon the bodies of the ſayd Admirall and other noble men.
               Thirdly, whereas S. Peter in his ſecond Epiſtle and ſecond Chapter, doth forwarne the Saints both of falſe Prophets and errors which they ſhall bring foorth with them, among others maketh mention that they ſhal not onely contemne, but alſo ſhall ſpeake euill of authorities. Behold, thou (Chriſtian reader) haſt ſeene in the former bookes of this hiſtorie, all the prankes which this holy League hath played for the ſpace of theſe twelue yeares, all the horrible villanies, poyſonings and murthers by them committed, and hauing in their mouthes nothing els but holy League, holy Vnion, holy Church, holy Catholike faith, euen holy murthers, and all that is prophane, wicked and damnable is holy with them, ſo that it be for holy Church: God through iuſtice and mercie in this peruerſe age & dangerous times, when men will not diſcerne the trueth from lying by the

word, but by their affection, according to the doctrine of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 4. hath marked by theſe their abominations, as with a hot burning yron,  their idolatries, hypocriſie and falſe religion, that men looking vppon the fruites, may iudge of the goodnes of the tree which beareth them. So in his grace and fauour he hath preſerued his Saints (profeſſors of his word) from ſuch abominable déedes, that his trueth being iuſtified may be louing and amiable vnto men, carying the ſtampe and grauen image of the ſonne of God, which is innocencie, mildnes, and perfect Chriſtian loue.
               Herein alſo is noted the mercifulnes of God, who will looſe none of his children. This king dyed not preſently of that wound, but God prolonged his life, both to giue him time of repentance, and to lay the foundation of the reſtabliſhing of that afflicted eſtate.
               For firſt, as concerning his repentance, it doth appeare that hée entered déepely into he conſideration of his ſinnes, and by that foundation of faith which remayned in him, confeſſed in the ſymbole touching the death of Chriſt, the forgiuenes of ſinnes through him, made him as if it were forget the moſt part of the idolatrous fantaſies and tromperies, in the which he had béen brought vp and delighted all the daies of his life, and neceſſitie and feeling of his ſinnes enforced him to repoſe himſelfe on the onely ſacrifice of the Sonne of God. So the Lord knoweth who are his.
               Herein alſo appeareth euidently the mercifulnes of God, who worketh all things to the beſt and comfort of his children. For when as the Rebels and murtherers ſuppoſed, that by the Kings death they might eaſily make an alteration of the ſtate, and tranſferre the Crowne vpon the head of the Duke de Mayne, and ſo diſappoynt the Princes of Bourbon of their right of ſucceſſion, the Lord turned al their counſels vpſide downe. For the Lord mooued the King lying on his death bed, when he was in perfect memorie, and fartheſt (as the manner in ſuch a caſe) from all manner of affection and parciality, to pronounce his ſentence and decrée, or rather ſupplying the perſon of God, to proclayme the King of Nauarre, right heire and ſucceſſor of the crowne, and by the inuocation of the glorious name of GOD, b
                     •
                  und the Princes, péeres, Nobles, Captaines and Souldiours, to yéeld him dutifull obedience: ſo that God himſelfe, hath béene the iudge of his cauſe, giuing ſentence on his ſide, by him whome he appoynted his officer in that behalfe. It will ſtand.
               Thus much of the vnworthy death of ſo great a King, in whom ended the iſſue of the noble houſe of Engoleſme, according vnto the fatall period of great, Noble and mighty families which is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , wherein we haue to note the whole family excepted onely Francis the firſt, as Henry the ſecond, Francis the ſecond, Charles the ninth, Francis Duke of Aniou, and this laſt King Henry the third 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  per ſanguinem ruit, and haue died of an vntimely or violent death, becauſe

they were polluted with that accurſed woman Catherine Medicis, Pope Clement his ſiſters brothers daughter. 
               
               And ſo making an end of the Epitaſis of this vnnaturalltragedie played by leaguers, we will make an end likewiſe of this 6. Booke.
               Here endeth the 6. Booke.
            
            
               THE SEVENTH BOOKE.
               
                  NOw we will follow the Cataſtrophe and laſt act: which although it be full of Calamities, yet it is like to bee ended with a ioyfull and happie ſucceſſe.
               The King beeing dead, great heauines and ſorrowe ſeazed vppon men of all degrees, the Campe was full of ſorrow and lamentation: the wiſe ſaw this to be new ſeeds of a world of euils, which wil worke the vtter ſubuerſion of France.
               
               On the other ſide, great reioyſing was ſeene among the rebels and traitors, authors and procurers of the murther, their ioye they ſhewed diuers waies, but ſpeciallie with contumelies and ſarcaſmes, demaunding one of another, whether the Friers knife was ſharpe enough or not.
               The rebels in Paris certified of the aſſured death of the King, and ſuppoſing that the army had béen greatly diſmayed, repleniſhed with teares and lamentation, conceaued a good hope to do ſome great and notable exploit: and imagining that it were eaſie in this mourning of all men to defeat the Kings forces: all that night the Duke de Mayne did muſter and prepare a mighty army, and early in the morning iſſuing out of the Suburbs, was ſo receaued by the Kings forces, that he was enforced to retire within the Citie with blowes and diſhonor.
               That morning, being the third of Auguſt (but by the right calender the 23. of Iuly) the King of Nauarre, who was appointed the Kings Generall lieutenant by the King, after that hee had receaued the wound, aſſembled the Princes, Lords, Nobility and Captaines to deliberat how to remedy thoſe great euils, and to put out that combuſtion which the rebels had kindled in all partes of the realme.
               
                  
Firſt, there was a capitulation made and concluded betweene theKing and the ſaid Princes and Nobles, Lords, gentlemen and ſouldiers, that  there ſhould be no innouation made in the Romiſh religion, but the ſame ſhould ſtand and be exerciſed peaceably without any interruption. And that the reformed religion ſhould be contained with all liberty in the exerciſe thereof within the places, where it was then at that preſent time eſtabliſhed: prouided that the Romiſh religion ſhould bee there exerciſed alſo without any diſturbance. And that men profeſſing theſe two religions, liuing peaceably like good ſubiects, ſhould be protected by the Kings authoritie, in their liues, goods, liberties and franchizes, vntill that by a nationall Councell ſome good and peaceable order ſhould bee taken for ſome reconſiliation or vniformitie touching religion. Which thing the King promiſed by the faith of a Prince to kéepe inuiolably, and with as much ſpeede as might be to prouide that a Councell and méeting of the learned might be aſſembled.
               This order being concluded, and the obſeruation thereof promiſed by the King, all his Princes, Nobles, Lords, Gentlemen and Captaines, promiſed vpon their othes all duetifull fidelitie and obedience vnto the K. and to aſſiſt him with their liues, goods and meanes, as well in the defence of his royall authoritie agaynſt all traytors, rebels and Leaguers, which goe about to vſurpe the ſtate; as in the execution of the exemplary puniſhment vpon them, who haue procured or committed that haynous diſloyaltie, felony and treaſon vpon the Kings perſon laſt deceaſed, and all others who ſhall be knowne conſenting, knowing, or acceſſarie to the ſame.
               This order being taken as the readieſt and moſt expedient to vnite the ſubiects with the King, being promiſed and ſworne, the King of Nauarre was ſaluted, declared, proclaymed, and crowned King of France and Nauarre, by the name of King Henry the 4. And whereas in this hiſtorie hée had béen diſcerned from the King of France, by the title of King of Nauarre; now in the courſe of this hiſtorie following, he ſhall be ſimply named King, without any other addition or title.
               This noble King being proclaymed King, is crowned and put in the poſſeſſion of the Crowne of France, due vnto him by right, not with triffling, childiſh, and Monkiſh cerimonies, with holy oyle, holy water, holy toyes, and holy traſhes; but after the ancient manner of the Emperours of the Romanes, in the Camp by the whole army, Princes, Péeres, Nobles and Captaines of the kingdome.
               Here (Chriſtian Reader) is to be noted Gods moſt gracious fauour toward France, and prouidence toward this great King: for except the Lord had prepared this heroicall Prince to reſtabliſh this decayed ſtate, which was caſt downe headlong into ſuch a depth of miſeries by the Leaguers, as in mans iudgement it was impoſſible that it could euer haue been vnited

againe, but rather reduced into a lamentable deſolation. But the Lord in his mercie beholding from heauen his holy habitation, with his lightfull  countenance after ſo many tempeſts, hath raiſed vp, lead by the hand, and placed by his own authoritie and power, this great Prince on the Throan of that ſtate, whom hee hath endued with wiſedome, prudence, fortitude, moderatnes, modeſtie, iuſtice and pietie, to bee able to heale the deadly wounds of that ſickly ſtate, to pacifie the controuerſies of religion, to lodge therein iuſtice and iudgement, ſo long exiled out of that common wealth, and to reſtore peace, ſo long wiſhed and deſired.
               Againe, we may with admiration, celebrate the prouidence of God, that cleane contrary vnto the expectation of all men, the Lord hath giuen him to France, for her good. For firſt, the Leaguers in the beginning of their inſurrection, made him a party. Then they vſed for the ſpace of foure yeares, all the power of France to oppreſſe him: when force would not ſerue, they procured poyſoners, to try what might bee done that way. But that taking no place, they degraded & debarred him from his right of ſucceſſion, by a fundamental law of the realme, which they ſweared, ſealed and decréed, that it ſhould be vnchangeable, and ſhould remayne for euer: they made him hatefull, and abhorred of the common people throughout all France. After they had miſſed of their purpoſe intended againſt the King▪ they ſo vrged their attempts, that the King was enforced to yéeld himſelfe into the King of Nauarre his hands for his ſafety: at length they murdered the King. Then I will aſke them what haue you gotten by it? They anſwered that they haue gotten the Crowne, either part or the whole. Why? Becauſe there is no ſucceſſor.
               
                  Demaunde. What are the Bourbons then.
               
                  Anſwer. They are excluded by a fundamentall lawe of the realme, ſworne by the vnion at Bloys.
               
               
                  Dem. What ſaith God to that.
               
                  Anſ. Beholde the Lord ſaith, that hee will haue the King of Nauarre head of the houſe of Bourbon to ſucceede, becauſe it is his right, for it is not reaſon, that a confederacie of conſpirators ſhould make a law contrarie vnto the fundamentall lawe of the realme, confirmed by the conſent and cuſtome of ſo many nations, by the ſpace of twelue hundred yeares, not contrarie vnto Gods word.
               
                  Dem. But where dooth God ſpeake it.
               
                  Anſ. By the mouth of a Soueraigne Magiſtrate, ordained by him, to bée the interpreter of all iudiciall lawes.
               Therefore beholde the meanes which the rebels haue ſought, to exclude the King of Nauarre from his right of ſucceſſion, the Lord hath vſed to the ſtabliſhing of the ſaid King, and hath vnited the Princes, Péeres, and chiefeſt Lords, Gentlemen, Captaines and Souldiours of the realme, to aſſiſt,

place and defend him in that roome; ſo the arme of fleſhe ſhall not preuaile againſt the power of God, and the hand of the Lord ſhall be vpon him. 
               
               The Prince Montpencier, gouernour, and Generall for the King in Normandie, then being at Audely, a towne vpon the riuer of Seyne, aboue Pont de Carche, cauſed all his army to take that oath, exhorting them to defend conſtantly the Kings will, according to their oath.
               About the 26. day of Iuly, there was an aſſembly holden at Caen in Normandie, of the court of Parliament (whereto the late deceaſed King had tranſported the ſaid court from the Cittie of Roen, after the rebellion thereof) of the Nobilitie and Gentlemen of the countrey, and of the bodie of the towne and Vniuerſitie, and of the Citizens and inhabitants of the ſaid towne: where the Lord Lizores, Lord Preſident of the ſaide court, did ſit as head of the ſaide méeting, in whoſe preſence, the ſaide Preſident hauing declared the haynous déede, committed vpon the perſon of the King late deceaſed, and ſhewed the equitie of the Kings teſtament and laſt will, on his owne behalfe proteſted perfect loyaltie to the King, right and lawfull ſucceſſor of the Crowne of France, & after the publication of the Kings, and of ye Prince Montpencier his letters, all vniformally with one conſent, did ſweare their acknowledgement and fidelitie, vnto the lawfull ſucceſſor of the Crowne of France, and to maintaine al things contained in the will of Henry d'Valoys, lately deceaſed.
               The like declarations and promiſes were made, and othes of fidelitie and loyalty taken, publikely in many townes and cities in France, euen on the North ſide of Loyre, to the ſame effect.
               The rebels vnderſtanding in Paris, what the late deceaſed King had done, and how the King of Nauarre was proclaymed King of France, contrarie to their expectation, & that they were worſe hampered now then before, like to haue him to be their maſter, whome they had refuſed and diſdained, thought good to trie what might be done by treachery, vpon the perſon of the King.
               And becauſe that a Friers coate could not beguile this King, as it did the other, by reaſon of the little acquaintance and credit which hée giueth them, they ſuborned a murtherer, who vnder the colour of a Gentleman, ſhould ſhoote him through with a Piece: but the Lord watching for his annointed, brought the murtherer to confuſion.
               All thinges falling out ſo confuſedly in France by the death of the laſt King, and the newes thereof fleeing abroad into forreine countries, repleniſhed mens harts with admiration of Gods ſecret iudgements with a maze, indignation and feare.
               The King taking counſell what was beſt to be done in theſe extremities, for to ſaue the remnant of the realme from vtter ſubuertion, did reſolue

vpon theſe three pointes which will follow this miſerable murther.
               Firſt, the King conſidering how his enemies long time aforehand had  rendered him by ſlaunderous libels and ſeditious ſermons, of Ieſuits and Friers, by theſe meanes to make him abhorred of the commonaltie, and thereby to make them vnwilling to acknowledge him for their King, and to render him fidelity, loyaltie and obedience, which long practiſed malice of his enemies would procure him much labour, and long continuance of warre betweene him and his ſubiects.
               Secondly, he knew that in the Campe, vnder the banner of his predeceſſor, and alſo in his counſell were many deuoted & ſworne to the League, whom he durſt not truſt, and knowing that they would not do him faithful ſeruice no more then they did to his predeceſſor, hee determined to licence them to depart ſo many as would, and to liue peaceablie in their houſes vnder his obedience: whereupon many diſbanded themſelues, and retired ſome home, and ſome to the enemie.
               Laſt of all, the K. foreſeeing that the heads of the League vpon this proſperous exploit done vpon the perſon of the King lately murthered, will double their rage, and with great forces (which they could quickly ſet vp in ſuch a mighty and populous cittie) would ſet vpon him, and with multitude might greatly diſtreſſe him, determined to ſend part of his forces into Picardy, vnder the conduct of the duke of Longueuile, & the Lord la Nouë, there to miniſter play to the enemy, and with the greateſt part of his army to retire into Normandy, there to gather greater forces: and if need ſhould require, to be nigh and ready vpon the coaſt, there to receaue ſupply of forces from the mightie Princeſſe the Queene of England, which might bee done vpon ſhort warning, conſidering the ſmall diſtance which is from Coaſt to Coaſt.
               As for the Swiſſers and other Germans, who ſerued the King his predeceſſor, hee ſent their Heads and Captaines vnto their Princes and Signories, to vnderſtand their pleaſure, whether they would call their men home, or giue them leaue to ſerue him. The ſaid Germans & Swiſſers (according to the Kings will and promiſe made vnto him) proffered vnto him their faithfull ſeruice.
               Thus the preſent eſtate and ſumme of affairs being managed, he retired into Normandy, hauing not with him aboue eight thouſand men of all ſortes, and ſtayed there a while beholding what the enemy would enterpriſe.
               Now we wil leaue the King about the Sea coaſt in Normandy, where we haue brought him with eight thouſand men of all ſorts, and will goe to ſee what is done in other places, what preparations the Leaguers do: and after we will paſſe ouer the Alpes, to ſee how doth Frier Sixtus, and what iolly diuinity is with him and his Chaplains.
               
                  
About the 31. of Iuly, which to the Papiſtes is the 21. of Auguſt, the D. of Lorreine thought good to blow the fire of rebellion to make it burne  more furiouſly. There is Langres a noble City in that part of Bourgondy, which commonly is called Baſsigny: the citizens had euer remayned faithfull to the King, and could neuer bee brought to aſſociat themſelues to the League, ſmelling the breath of the Lorreins, as nigh Neighbours to Nancie. This noble Citie the Duke of Lorreine deſired greatly to bee of the aſſociation of the rebellion, knowing the importance of that place, by reaſon of the ſtrong ſituation thereof, to make much for the affayres of the rebellion.
               Firſt, he ſheweth his ſorrow for the Kings death to be ſo great, that hee cannot keepe himſelfe from weeping. This weeping and teares are to be ſuppoſed to proceede from ioy, he himſelfe beeing one of the procurers of the murther.
               Secondly, he fayneth a great feare, leaſt the Goſpell (which he calleth hereſie, entring into their City) ſhould breake the necke of Popery, and ſo rid their Citie of that deceitfull gueſt, which by all meanes poſſible hee would haue courteouſly entertained.
               Thirdly, he exhorteth them to admit none of the Kings fauorers within their walles, and in ſo doing promiſeth them all ayde and fauour.
               The noble Citie of Langres, after curteous thanks geuen him for an anſwere the third of Auguſt, doth firſt proteſt of their zeale, goodwill and conſtancie in the Catholike faith.
               Secondly, doth proteſt of their great ſorrow conceaued for the death of their late King of bleſſed memorie, proffering themſelues, their liues, their goods, and whatſoeuer is deare vnto them for the iuſt and due reuengement of that moſt vilanous and execrable deede.
               Laſt of all, doth proteſt of their dutifull obedience to their King, promiſing all aſſiſtance, with all their meanes todefend him, and nobility ioyned with him, both in the defence of the Crowne and State, and alſo in purſuing the authors of that murther, vntill that a ſufficient reuengement be taken of them.
               The Citizens of the Noble Citie of Langres, perceauing by theſe letters of the Duke of Lorreine, that further matters might be attempted to procure a rebellion within their Citie, to preuent all that might happen the third day of Auguſt, and in their Popiſh calender. The twelfth, they aſſembled al the Magiſtrates, Officers, Citizens, and Inhabitants of their Citie in the Towne-houſe, after ripe conſideration of the euils procured by the Leaguers and rebels, and of their duties, of their lawfull obedience, did all with accord and minde promiſe and ſweare.
               Firſt, the keeping of the Catholike faith.
               Secondly, they do ſweare neuer to admit any confederacy, ſociety, faction

or conſpiracie, neither with the Lorreyne, nor any other forreine, nor within the Realme, without the expreſſe commandement of their King. 
               
               Thirdly, doo acknowledge Henry of Bourbon the 4. to bee their lawfull King and naturall heire, and ſucceſſour to the Crowne of France, and ſweare neuer to depart from his obedience, but to obey him, and to defend him and the fundamentall lawes of the right ſucceſſion of the Crowne, proffering all their liues, goods and meanes to preſerue his perſon, his ſtate, Crowne and kingdome, and not to admit any ſedition or conſpiracie againſt him.
               Laſt of all, doo ſweare to aſſiſt him with all their power and meanes to reuenge the vnworthie death of Henry de Valoys lately deceaſed. Many other Townes on the North ſide of Loyre, as in Gastinoys, Hurepoys, Auxerroys, Bourgundie, Baſſigny and Champaigne, being wauering, encouraged with the example of the noble Citie of Langres, did reſolue themſelues in reiecting the entiſing perſwaſions of Rebels, to remayne in the Kings obedience, and tooke the like oath voluntarily as the ſayd Citie of Langres had done.
               As the Rebels in the reſt of Townes and Cities, tooke occaſion by the proclayming of the King, to ſtirre the people to their ſocietie of vnion, that is, to rebellion, crying ſtill the Catholike, the Catholike religion, hereſie, hereſie, heretikes, heretikes: ſo in like manner the heads of the rebellion doo prepare all the forces that euer they can: for the Duke of Lorreyne gathered a great power of horſemen and footmen, which he ſent to the Duke de Mayne to Paris, conducted by his eldeſt ſonne the Marqueſſe du Pont. The Duke de Mayne alſo ſent to the Duke of Parma for ſuccour, ſuppoſing that with the great forces which he was able to make within Paris, the ſuccour which was expected from Lorreyne, and ſome companies of horſemen of Wallons and Germanes, he would eaſily make an end of the warre. The Duke of Parma therefore ſent luſtie companies of horſemen and Wallons, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Brounſwicke and Countie Egmond, who did arriue about the beginning of September.
               Now let vs leape ouer the Alpes to ſee Frier Sixtus, and pray to God that the pockes may neuer depart from him, nor from that holy ſea, ſeeing that his predeceſſor Iulius the great warriour, being either the firſt or one of the firſt in all Italy, which was infected with it (if Ihuigo doth not lye) and of a ſpeciall grace and Apoſtolicall fauour, left it to all the legions of Friers and Maſſemongers, for a token of their honeſt and chaſt life.
               The Rebels hauing committed that ſauage murther vpon the perſon of their Soueraigne King and Prince, whom God commaunded them to obey, ſerue and reuerence, and ſuch as in Catholiciſme did ſurpaſſe the beſt Catholike in the world: and to bee ſhort, with one blowe hauing executed the ſecret counſell of Rome, for the rooting out the raſe of Valoys, and put

out the Lamp of France, (as for the Bourbons they had made their account to haue deſtroyed them all ere now) they ſent in poſt to Rome to congratulate Frier Sixtus for their good ſucceſſe, and alſo to haue his Frierlike  counſell to bring their worke to perfection, according to the ſacred counſell of Rome, as is aforeſayd. In this meſſage (as it appeared in Frier Sixtus oration) they had certified him, how miraculouſly the Frier went out of Paris in great daunger to be ſearched out, and afterward miraculouſly paſſed through the Campe of the heretikes, and through the Kings gardes, not perceiued of any man, (but as if the diuell ſhould conuey him inuiſible in a clowde) vntill he came into the Kings preſence: ſo that no man had no power to examine him, nor to aſke him Domine quo vadis?
               
               The newes of this exploit ſo happily brought to paſſe, arriuing at Rome, filled the Citie with Gaudeamus, the Churches with Te Deum, and the court of Rome with Curtizans.
               Thereuppon, that Fryer Sixtus may fill the meaſure of iniquity, and that he may leaue a teſtimony to the world to be knowen whoſe Vicar hee is, he called together all his Chaplains into the Conſiſtory, and telleth them the happieſt newes that euer came to Rome, ſince the day that it was taken and ranſaked by Charles of Bourbon, to wit, that Henry the third K. of France, was ſlayne by the hands of a Frier: and that hee may giue ſome ground to his oration, flouriſhed with Monkiſh eloquence he taketh a text out of A bacuck. I haue wrought a worke in your dayes, and no man would beleeue it though it be told them.
               
               Vppon theſe wordes the lewde lying Frier taketh vppon him to make the articles of our Faith, as tou
                     ••
                  ing the incarnation and reſurrection of Chriſt, and the execrable parricide of this accurſed murdering Fryer to bee equally miraculous, and wrought by the will, counſell, finger and power of God, and by the inſpiration of the ſelfe ſame Spirit which guyded the Prophets and Apoſtles, and wrought in them the meaſure of all wiſedome, righteouſnes and holines, conducted this Fryer through all the difficulties of the way, and directed him and his hand in committing ſuch a damnable Par
                     •
                  icide. The Lord reproue the lying ſpirit of blaſphemie.
               Thus may we ſee the helliſh diuinity which Frier Sixtus (which ſitting in his Conſiſtory in his Pontificalibus cannot erre) ſpueth out by the inſpiration of Sathan.
               This impudent Frier, the other day being Sonne to a Swineheard, & lying in Ouens for lacke of better lodging, though he be neither Prophet (a ſpudevp-prophet let him be) nor the ſonne of a Prophet, yet telleth to his Chaplayns, that hee prophecied to the red-cap Prieſtes, called the Caroinals Joyeuſe, Leuencourt and Paris, how the King ſhould be the laſt of his name, and ſhould die an infortunate and violent death. By this prophecie

euery man may ſee how deeply this murthering Fryer Sixtus had his fingers in the conſpiracy of the Kings death. 
               
               Thirdly, becauſe the King would not yeeld himſelfe to be ſlayne by the Leaguers, according to the ſecret counſell of Rome. Alſo by reaſon that he ſuffered the execrable murtherer to bee ſlayne, and willed the King of Nauarre, and the Princes with him to make exemplary iuſtice vppon the authors and acceſſaries of his death. Frier Swineheard, (otherwiſe Sixtus) ſweareth by his cornerd cap, that as when it is vppon his head, there lyeth vnder it the foure quarters of a falſe Frier: ſo the King ſhall haue no Maſſe of Requiem of him, but ſhall ſouſe, burne and broile in purgatory vntill he be as cold as a Frogge.
               So Fryer Sixtus hauing taken ſo great paines for the holy Church, as he did that day, his belly began to call him to another worke. And all the red cap Prieſtes making their abaſhio vpon their knées, began to whiſtle with his mouth, and with his two forfingers and his thumb, hunting flies ouer their heads, bleſſed them, voto mileſorum nemo vestrum frugi eſto, get you to dinner, edite bibite, cras moriemini.
               
               Not long after, at the ſolicitation of the rebels, who had promiſed (in caſe Fryer Clement ſhould bée ſlaine in ſuch good ſeruice to the holy Church) to make him a Saint. Fryer Sixtus (for why ſhould not a Fryer doo for a Fryer, euen a greater thing then that) made him a holy martyr, who ſuffered for the Catholick faith, and Deum tutelarem of the Citie of Paris. Then his Image was ſet vp in euery Church, Maſſing, ſenſing, offring, kiſſing, kneeling, and ducking, is dayly done to the Idoll: there was neuer ſo much a doo about the Idoll of Molok, there was neuer ſo much crying about the Altar of Baal, as there is ora pro nobis about this new Saint: there was neuer ſo many flyes about Beelzebub, as there is Idolaters in Paris about this new Idoll.
               Now before we do enter into the narration of King Henry the fourth, we will repreſent an image of the miſerable confuſions which are in the realme, by a compariſon.
               
                  Henry the fourth, Emperour of the Romains by the mothers ſide, was of the royall bloud of France▪
                   a man of great wiſdome and integrity. The holy Empyre was ſet on a fier of ſedition, by the Biſhops, Prieſts and Monkes, by the procurement of the Popes which then liued: ſeditious rebellions, and commotions were rayſed vp by the Shauelings throughout all Germanie, about the beſtowing of Biſhoprikes and Benefices.
               Firſt, they ſtirred vp Saxonie: after Suobland they ſet vp an vſurper, to wit, Radolph, but to his great harme. Then they ſet vp his owne Sonne againſt him, to wit, Henry the fift.
               Laſt of all, the Biſhops, Prieſts and Monkes, by treaſon oppreſſed

him: this noble Emperour could neuer be ouercome by force, but had alwaies the victorie againſt the Shauelings and their partakers: his age was blinded with groſſe ignorance, and a vaine feare of the Popes vayne  craking excommunication.
               
                  Henry of Bourbon the fourth, all one in name, in number, in vertue, and force, and proſperous ſucceſſe is all one, with that noble Emperour, iſſued out (if we ſhould well conſider the hiſtories) of the ſame famely as the other was by the mothers ſide, his Kingdome is all ſet on a fire of rebellion: the Prieſtes and Fryers haue blowne and kindled it, religion is pretended, but in very déede, ambition is the procurer of all theſe euills. This age is not ſo blinde, if they would, but men are more malicious, they vſe now the old ruſty ſword of the Popes excommunication, as they did then, not that they doo paſſe for it, but to ſerue their owne turne, to bée the trumpet of all rebellion: he hath ſuſtayned the fury of the Prieſts and Fryers, and of their partakers for the ſpace of theſe 14. yeares, and had neuer any foyle, but hath had alwaies the victory on his ſide.
               The Emperour Henry the fourth, was oppreſſed by the treaſons of popelings: this I hope will beware of ſuch Chaplaines; Popery then did preuaile, but now the Goſpell ſhall floriſh, mauger all the religions of idolatrous Fryers, and all the route of Antichriſt.
               We haue left the King on the ſea coaſt of Normandie, there to view the preparations and attempts of the Leaguers: where vnderſtanding that the Leaguers did inſult, by the good ſucceſſe which they had, in executing their traiterous felony vpon the Kings perſon, and that they had prepared a mighty army of ſuch rablement of rebels, as Paris could afoord them, and had receaued certaine ſwart Rut
                     •
                  ers, vnder the conduct of the Duke of Brunſwick. He was aduertiſed alſo, that the Duke of Lorreyne had ſent his ſonne the Marquis d'Pont, with certaine companies of Horſemen: and that they had receaued certaine Wallons out of the Low Countrey, conducted by the County Egmond. The King I ſay, aduertiſed of theſe things, ſent from Deepe to the Quéene of England for ſome ſuccour, who (as her Maieſty neuer fayleth to helpe them who are vniuſtly diſtreſſed) ſent him forces, according to his requeſt. All the Kings forces at Deepe, were not about nine thouſand men, before the Engliſhmen arriued to him.
               The Duke d'Mayne hauing a mighty army of fiue and twenty thouſand men, ſet foorth out of Paris about the beginning of September, giuing foorth, that he went to a certaine victory, and vaunting that he would bri
                     •
                  g to Paris the King dead or a liue, or elſe he would driue him into the Sea, approached toward Deepe. But the God of battels, turned as eaſily with few as with multitude, all theſe bragges to vanitie and ſhame.
               For the King hearing that the enemy approached very faſt, encamped

himſelfe at Arques, about two myles from the towne of Deepe, by the prudent counſell of the Marſhall of Byron. The King viewing the place, iudged  by and by what the enemy was able to doo againſt him: whereupon hée cauſed trenches to bée made on the top of the hill, in moſt ſubſtanciall manner, as farre from Arques as a Canon can ſhoote, ſo that all the army for a néede, might bée couered therewith out of all danger.
               Vpon the ſame trenches, hée cauſed foure pieces of ordinance to bée placed, right againſt a great plaine, where hée ſuppoſed the enemy would come to fight, whether alſo he might come without any danger: the kings companies were quartered in the Villag
                     •
                  s round about.
               Whileſt theſe things are a dooing at Arques, the enemy approached more and more very faſt, and on the 15. of September, lodged his vauntgarde, within three miles of Deepe.
               
               The King that morning, perceaued that they intended to ſpoyle the ſubburb Paulet, before he enterpriſed vpon any thing at Arques. Therefore with ſpéed, he fortified the ſaid Suburb, but ſpecially the milles which ſteed moſt open to the enemy.
               This thing being done, the King determined as nere as could bee, and with ſmall company, to view how the enemy was lodged, and perceauing by occaſion of ſome that they were too forward, commaunded fiue or ſixe of his company to giue them the charge, in the which ſeauen of the enemy remained vpon the place: which thing being done, the king returned to lodge at Arques.
               
               The 16. before day, many iſſued out of Deepe, who made hot ſkirmiſhes vpon the enemy, where the Lord Chaſtilion commaunding ouer the footemen, ſhewed himſelfe a moſt ſkilfull warriour. The King had placed certaine horſemen betweene his footemen and the enemy, to repreſſe the Leaguers of the Souldiours, leaſt raſhly they might haue bred ſome confuſion. The ſkirmiſh was ſuch, that the Harquebuſiers did neuer diſcharge a bullet that day in vaine.
               That day the King permitted certayne Engliſh gentlemen to ſkirmiſh with the enemie, who imployed themſelues ſo valiantly, and with ſuch a noble courage, that in leſſe then the turning of one hand they ouerthrew, ſlew, or tooke priſoners all that encountred them.
               The ſame day, about 25. of the enemies had paſſed the brooke, which did runne betweene the Kings armie and the enemie, and were already in the medow to haue aſſaulted a Village named Boteille, where the Kings Cornet was lodged: great troups of horſemen came downe the hill, to paſſe in like maner the brooke to haue aſſiſted them: but there came out of the Village ſixe gentlemen well armed to meete the enemy, among whom were the Lords Saint Marke and Slurbe, with two Harquebuziers on foot, charged the enemy ſo hard, that they were faine to retire with ſwift flight,

feare and ſorrowfull countenance.
               All this day there continued hot ſkirmiſhes at the milles, which are at the end of the Suburbe named Paulet, and whereas the King aduaunced  ſtill to view the enemies doings, an Harquebuze ſhot ſtrooke his horſe in the thigh.
               The ſame day the King ſent the company of the Prince County, conducted by the Lorde Armilie his Lieftenant to the Marſhall Biron, who was at Arques, which immediatly commaunded them to goe and ſpie the lodgings of the enemy, who did lye in a Village called Martinglize, where were the Dukes Aumale, Nemours, and the Lord Sagonne: this company of light horſes comming to the place, and forgetting to bring word to the ſayd Lord Biron of that which they had ſeene, ran ſo fiercely vppon the enemy, that they killed aboue an hundred and fifty, and among them the Marques of Meneiay, they tooke many Captains and other priſoners, and ouerthrew their rampiers and Barricadoes being ſtill on horſebacke. The reſt being foure regiments of footmen fled with great terrour, Aumale, Nemours and Sagonne, ſhewing to theſe companies the way to flee, and ſtriuing among themſelues who ſhould flee ye ſwifteſt. The Lord Armilie was dangerouſly wounded through the body with a ſword. The King from Diepe vnderſtanding the ſkirmiſh, made haſt thither with three hundered horſes: but the enemy was already chaſed before he came.
               The 17. of September the King cauſed a Canon to bee diſcharged againſt the enemie on the ſide of Arques, whileſt the Lord Chaſtilion did valiantly ſkirmiſh with the enemie at the ende of the Suburbe Paulet, where he ſlewe many of the enemies, and tooke many priſoners, without the loſſe of any one man, ſaue onely fewe of his were wounded.
               Another company of the Kings Campe at the ſame time went to view another Village on another ſide, where they ſurpriſed the enemies, ſlewe thirtie of them, and put the reſt to flight.
               During theſe ſkirmiſhes, a great number of Gentlemen and Souldiers came to the King, and of their owne voluntary motion and goodwill, yéelded themſelues and their ſeruice. They were part of the troupes of the Lord Rabempré, who a little before was taken by the enemie at Gournay, a Towne ſituated in Beauuoyſin, betwéene the Cities of Beauuoys & Roen, who had followed the enemies for their ſafegard.
               The enemie truſting in his great multitude, determined to paſſe ouer the little riuer which ran betwéene them and the King: and hauing made certaine bridges of wood to bee caſt ouer, the 19. day of September about fiue of the clock in the morning, the enemie marched from Martinglize in battell aray, well ordered, ſtrong and thicke. Their footmen well placed at their wings, their faces ſet toward Arques, & the quarter of the Swiſſers
               
                  
The Lord Billing with two thouſand ſhot was appoynted to giue the onſet. The Duke de Mayne ſtood behind with great ſtrength in battell aray,  readie to giue ſuccour where néede ſhould be.
               The King had watched all night before on horſebacke, to giue order in euery place, which hee did ſo diligently and circumſpectly, that the enemie could doo him no hurt, without great diſaduantage and loſſe to themſelues.
               But in the morning hauing ſeene the order of their battell aray, incontinently he ſent foorth his light horſemen, and the company of the Prince County, lead by the Lord Montater: he ſent alſo his Cornet, wherein were the Lords graund Prior, the great Squier, the Countie Rochefocault, and the Countie of Roſſie his brother, with the Countie of Rochefort, with diuers Gentlemen who were néereſt to his perſon: all them he ſet about his footmen, deuiding the Swiſſers into two parts. The enemies were 25. thouſand, and he had not aboue nine thouſand and that to the vttermoſt.
               With this ſmall number the King (knowing that God would conſider iuſtice of the cauſe, and was able to vanquiſh as well with fewe as with a great number) hauing earneſtly deſired Gods ayde in his priuate prayers, commaunded publike prayers: which being ended, marched againſt his enemies with ſuch reſolued and princelike courage, that at the firſt encounter, as it were with one blowe, the enemie left vpon the place fiue hundred men, beſide a number of priſoners and wounded ſouldiers: but the reſt fled with great feare and diſorder.
               In the ſame méeting the enemie loſt, as is aboue ſayd, at the firſt encounter fiue hundred men, among whom were the chiefeſt Sague, Colonell of the light horſemen: the Lord S. 
                     Ʋidal chiefe Marſhall of the Ordinance, the Lord S. Andrew, brother to the Countie of Saulx, the Lord Vienuille, eldeſt ſonne to the Marſhall Vienel, who were caried to Roen and there buried, with many more of great account.
               The Countie Billing Marſhall of the Camp, Temblecourt, the Countie of Lorreyne, who had the firſt regiment, and the Lord Sauelak, with diuers other Captaines were taken priſoners.
               Of the Kings ſide dyed but 26. among whom were the Countie Roſſie, brother to the Lord Rochefocault, and alſo the Lord Bakqueuile, whoſe vertues were commendable among all men, for whom the King was greatly grieued.
               There was among the enemies, one Lorde Sagonne, a proud man, greatly boaſting of his valiantnes, who with feeling, eſcaped from the ſlaughter at Seulis, the Lord Graund Prior prouoked him to fight, who ioyning together, the ſaide Lorde Graund Prior gaue him ſuch a blowe, that in retyring and lighting downe of his horſe, hee fell downe and brake his neck.
               
                  
Thus the enemy hauing retyred with ſhame and loſſe, the King commaunded all his forces to refreſh themſelues, which thing being done,  fifteene hundred Launce-knights, preſented themſelues to a little trench, which was kept by ſome of the Kings Launce-knights, and lifting vp their hands, proteſted and deſired to yéeld vnto the King, ſo that the Kings ſeruants as well as they would put vp their weapons. This cauſed great ioy in the army, and euery man putting vp their weapons, the Kings men ſcattered themſelues among them: without any ſuſpition of treaſon, ſhaking hands like good fellowes, two of the Captaines went to meete the King, and being examined ſuddainely, faultring in their ſpeach, as knowing not what they ſaid, as men troubled in minde, named themſelues ſeruants to the Duke d' Mayne: in the meane while, they fed the Kings Souldiours with fayre words, to delay the time, till their troupes of horſemen ſhoulde drawe neere, to aſſiſt them, deſiring very much to ſee the King.
               The King hauing no liking of them, commaunded his forces to march downe the medowes from them, and whileſt theſe villanous diſſembling traitors paſſed toward the Suiſſers, as though in deed they would yeelde themſelues to the King, ſeeing no more the kings horſemen before them, and their horſemen approaching ſtill, then they ſeazed vpon the Countie Rochefort, and began to ſet vpon the Kings troupes with all their might, whileſt fiftéene hundered horſemen came marching a long the medowes to aſſiſt them.
               The enemies by theſe meanes, being three thouſand, and the Kinges forces there, beeing not aboue three hundered Horſemen, put this ſmall companie in great feare, and began to retyre toward the Swiſſers.
               The Swiſſers neuer ſhronk for all that multitude, but ſtoode ſtill firmely, ſhewing ſuch a manly countenance, that the enemy ſuſpected the retyre of the Kings horſemen, to haue been a policy to draw them into the danger of the Swiſſers.
               At the ſame inſtant that the treaſon was diſcouered, the Lord Chaſtilion brought out of Deepe fiue hundred Caliuers. Thus all theſe troupes were deuided into two parts: the Harquebuſiers of the Kings ſide were ſo fitly placed, that the enemy durſt not venture to ſet vppon them. The Canons in the meane time played vppon them, and killed manie.
               The King in this extremity, and ſuddaine diſcouering of this vnlooked treaſon, hauing ordered all things, ſet vpon the enemies, and ſhewed himſelfe both King, Captaine and Souldier, and by his princely courage, did encourage all men to play their partes valiantly. The King receaued a ſhot in his boete, and his horſe being hurt, accompanied with the

Marſhall Byron, fought on foote, vntill hée was reuenged of his enemies. 
               
               The enemie retired with ſhame and loſſe, leauing their dead on the place, and hid himſelfe at Martinglize. The King remayned on the field, and commaunded certaine pieces of Ordinance to bée diſcharged againſt Martinglize: which thing being done, he gaue thanks to God, with earneſt praiers for his gracious goodnes, ſuccour and preſence, in defending them and his iuſt cauſe. This being done, hée greatly commended the good and faithfull ſeruice of the Swiſſers, in preſence of their Captaines, and dronke to them for their valiant exploytes done that day.
               The 23. of September, the Lord Staphord, Ambaſſadour for the moſt Noble Quéene of England, arriued at Diepe, bringing both money and munition, but hée ſawe not the King, vntill the next day following. About midnight following, the ſame day the King perceaued that the enemy had changed his opinion, and that hée would rayſe vp his armie.
               The 24. of September very early in the morning the enemy raiſed vp his Camp, without any ſound of Drumme or Trompet in the ſight of the King and of his army. This their remoouing was done with ſuch great feare, and ſo cowardly, that they left their wounded in the Villages behind them, and without giuing warning to their Sentinels to retire and ſaue themſelues: they left their victuall and munition of warre in the way as they went. They tooke their iourney as though they went to the towne of Hewe, and at length they turned to Saint Vax, Quinqueuile, and Bures, and camped themſelues on the other ſide of Diepe, entrenching themſelues in the néereſt Villages, Ianuile, Boutiles and Apeuile.
               
               The King who was on the other ſide of the hill in battel aray, ſéeing their departing to be like a fearefull flight, while hee receaued the Lord Ambaſſador of England, ſent certaine companies to puriue them, who alſo tooke many priſoners ofthem.
               Theſe Priſoners beeing demaunded the cauſe of the ſudden retire, anſwered diuerſly: for ſome ſaid, it was by reaſon of the comming of the Engliſh ſhips, which lately arriued, wherein they doubted great aid to bee ſent to the King. But ſome gaue another anſwere, to wit, that vpon the death of thoſe Noble men who had béen ſlaine, great ſtrife had growen among them, for placing other in their roome: ſome allowing one, & ſome chooſing another: ſo that it ſeemeth that theſe two cauſes troubled the enemy.
               The King ſeeing the enemy encamped in another ſide, cauſed his battaile to bee pitched in the plaine of Arques, and afterward in the euening brought his army into Diepe, and the Suburbs of the ſame, and all night

cauſed great and large Trenches to bee made in a place called the hill of Cats: and by the Morning the Trenches beeing ſtrong, he placed part of  his footmen vnder the gouernment of the Lord Chaſtilion, with thirtéene Enſignes of Swiſſers: vppon the Fort of the ſide of Januile hee pitched two double Canons, which did greatly endomage the enemy, becauſe they were all on an heape, and their horſemen could not retire into their quarter without the danger of the Canon: ſo that it neuer ſhot in vaine.
               The King ſent the Regiment of the Lord Garde, into the Caſtle of Arques.
               
               The firſt day of October, the enemy planted ſixe pieces of Ordinance vpon the top of the hill by Ianuile, and ſhot fiue or ſixe voleies of ſhot into  the Towne, wherewith was ſlaine one of the Kings Cookes, a Woman, a Maiden and a Boy, and great hurt done to two Shippes which lay at Anker in the Hauen.
               The Lord Staphord Ambaſſador of England, had preſented a Canonier to the King, who beeing very ſkilfull, with a ſhot killed the maſter Gunner, and diſmounted two pieces of the enemies Ordinance, which cauſed them to remooue their Canon: during this time the Kings troups dayly did ſet vppon them, and drew them from their Trenches with blowes and deadly woundes, who beeing weary of that continuall play, the fourth day of October they brake their Rampiers and Gabions, & vpon intelligences of the comming of the Prince of Soiſſon, the Duke of Longueuile, & Marſhall Aumont retyred with ſhame and loſſe of men, and in the Kings ſight raiſed their camp, and diſlodged on a ſudden, taking their iourney toward Picardie, and in the way ſhewed all crueltyes that could bee.
               The King ſeeing the ſudden and vnexpected departure of the Enemy, ſuppoſed that he went to fight againſt the power which was broughtto him by the ſaid Prince of Soiſſons, Duke of Longueuile, and Marſhall Aumont, afore they ſhould ioyne with him: which thing he miſtruſted the more, becauſe the enemies ſhifted into three ſeuerall places, and neuer frarre from him. But the King knowing that theſe helpes were come within ſeuen or eight leagues, tooke betweene three or foure hundred horſemen to goe to meet with them about the ſixt day of October, leauing the Marſhall Biron in Diepe, with all the reſt of the armie. The ſame day he tooke the towne and Caſtle Samache in the ſight of the enemy.
               The 8. day, hée tooke the towne of Hew, giuing great occaſions to the Duke d'Mayne to fight.
               Whileſt theſe things were paſſing at Diepe, and ſometime before there was a méeting of the deputies of the Dukes d'Mayne and Parma, in the town of Aras, where the Duke d'Mayne bound himſelfe to the Spanyards, to deliuer all the townes of Picardie into their han
                     •
                  s, ſo that they would come to ayde him: but the Spanyards would not ſtyrre

out of their places, before hée had performed what hée was bound to doo. 
               
               The Duke d'Mayne therefore, to colour his cowardlines, ſhamefull flight and diſgrace receaued at Diepe, and for that hée durſt neuer hazard the battell: he bruted abroad, that he went into Picardie, to take poſſeſſion of the townes of that Prouince, to pledge them to the Spanyards: and ſo hauing paſſed the riuer of Some, he tooke away with him, all hope from the King to come to any battaile.
               The King knowing well the nature of the French men, who though ſometyme in their heat and naturall haſtines they doo fall to ſedition, yet are vnpacient of a ſtrange gouernment, aſſured himſelfe that they would neuer admit the gouernment of that nation, whom they of all moſt hated, neither would they yeeld vnto the Flemmings whom they hated alſo, for the naturall iniuries which they do proffer one to another in time of warre, as it falleth out commonly among Borderers. Therefore he ſtayed yet a while in Diepe, as well for the affaires of Normandie, where hee left the Prince Montpencier for Gouernour, as for to receaue foure thouſand Engliſhmen ſent vnto him by the renowmed Queene of England.
               
               And the 21. of October hee departed from Deepe, and with ſmall iourneyes coaſted the enemie betwéene the two Riuers of Seyne and Some, vntill hee came to Meulan, a Towne ſituated a little aboue Pontoys diſtant from Paris ten leagues, and there vpon that bridge paſſing on the South ſide of Seyne, with all ſpeede went to Paris for two cauſes. Firſt, for to drawe him to fight: for although hee would not venture a battell for the winning of Deepe, (notwithſtanding he had ſo promiſed to his partakers) yet the King was in good hope that he would fight for Paris. The other cauſe was to withdrawe him from Picardy, where he had taken the towne of Fere, and ſome other ſmall Townes, the moſt part of the Nobilitie and Gentlemen of the countrey being with the King.
               About the 28. of October, the King lodged his armie a mile from Paris in the villages about. The morrowe after, the king in his owne perſon went all about to view the Trenches along the Suburbes.
               The laſt day of October, the king hauing prepared all things by the aduiſe of the Princes, Marſhals and expert Captaines, determined to aſſault the ſayd Suburbs the next morning by breake of the day in three ſundrie places, and to that purpoſe deuided his forces into three ſeuerall companies.
               In the one were the foure thouſand Engliſhmen, vnder the gouernement of the Lord Willoughby their Generall, with two regiments of Frenchmen, and one regiment of Swiſſers, with the Marſhall Byron, and the Baron Byron his ſonne, the Lord Guittry, & diuers other Noblemen, who had commandement to aſſault the Suburbs S. Victor & S. Marcel.
               
               
                  
The ſecond troupe was of foure Regiments of Frenchmen, two Regiments of Swiſſers, and four companies of aduenturers with the Marſhall  of Aumont, accompanied with the Lord great Eſquire, and the Lord Rieulx Marſhall of the field, with a great number of Nobles and Gentlemen, who had charge to aſſault the Suburbs of Saint Iames, and Saint Michael.
               
               The third companie with ten Regiments of French men, and one Regiment of Launceknights conducted by the Lordes de la Nouë and Chaſtilion, ſhould aſſault the Subutbs Saint German, Bucy and Nille.
               
               Euery troupe had a good number of Gentlemen well armed to aſſiſt the footmen, if any great reſiſtance ſhould be made. The King alſo commaunded two Canons and two Culuerins to be planted in the rereward of euery troupe.
               He ſeperated alſo all his horſemen in three companies, he himſelfe commaunded ouer the firſt, the Prince of Soiſſons ouer the ſecond, & the Duke of Longueuile ouer the third, each of them appointed to ſtrengthē the companies which were ſet to aſſault the Suburbs, thus deuided as is aforeſaid.
               The firſt day of Nouember by breake of the day, beeing a very thicke myſt, in this order the Suburbs were aſſaulted, and ſo ſhaken by the Kings power, that in leſſe then an houre they were all taken with the loſſe of fifteene hundred men of the enemie. There were alſo fourteene Enſignes taken, and thirteene pieces of Ordinance. The chaſe was followed with ſuch a furie, that the Kings men mingled among the enemies followed euen within the gates of the Citie, and if the Kinges Ordinance had come, as it was appointed, the Gates had béen beaten downe before they could any way haue fortifyed them.
               So the King came into the Suburbs of Saint Iames, about ſeauen or eight a Clocke in the Morning, the people crying in the Stréetes with a lowd voice, Viue le Roy, with more ſhew of ioy then of any feare at al.
               About a hundred and fiftie Harquebuziers of the enemies tooke for their defence ye Abbey of Saint Germayn, making a ſhew as though they would hold it perforce, which thing they might well haue done, by reaſon of the ſtrength thereof: but about midnight beeing charged to render the place, they gaue it ouer. Then was the King maſter of all the Suburbs, which do lye on the ſide of the Vniuerſitie, which are as big as the Citty of London within the walles.
               The King being maſter of the Suburbs, in the ſpace of two hours (ſaue the Abbey as is aboue ſaid) tooke ſuch good order that none ſtarted from his company for any pillage, vntill the Quarters were appointed vnto the Souldiers where they ſhould haue their pray. That day was employed about entrenching before the Gates of the Citye, and watch and ward

ſet in conuenient places.
               About midnight following the ſaid 1. of October, the King was aduertiſed  that the Duke de Mayne came into the Citie of Paris with his Forces, whereof the King was exceeding glad for two cauſes: firſt becauſe the enemy was new retyred from Picardy. Secondly, becauſe that hee was in good hope that he would bee drawen to a battayle for the defence of that Citie, by which meanes he ſhould not be enforced to execute his iuſtice agaynſt the walles of the Citie, and his owne ſubiects, who were greatly ſeduced by the bad perſwaſions of the enemy.
               The ſecond day of October the King ſtayed all the day to ſee what the enemy durſt attempt, and whether hee would venture to come forth to fight, but ſeeing they ſhewed no feeling of their loſſes receaued the day before.
               The third day, the King determined to yéeld them the Suburbs, to ſee whether that would prouoke and encourage them to attempt any thing. Therefore leauing the Suburbs ſet himſelfe in battayle aray, ſtaying in the field from eight vntill a eleuen a clocke, and ſeeing that no man appeared, he marched thence quite for two cauſes.
               Firſt, for very compaſſion which hee had of an infinit number of people ſeduced from their dutie and obedience, ſuppoſing that time and this perill which came to theyr doores, would make them wiſer, and call their dutyes to remembrance. But if not, that it was the iuſt and heauy iudgement of God, who hardneth theyr harts as hee did the Egyptians in olde time, that he might reuenge the idolatryes, whoredoms, contempt and hatred of his Goſpell, and the bloud of his Saynts, which they had powred in their Stréets lyke water, and that ſuch a great City (when theyr iniquity and rebellion had come to a full meaſure) might be aſſaulted at any other tyme.
               Secondly, he thought good to reduce into his obedience the Countreys which did lye betweene the riuers Loyre and Seyne, which their enemies had ſeduced for two cauſes, that hee might haue a ſure way for munition and victuals out of thoſe countreys which are very fruitfull.
               Secondly, to procure a ſafety vnto the countryes, which are vnder his obedience, but ſpecially to the Citie of Tours, which by his predeceſſor was made the ſeat of the Realme, and was in a manner all compaſſed (but ſpecially on the North ſide) with townes, caſtles and holds, rebelled and furniſhed with garriſons of rebels.
               The Duke de Mayne playing the night Crowe, fearing the day light, arriued in the night at Paris, neither proffered any iſſue nor ſkirmiſh vnto the King, nor ſhewed any token of his being there, no more then if they had béen fallen on a ſudden into a lethargie.
               The King being retyred from Paris, the ſayd Duke fell to a ſaffer and

more profitable kinde of warre: for his money being ſpent in erecting ſo many Trophées in Normandy with that mightie Army, as he did after he had receaued ſo many ſtripes and baſtonadoes, as he ſayd, that he will no  more of that play: he determined to ſearch the Coffers of his friends the Pariſiens, whom he loued well, yet their money better.
               And as it is ſayd commonly, that the man who deſireth to kill his dog, maketh himſelfe beléeue that hee is mad: ſo this valiant Duke, to picke a quarrell, doth eaſily make himſelfe and the Pariſiens beléeue that they had procured the King to come to Paris, and that which the King had done by valour, was done by winking of them, and was enterpriſed vpon intelligences which they had with him, and that if hee had not come with ſpéede they would haue deliuered the citie to the King. No man could deny this, for there was within the citie witneſſes, who were returned from Picardy, to the number of twentie thouſand, who had the Fortreſſes of the Citie in their hands; all theſe would beare witneſſe agaynſt them. And who will not beléeue ſuch a multitude of witneſſes: But yet if it had not béen ſo, their goods were ſufficient witneſſes of the crimes aboue ſaid: ſo that whoſoeuer was rich or ſo accounted, was ſufficiently conuicted to haue practiſed againſt the aſſociation and holy vnion. Whoſoeuer had goods was quickly conuicted to be an heretick and betrayer of the Catholike religion. Therefore hot ſkirmiſhes were within the Citie, deadly warre is proclaymed againſt the Coffers, Cloſets and Counting houſes of rich men. Rich Marchants are ſent for, pulled out of their houſes with their wiues and children, their goods taken to ye holy vſe of the holy League, they are made faſt to a payre of gallowes and there hanged: for the very zeale and deuotion which the Leaguers haue to their Catholike faith, and holy mother the Church, they did throw into the water the wiues and children of many rich citizens, leaſt they ſhould clayme any part of their goods. All parts of the Citie were full fo horrible executions, weeping, mourning and heauie lamentation.
               The King did neuer ſhewe the hundred part of that extremitie vnto his enemies, as the heads of the League did vnto their friends, whom they ſhould haue defended from being executed by others. So that the heads of the traytors hauing obtayned a profitable and gaynfull victorie agaynſt the Counting houſes and Coffers of their friends: and hauing that which they moſt deſired, doo reſt themſelues, take their caſe after ſo many ſkirmiſhes fought in Normandy, but ſpecially in Paris: for now they haue money to ſpend.
               The King being at the Village Liuars vnder Mount berry, remayned there a whole day to try whether the enemies (hauing reſted and refreſhed themſelues thrée dayes in Paris) would haue gathered ſtomacke and purſued him. But vnderſtanding of their kinde of warre and victories which

they had agaynſt the Coffers of the citizens of Paris, hee determined to leaue thoſe wicked rebels to deſtroy one another, and to take the Towne  of Eſtampes vpon this occaſion.
               The Lord Clermont of Lodeſhe in Languedocke, had thruſt himſelfe into the ſayd Towne with fiftie or threeſcore Gentlemen, through the aſſurance which the Duke de Mayne had giuen them, and confirmed the ſame by many of his letters, which were intercepted, that he would come to reléeue them with his armie. The King by theſe letters knowing that the Duke de Mayne ſtood bound vpon his faith & honour to reſcue Estampes, with all his armie the fift of Nouember hauing ſent part of his forces to compaſſe the ſayd towne, which was done the ſame day early, he followed and arriued at Eſtampes with the reſt of his armie when it was dark night, and at his comming he wonne the Suburbs, which the enemies had made ſhewe to haue defended. The ſame night alſo the Towne was taken, the Souldiers retyring into the Caſtle.
               The ſixt day of Nouember the Caſtle was enuironed, approaches made, and two Culuerines placed in batterie. The ſtout Souldiers with the Lord Clermont, who did looke ſo bigg firſt, ſeeing that the army which ſhould reſcue them did not appeare, and that they had no newes of it, demanded parley, and yeelded themſelues the ſame day, with condition that eight of them ſhould remayne priſoners, vntill ſuch time as they ſhould giue eight others (who were named to them) to be deliuered.
               After that agréement, the King did ſhew that fauour to the Lord Clermont, and vnto fiue others, that ſhould haue remayned priſoners, to ſend them away vpon their oathes: ſo there departed out of the Caſtell, about forty Gentlemen, and two hundred Souldiours, who were ſafely conducted halfe the way to Paris.
               
               The King conſidering that poore Towne of Estampes, to haue béene taken thrée times in foure moneths, and thought it had been neceſſary for him, to haue kept a good Gariſon in it: yet notwithſtanding, being of his owne nature, as eaſie to be ouercome with 
                     •
                  lemency, as he is inuinſible to his enemies, by force was centent to take no other aſſurance of the towne, then the oath of the inhabitants, wherein he repoſed his truſt. And that the Caſtell ſhould not bée a meane of their rigorus vſage, hereafter hée determined to raſe it, and to commit the keeping of the Towne to the towneſmen, onely perſwading himſelfe, that they comparing the vſage which they haue at his hands, and of his enemies together, it will be the ſureſt Gariſon to keepe them in obedience.
               About the eight of Nouember, the King remayning yet there, arriued a Gentleman from the Quéene Dowager to the King, bringing a requeſt, which ſhe preſented vnto the King, veſéeching him to doo her iuſtice, for the det
                     •
                  ſtable murther committed vpon the perſon of the late

King her Huſband: the King deferred the anſwer vntill ſuch time, as hée ſat in counſell. 
               
               The ninth day of Nouember, the Gentleman was called before the King and his counſel, who after he had deliuered his meſſage, the requeſt was read aloud in the preſence of all the Princes, Marſhals of France, and other Lords and Gentlemen, who were then in great number about the King: by the which requeſt, beſides the deſiring of the King, ſhee did adiure, not onely the Princes and Nobility of France, but alſo all Chriſtian Princes, to be aſſiſters in this cauſe.
               The King making anſwer, himſelfe declared, that he highly commended her vehemency in following this ſute, and ſent the ſaid ſupplication vnto his court of Parliament, tranſported to Tours, commaunding his generall atturney, with the atturney of the ſaid Lady; to make information againſt the offenders, to the end the matter might bée determined afterward in his preſence, in manner and forme conuenient. And for his owne part, he would not ceaſe to proſecute the matter, but vowed in preſence of all the company, to employ his trauailes and armes, vntill ſuch time as he had doue the iuſtice that God had appoynted him to doo. So that as the pittifull tearmes of the requeſt of the ſaid Lady, had filled the eyes of all with teares, ſo the princelike anſwer of the King, had quickly dried them vp, and repleniſhed their hearts with iuſt indignation, and burn
                     •
                  ng deſire of reuenge. At that time, all with a loud voyce, renued the oath of not laying downe armes, vntill ſuch time as they had reuenged the hatefull death of the late King their maſter.
               The King ſéeing that there was no hope to bring the enemy to a battaile, but by extreame neceſſitie, ſent back the Duke of Longeuile, and the Lord la Nouë, with ſuch forces as they had brought out of Picardie, to refreſh themſelues in that Prouince: he did the like alſo, by the Lorde of Gyury, who met him with a good troupe at his departure from Paris, and ſent him againe into the Country of Brie.
               
               The King with the reſt of his army, determined to make a voyage to the riuer of Loyre, in the meane time, whileſt his ſtrange forces that were comming, would be further in their way.
               Therefore the tenth of Nouember hee departed from Estampes, and marched through the Countrey of Beauſſe, and being aduertiſed that the towne of Ianuile, ſtopped all the paſſages, he deſired to winne it in paſſing by the way.
               The 11. of Nouember, the King arriuing, the Captaine that was within it, made a ſhew as though he would defend it: but when hée ſawe the Canon approach, he yéelded it vp, and departing with two hundered Harquebuſiers, the King entred therein, and there ſtayed the day after. They of the Towne receaued no diſpleaſure, nor diſcommodity, no more

then if they neuer had reiected his obedience.
               The King leauing a good Gariſon in the Caſtell, which is a good  ſtrong place, departed thence the thirteenth of Nouember, to the Towne of Chasteaudunne, where as ſoone as he was arriued, he ſent to ſommon the Towne of Vendoſme, which was his auncient patrimony, and the anciēt title of his predeceſſors, and becauſe that thereby they were his double ſubiects, they were the more culpable in taking his enemies part: yet the King hauing more care to kéepe them from further offending, then to puniſh them for their double treaſons, he ſtayed thrée dayes at Chausteaudunne, to giue them time to aduiſe themſelues.
               Whileſt the King lodged at Chasteaudune, the Captaines of the Suiſſers arriued, who were ſent immediatly after the death of the late King, by their C
                     •
                  lonels of the foure Regiments, to knowe the pleaſure of their ſuperiours, whether they ſhould continue in ſeruice, or aſke leaue to returne home.
               The ſaide meſſengers reported vnto the King, that they had expreſſe charge from their Seignories, to giue his Maieſty to vnderſtand, that they not onely doo commaund the Colonels and Captaines of the ſaid regiments, to continue in dooing his Maieſty good and faithfull ſeruice: but alſo that they did offer him all ſuch other ſuccour, as they ſhall be able to make, and as he ſhall néed, holding from that houre the ſame ali
                     •
                  unce and good friendſhip, confirmed with his Maieſty, as they haue had with his predeceſſors.
               The Lord Malbenehard, ſome dayes before, vnderſtanding of the kings comming into Beauſſe, had called vnto him certaine Gentlemen beeing his friends, and with them had foure hundred Souldiours in Gariſon there beſide the inhabitants, which came to eyght hundred able men, and knowing that there hee ſhould bée beſieged, whileſt the King was yet at Chausteaudune, deſired to parly with the Lord Richlieu, great prouoſt of France, with whome hee was familiarly acquainted: and when the ſaide Prouoſt came to him, he deſired of him, that without yéelding of the place the army might retyre.
               The 16. of Nouember, the King departed from Chausteaudune, hauing ſent part of his army before, who the ſame day inuironed the Towne of Vendoſme.
               
               The ſame day, the King arriuing at M
                        •
                     lay, before he lighted, went to view the towne and caſtell, which are both of a good reaſonable ſtrength. The Towne is compaſſed with a great ditch, well watered, and a ſtrong wall well flanked, and in many places rampered within: the Caſtell is much ſtronger, being ſituated vpon an hill, inuironed with a déepe ditch toward the field, and it is of a great height ouer the towne, it is defended with a ſtrong wall, with many Towers. The ſame day, the King cauſed

the Suburbs to bee won, and parted the Lordes, Marſhalls of Byron and Aumont, the one of the one ſide of the riuer Loyre, the other on the other ſide, and hauing well conſidered of the forme of the ſiege, hee determined  firſt to deale with the Caſtell, which being wonne, the Towne could not hold long, which thing would haue happened, if hee had begon with the Towne.
               The Towne of 
                     Ʋendoſme being beſieged, the Lord Malbeuehard ſent againe for the Lorde Richlieu, who had no wiſer anſwer then the firſt: wherein appeared, that God would make him féele the recompence of his deſerts, not permitting him to helpe himſelfe with reſolution, but GOD left him in the dampe of his rebellious cōſcience, as a man troubled with giddines of the head, not knowing what he did.
               The ſeauentéene and eighteene dayes, the King beſtowed in viewing where he ſhould place his battery, putting all things in readines, and being preſent at the workes all day long, and part of the night. And the night following, the eighteenth day, hee paſſed in a manner, in conducting and placing the ordinance to the battery.
               The 19. of Nouember at the dawning of the day, hee began to beat two towers of the Caſtell, and to take away the defences of the breach which he purpoſed to make, and after the beſtowing of ſixe ſcore Canon ſhot, hauing made a hole in one of the ſaid towers, where onely 2. men could paſſe in front, certaine Souldiers were commaunded to ſée if they could lodge in the ſaid tower: they gate vp, and in a furie entred the retrenchment, and being followed by ſome, conducted by the Baron of Biron and others, and others by the Lord Chaſtilion: they made thoſe within ſo diſmaied, that after they had offered to fight, they fled, and abandoning the Caſtell, ran into the towne, where they were followed ſo néerly, that part of the Kinges ſouldiers entered confuſedly with them, and made themſelues within leſſe then halfe an houre maſters both of the towne and caſtell.
               The ſaid Malbeuehard and his ſouldiers being retyred into an houſe, did yeeld incontinently vnto the Baron of Biron, none otherwiſe, then at the Kings mercie.
               In this aſſault there was none of the Kings ſide ſlaine, and very few of the towne. All the inhabitants were pardoned, ſaue the Lord Benehard and a ſeditious Franciſcan Frier (whom the Inhabitants accuſed to haue béene the Author of the miſchiefs happened among them) they two were executed, he gaue the towne to the pillage, cauſing the Churches carefully to be kept.
               The 20. day he commaunded all his army to depart out of the Towne, permitting no man any longer to bee pillaged or raunſomed. Hee reſtored the eccleſiaſticall perſons vnto their ſeuerall charges, much more peaceably then they were, when the towne was in the occupying of the League.
               
                  
The King beeing at 
                     Ʋendoſme, finding himſelfe ſo neere Tours, purpoſed to make a iourney thether, to determine with the Lords of his Parliament  there of certaine ſpeciall buſineſſe, leauing in the meane time the army to be conducted by the Marſhall Biron.
               
               The 21. of Nouember hee departed from Melay by Vendoſme, and arriued at Tours the ſame day two houres within night, where he was attended with ſo great ioy and gladnes of all the people of the Citie, that ſuch ſtore of lights there was prepared in the Stréets at his arriuall, that it was as light as the noone day.
               That night the Prince, Cardinall of Vendoſme, came to the King to doo him reuerence, who receaued entertainment and countenance agreeable vnto his neerenes of bloud with the King.
               The 22. of Nouember all the chambers of the Parliament came perſonally to ſalute and acknowledge the King the firſt preſident, making the relation with ſuch ſubſtance and eloquence as cauſed a great contentation to the King.
               After them came the Maior and Iurats of the Citie, who were moſt eurteouſly accepted by the King.
               Laſt of all came the eccleſiaſticall perſons of the Towne, all with great ſhew of ioy and hope of an happie and quiet gouernment: therin they were confirmed by the anſwers which they receaued of the King in moſt excellent tearmes and Princelike eloquence.
               The ſame day the Ambaſſador alſo of the ſtate of Venice had audience, where firſt he preſented the letters of the ſeignory vnto the King, and afterward declared the ioy they had of his happy ſucceſſion vnto the Crown, beſeeching him to accept the offer of the friendſhip of the ſaid feignory vnto his Maieſtie, and to promiſe and aſſure them of his, and to maintaine the good entercourſe betweene his crowne and the ſaid ſignorie: whereunto the King anſwered to their contentation.
               The King was determined to haue ſtayed at Tours but one day, but the people were ſo deſyrous to ſee him, that hee was faine to ſtay there foure dayes.
               During which time of his aboade there, the terror of his armes, the loue of his clemencie, which he ſhewed whereſoeuer he came, the opinion of his iuſtice, and the admiration of his wiſedome and modeſtie did ſo mooue the people, that the Townes of Lauerdine, Chasteaudeloyre, Montouert, ſituated vppon the riuer Loyre, and Montrichard ſituated vppon the riuer Chere in Toureyne, voluntarily yeelded themſelues. So the 25. of Nouember the King departed from Tours, and with one iourney went vnto his army at Chasteaudeloyre, ten leagues of.
               The King hauing great deſire to beſiege the Towne of Mans, from Chandeloir, ſent to the Lord Farges to compaſſe the ſaide Towne, and to

common it. The Lorde Boyſdaulphin, which commanded in it for the League, made anſwer as though hee had been reſolued to bury himſelfe therein, and all thoſe that were with him, rather then to depart out of it:  and the 27. of Nouember the ſai
                     •
                   
                  Boyſdaulphin went out of the towne, to burne a great part of the Suburbe named la Conſture: but the Lord Farges comming vpon him with his troupes, reſeued a great part of the ſaid Suburbe from burning.
               The 28. of Nouember the King departing from Chaſteaudeloyre, the ſecond day arriued at Iuray Leueſine, diſtant from Mans one League.
               The 30. of Nouember the Baron of Biron, and the Lord Chaſtilion arriued with the greateſt part of the French infantry, by whome the ſame night the trenches which the enemie had made in the Suburbs was woon in ſome twenty foot high, and might eaſily haue attended the Canon, after that it was ſuppoſed that they were eaſier to be dealt withall then it was looked for, conſidering the high loftie ſpeaches of Boyſdaulphine, Captaine of the Rebels.
               The 29. of Nouember the King came and lodged in the Suburbs, which are faire, and in a manner more commodious to lodge in then the Towne. The ſame day the King cauſed all the reſt of the Suburbs to bee woon, except the Suburbe Saint Jahn, ſituated on the other ſide of the riuer Sarthre, which was woon the day after. The ſaid Boyſdaulphin had burned more then halfe, but ſpecially that part which was next the bridge beeing the faireſt houſes: ſo that their valour appeared in nothing elſe but onely in burning the houſes and goods of their owne frendes.
               The King beſtowed three daies and nights trauelling himſelf almoſt the whole night in making Gabions and other preparatiues neceſſary for the battery, and to ſee the pieces brought to their places.
               All things beeing in a readines, the ſecond of December the King began  to batter certaine defenſes of the wall of the Towne, and after certaine vol
                     •
                  is of Canon, Boyſdaulphin perceauing that within three howers he ſhould haue had an aſſault geuen him, and (his hart failing) not willing to abide it (for he was a man experienced n
                     •
                  t in feats of armes, but onely in feats of ſedition among a mutinous company of robbers, as it did appeare in his dealing in Paris.) After few voleys of Canon ſhot, his high wordes were turned to vanity, he demanded parley, and in fine by two a clocke in the after noone the ſaid Towne of Mans was y
                     •
                  elded vnto the K. which without great 
                     •
                  are of the King had béene ſacked by the Souldiers, but he cauſed the gates to be kept ſhut, and to take away all occaſion of annoyance to the Citie, he would not lodge in it himſelfe, but kept in the ſuburbs where he was firſt lodged.
               There was within the Towne more then two hundred gentlemen, and twenty enſignes of footmen, who du
                     •
                  ing the time of parley did publickly

ſcolde and outragiouſly reuile one another. For the gentlemen ſaid, that the Souldiers would not fight; the Souldiers ſaid that againſt their wils  the gentlemen would compound: but in verie deede beeing but a rable of ſeditious perſons when they came to the p
                     •
                  nch euery one did feare his ſkin. For whereas they had cauſed the towne to beſtow aboue two thouſand crownes in fortifications, they had burned aboue one hundred thouſand crowns in houſing in the ſuburbes, they had ruined the countrey ſixe times as much more, and yet would they not abide aboue three voleyes of Canon.
               Whileſt the King battered Mans, Briſſak another buſie Captaine of rebellious robbers heard the thundering of the Cannon, beeing at la Forte Bernhard with two regiments, who were cōming to ſuccour the town of Mans, beeing put in great feare gaue to himſelfe the alarum and fled back againe twelue leagues, and in retiring, fell vnawares into the Rutters quarter that ſerued the King, who tooke from him thirtie or fortie horſes & chariots without the loſſe of any man.
               The King reſtored into the Towne the Biſhop and the Lord Larges his brother, to his office of Gouernour there, as he had been before, and pardoned the inhabitants, who came as well Eccleſiaſticall as other to giue him thankes, with proteſtation of fidelitie and true obedience.
               The King abode there after the taking of it fiue daies, during the which time the greateſt part of Gentlemen who were in the Towne of Man, and had bin ſeduced by the League, and by them induced to this rebellion, put themſelues into the Kings ſeruice.
               About the ſecond day of December, the Caſtles of Beaumont and Touuoy yéelded vnto the King: and about the ſame time in the countrey of Laual, the Townes of Sabliee, Laual, Chaſteaugontier, townes of importance, and many other of leſſer name were brought vnder the Kings obedience.
               About the 9. of December, the King ſent his armie to Alencon, vnder the conduct of the Marſhall Byron and the Baron his ſonne Marſhall of the Campe, whileſt he himſelfe made a voiage into the countrey of Laual, to the intent by his preſence to comfort the Nobilitie and people of that countrey, who were newly redeemed from the ſlauerie of the Rebels and reduced to his obedience: but ſpecially to cauſe the Prince D'ombes to repayre vnto him out of Britaine that he might ſee him. So taking his iourney the eight of December, arriued at Laual the ninth day. There as well the Eccleſiaſtical as Cannons, and other ſorts of popiſh prieſts with their ornaments, wherewith they had accuſtomed to go to proceſſion, met him a great way out of the towne, and hauing by the mouth of one made their ſubmiſſion and proteſtation of their fidelitie and obedience, they accompanied the King marching before him vntill he entred into the towne, ſinging with great melodie all the way along, Viue le Roy.
               
               
                  
There came out likewiſe the Magiſtrates of the ſayd Towne to méete him, and the people ſaluted him as he paſſed through the ſtréetes with this  acclamation, viue le Roy. The King abode there ten daies, and in the mean time the Prince D'ombes arriued with a great companie of Nobilitie out of Britaine, who was moſt courteouſly receaued of the King.
               In his way from the Man to Laual, certaine of his companie departed from him, and tooke in their way Chaſteaubriault in Anjou, and brought with them the Captain to the King being at Laual, with many other priſoners.
               The King hauing ſpent certaine dayes with the Prince D'ombes, and taken order for the affayres of that Prouince, ſent him againe to his charge of Britaine, and diſpatched the Marſhall Aumont to gather his ſtraunge forces together: ſo that the 20. of December the King departing from Laual went to Mayennelafahes, where hee was very well receaued, aſſured himſelfe of the Caſtle: and withoutleauing any other garriſons in the Towne, paſſing through a moſt foule countrey, arriued at Alencon the 23. of December.
               Now the Marſhall Byron departing from the Towne of Man with the armie the ninth of December, could not reach to Alencon, vntill the 15. day of the ſame moneth, by reaſon of the foule way which hindered the carriage of the Ordinance: but hauing ſent the Lord Artray certaine daies before, he had compaſſed the Towne, and at his firſt comming tooke the Suburbes, and drew them of the Towne to compoſition.
               Captaine Lago Gouernour of the Towne, retyred into the Caſtle with foure hundred and fiftie Souldiers, making ſhew as though he would defend it. The place was very ſtrong, enuironed with water and ſtrong wals, well flanked and good towers.
               The Marſhall of Byron being entred the towne, kept ſo good order in it, that it was not ſeene that it had bin beſieged, the ſhops being kept open that day as if it had bin in time of peace: and preſently cauſed the artillerie to be brought before the Caſtle, and ſhot at the defences, found meanes to take away their water.
               The 23. of December the King being arriued at Alencon, and viewing what was done at the ſiege of the ſayd Caſtle, ſayd that the ſiege would not be long.
               The ſame day the King cauſed the ſayd Lago, who was within the Caſtell, to bee aduertiſed that he was come, and to bee ſommoned: at which newes he began to bee aſtonied, and the morrowe after he required parley, and the ſame day yeelded the place with promiſe of ſafetie of liues, armes and baggage.
               The King hauing prouided for the aſſurance of the place, left there for Gouernour the Lord Artrey with a good gariſon in the towne and caſtle,

and departing herehence, the 27. of December went and lodged at Sees, where the Biſhop and his Prieſts, with the Magiſtrats of the Citie, came  to méet him, and receaued him ſo well, that he truſted vnto the inhabitants of the place, without leauing therein any other garriſon.
               The 28. of December the King departed from thence to Argenton, which is a good towne in Normandie, wherein is a Caſtle of good ſtrength. There was in the ſame Caſtle three Enſignes of footmen, whom the Lord Briſſak had left there, who with Captaine Picart and his regiment were come from Paris to Man, and had promiſed to ſhewe himſelfe at all the ſieges which the King would take in hand, and he would empeach him from the taking of any towne in the countreys of Mayne and baſe Normandie. But this great warriour was as olde in courage as he was hot in words: for he neuer ſhewed his face at any ſiege.
               The inhabitants of the towne of Argenton hauing determined to yeeld to the King, came foorth and met him, moſt humbly deſiring his Maieſtie to receaue them to his fauour: which thing he did willingly.
               The Souldiers ſeeing that, retyred into the Caſtle, beſeeching the K. to ſuffer them to depart with their liues and baggage: which thing the K. granted vnto them.
               The 29. of December, the garriſon of Damfront vnderſtanding that he had ſommoned the towne, and that the inhabitants had determined to acknowledge and admit the King, entred in conſultation what they ſhould doo, and being deuided into contrary factions, put themſelues in armes one agaynſt another. It happened that they who would ſubmit themſelues to the King, although they were not halfe ſo many in number as the other, were encouraged and aſſiſted of God; for the iuſtice of the cauſe had the victorie. The Baron of Verny Gouernour of the Caſtle was ſlayne, and certayne other: whereupon as well they of the Caſtle as of the Towne ſent to the King to craue his fauour and clemencie, which they obtayned.
               The 30. of December the King ſent to the towne, to be aſſured of both partes, which thing was done without force or violence.
               The Lord, Briſſak, and his companions rebels being beaten away out of all townes of Anjou, Mayne and Perche, had put himſelfe with the regiment of Captaine Picart, into Falaize, a Towne ſituated betweene Argenton and Caen: where is a Caſtell very ſtrong, and eſteemed to be the beſt place of baſe Normandie, the Caſtell of Caen only excepted. Thether Briſſak had entiſed many Gentlemen and Souldiours of the Countrey, men of his owne humour, whoſe heart did boyle with rebellion and treacherie, and alſo the remnant of the Gantiers, who had eſcaped the ſlaughter done vpon them before, by the Prince Montpencier: vaunting that they would repayre the honour of their companions, who had yeelded and loſt all other townes, and that at this place all the ſpoyle which

the King had gotten, ſhould be ſurrendred.
               The night following, the 30. of December the King ſent the Baron of  
                  Byron to enuiron it, with certaine troupes of men of warre, who came thether the morning following ſo happily, that hee found the Lord Briſſak, comming out of the Towne, purpoſing to haue burned the Towne of Gybray, which is as if it were a Subb
                     •
                  b of Falaize. The ſaide Lorde Briſſak perceauing the troupes of the Baron of Byron, returned back into the Towne in haſt, and with great terror, ſo that by the comming of the ſaid Byron, the Towne of Gybray was kept from burning, ſeazed vpon, and the enemies there inforced to r
                     •
                  tyre into Falaize.
               
               The 31. of December the King arriued, and went preſently, accompanied with the Marſhall Byron, to view the Towne and Caſtell, which are both ſtrong. The Towne is compaſſed with a great poole, whoſe water cannot be drawne away: the wall is good, and flancked with good Towers, and hard to approach for the battery of the Ordinance. The caſtell is much ſtronger fortified with great and ſtrong towers, and very good walls, with a dongeon, ſeparated and compaſſed with great & deepe ditches. Beſides this, the Lorde Briſſak was within, well accompanied with Gentlemen, Captaines and Souldiours, and made a great ſhewe that hee would defend that place effectually, with intent to get honour.
               The firſt day of Ianua
                     ••
                  e, the King ſent to ſommon the Towne, to the which the Lord Briſſak made anſwer, with a great bragging of reſolution, that he had vowed vnto God, neuer to ſpeake of any compoſition for that Towne.
               Vpon this anſwer, the King cauſed with great diligence and expedition, gabions to be made, baggs to be filled with earth, and al things neceſſary for the battery to be done: which thing was ſo dil gently followed, that the third day of Ianuary all was in a readines, and had begon to batter that day, but he ſtayed for three Canons, which the Prince Montpencier did bring to him out of the Caſtell of Caen, which arriued at the ſi
                     •
                  ge that ſame day.
               That ſ
                     •
                  me day the Prince Montpencier came to the King, hauing with him, about twelue or fifteene hundred Sou
                     •
                  diours, a good troupe of Gentlemen of the Countrey, and certaine companies of men of a
                     •
                  ms, with the three Canons aforeſaid. They which were within the Towne, did neuer all theſe foure dayes ſally out, but with great braggings, ſhewed a reſolut minde, ſuppoſing therewith to feare away the King.
               The King hauing put all things in a readines for the battery determined to make one worke of two: for knowing that the Caſtell being won, the Towne could not hold out long hee concluded to place three batteries, whereof two from ſundry parts ſhould batter at one breath of the Caſtell

The third being placed vpon a rock, ſhould ſcoure certaine waies along  behinde the breach of the ſide of the Caſtell.
               Therefore the fift day of Ianuary, at eight of the clock in the morning, his Ordinance began to beate two great towers, which flanked from the one to the other, whereof the one ſerued for a defence to the breach, which he ſuppoſed to make.
               And after the beſtowing of foure hundered Canon ſhot, the top of one Tower being fallen, and a hole being made in the other Tower that defended the creach, the King cauſed it to be battered ſpéedily, for there néeded but the beating of a little piece of a Wall. This done, the King commaunded certaine companies of Souldiours to goe and view if they could lodge in the ſaid Tower: at whoſe commaundement, certaine of them entring the hole which was made through, went into the Caſtell, and finding no reſiſtance, called their fellowes, who entring one after another, in a ſhortſpace they became Maſters of the Caſtell and Towne.
               They within, being ſore diſmayed, without any fight retyred into the d
                     •
                  ngeon, out of the which they ſent thrée Gentlemen, to beſéech the King to receaue them vpon any compoſition.
               The King anſwered, that he would not receaue them, but at his pleaſure, and that they ſhould proue his clemency, without binding him elſe vnto any condition.
               The ſixt of Ianuary, the King ſuffered the Lord Briſſak to come and ſubmit himſelfe vnto him, and being ouercome with pitty, which hée had vpon the young Gentlem
                     •
                  n, graunted their 
                     •
                  iues, in chooſing fifteene of the beſt ſort of them, whome hée would keepe priſoners as warlike enemies, and fifteene more, ſuch as hee ſhould thinke good, ſhould bée at his Maieſties diſpoſition. Thus God did ſo beate downe theſe proud and inſolent rebels, roaring and breathing a little before, nothing but fire and bloud, that none of them did proffer, or ſéemed to make head otherwiſe then by words.
               The Towne being taken by aſſault, could not be preſerued from pillaging and ſackaging, that there might be a difference betweene them that fled to the Kings clemency, and thoſe who obſtinatly did proue the force of his army, the one being wholy deſolat, the other reioyſing in a full quietnes and perfect peace.
               The 15. whom the King tooke for warlike Enemies were put to their ranſom; the town was geuen to the Souldiours: of the other fifteene, who were at the Kings diſpoſition, the Lord Briſſak (as conſenting and acceſſary to the Kings death) was condēned to die. But wheras after the Kings death and when the townes of Picardie did reuolt, the rebels had taken the Ducheſſe of Longeuille, mother to the Duke now liuing priſoner, for abhorring

their rebellion, and detained her in captiuitie in the Citie of Amiens. 
                   The Duke of Lōgueuille greatly deſirous to deliuer his mother, begged the ſaid Briſſak to ſet his mother at liberty and in place of ſafetie by exchange with the ſaid Briſſak, which thing the king granted, ſuppoſing that it would not bee long afore he would come againe into his hands, to receaue the reward of his rebellion and parracide.
               Hetherto Chriſtian Reader thou haſt ſeen into what miſerable and wofull ſtate the whole Realm was throwen in by the Leaguers, by their Friers, Monkes, and deſperat Ieſuits, and by their venimous ſeditions and vngodly ſermons preached to the people, to ſtirre them to all manner of damnable licenſe. And how that kingdome ſunke and drowned in a moſt confuſed rebellion was left by the king Henry the third, and laſt of the noble familie of Valoys, and deliuered to Henry the 4. now king of France and Nauarre, named, declared and inthroniſed by his predeceſſor, approued, accepted, and proclaimed lawfull and natural heire and king of ye crowne of France, after the maner of the Emperours of the Romans, by the Princes, Nobilitie, Officers of the Crowne, not among few Prieſts, Biſhops, and Monks, with a traſh of ceremonies, but in the middle of an armie, by ye Marſhals, Colonels, captaines & Souldiers acknowledged, & obedience ſworn vnto by the beſt and ſoundeſt part of the realm, towns, cities, Commonalties & people, as well eccleſiaſticall as temporall, reſiſted onely by few rebels and robbers, who hauing ſurpriſed ſome Townes and Cities, do exerciſe an intollerable (and more then Turkiſh) tyranny ouer the Citizens otherwiſe well diſpoſed.
               Thou haſt ſéene alſo, how God hath guided his hands to battell, and his fingers to fight, hath bleſſed his armes before, and now in the beginning of his raigne with proſperous ſucceſſe of victories, and reduced Townes, Cities and whole Prouinces, ſeduced by the Leaguers, to their duetifull obedience, and hath ſo reſtored to them, which will be quiet vnder his gouernement, peace, iuſtice and iudgement, that they may ſay, that the Lord after a long continual ſtormy tempeſt, hath geuen them as a calme weather to reſtore in that afflicted ſtate ſaturnia regna, wherein godlineſſe and iuſtice ought to raigne.
               Now before we make an end of this yeare, and this ſeuenth booke together, wee will lay downe other exploits of warre done in other partes of France, but ſpecially in the Prouince of Daulphine: and hauing no ample informations nor obſeruation of time and other circumſtances neceſſary to the perſpicuity of the hiſtory, we will put downe onely the euents bare and naked as it were priuate memories, in ſuch ſort as they were ſent to the noble Princeſſe of Orenge out of her ſoueraignty of Orenge by ſome of her ſeruant
                     •
                   there, deſyrous onely to aduertize her excellency ſimply of the accidents which had paſſed there.
               
                  
It ſaid before how the Guizes (head of the League) tooke for party the king of Nauarre, and with him the profeſſors of the reformed religion as  onely hinderers of their driftes. And afterwardes they proclaimed open warre againſt the Lords Eſpernon and Valete his brother, who with their faithfull ſeruice and wiſe counſel were ſtumbling blockes in the way of the ſaid Guizes and Leaguers, diſappointing them of their purpoſes. The L. Valete beeing in Prouance and Daulphine, and vnderſtanding of the execution done at Bloys vppon the perſons of the Duke of Guyze, and the Cardinall his brother, by a prudent wiſedome foreſaw how ſome new tumults would ryſe thereupon, and how the king would turne his forces againſt the Leaguers, & vpon that occaſion would reconcile the king of Nauarre to him, and vſe his ſeruice, and of them of the reformed Religion.
               And thereupon, to auoyde all inconueniences which might enſue this ſtrange and vnexpected accident: thought good to make peace with the Lord des Diguieres, a noble man of great valour, who had conſtantly and valiantly defended the cauſe of the religion, and brought many Townes, Cities and Fortreſſes, from the tyranny and ſlauery of the Leaguers, to the Kings obedience. And when after the death of the Duke of Guize, many Townes and holds had rebelled, partly induced by the out
                     •
                  ries of ye Leaguers, and partly ſurprized by them, but ſpecially in Prouance.
               
               Peace vpon theſe occaſions was made betwéene them, that their forces being ioyned together, they might the better be able to preuent the traiterous attempts, and reſiſt the practizes of the ſaide Leaguers. After which agréement, the ſaid Lordes des Diguieres and Valete came together, and oftentimes ſat in counſel, to take aduiſe for the ſafe kéeping of the countrey of Daulphine and Prouance in the Kings obedience, they together entred Valence, Romans, Tullet, and other places.
               After theſe two Noble men by this newe reconſiliation had been ſome dayes together, they determined to ſeparate themſelues and their forces: the Lord des Diguieres remayned in Daulphine, and the Lord Valette went with his forces into Prouance, there to ſtop the attempts of the Rebels.
               After the ſeparation of theſe two Noble men, the Lord des Diguieres firſt layed the ſiege before the fortreſſe of Auxonne, right agaynſt Montlimart, which had been ſurpriſed by the Rebels, and tooke it by aſſault the fift day of Ianuary, the Captayne of the ſayd Fort and all his men were put to the ſword.
               Shortly after the taking of Auxonne, the Lord Eſchambault, who had conſtantly defended the reformed religion in Viuaretes, ioyned his forces with the Lord des Diguieres, which thing before he could not well doo. From Auxonne the Lord des Diguieres, ſtrengthened with the forces of the Lord Eſchambault, layd the ſiege before the Hold of Colonſeles in the

countie of Griguan, which he tooke by aſſault. The Gouernour of that Hold  was hanged, and all his companie put to the ſword, one onely ſaued vpon condition that he ſhould pay all the expenſes that the whole armie had béen at that ſiege.
               The ſayd Lord des Diguieres departing from Colonſeles, tooke his way ſtraight to the County of Veyaſcin, and aſſoone as he was entred the countrey, the Holds of Bauuyes, Tauſſie, le Bouſch
                        •
                     l, Racheringes and Rochegardes yéelded vnto him, neuer expecting the Canon. Theſe Forts being ſurrendred, he went to lay the ſiege before Camaret, a place well fortified, diſtant from Orenge about two miles. The ſayd towne yeelded at the ſight of the Canon with ſafetie of liues, as well of Souldiers as inhabitants. From Camaret he went to the ſiege of Vacquiras: he tooke alſo by compoſition Aubiguan, where he reſted the whole armie to refreſh his Souldiers ten dayes. Thether came the Deputies of the countrey to demaund a truce.
               From Aubiguan the Lord des Diguieres went to beſiege an Hold called Cayranne, which was taken by aſſault, the gouernour thereof being an Italian was hanged in the worſhip of Nuestra donna de Loretta, and all his Souldiers for company with him, or els put to the ſword.
               After this execution done, the Gouernours of all places and Townes thereaboutes, as Rakeſell, S. Romans, Villedieu, Boyſſon, Mirebel, Paymerat, S. Romanet and others, came to him and offered him their keyes.
               From Cayranne the Lord des Diguieres went foorth to beſiege Molans, a place well fortified, where are Caſtles very ſtrong. There he beſtowed three hundred ſhot of canon, and at length a breach being made the aſſault was giuen, and after two hundred and fiftie men of the enemies had béen ſtayne the Towne was taken. The Lord of the ſayd place had his life ſaued, in paying ten thouſand Crownes for his raunſome, and beſides his houſe ſacked.
               There was during the time that theſe affaires did ſo paſſe in Daulphine, a certayne méeting of Deputies of Grenoble, and other Townes & Cities of that Prouince, making ſuite for to haue a truce for foure yeares: vppon whoſe ſuite the Lord des Diguieres drewe néere to Grenoble, and lodged his armie thereabout in the Countrey: but hee himſelfe went to Nions. There the Deputies me
                     •
                  , and requeſted to haue truces and ceaſing from warre during the ſpace of foure yeares. But when as they could not agree vpon the conditions, the Lord des Diguieres appoynted another méeting at Bogency within two miles of Grenoble, and at length a truce was concluded betweene them about the latter end of March, which was ſigned, ſealed and confirmed with great ſolemnitie in the Suburbs of Grenoble.
               
               It was agréed that the principalitie of Orenge ſhould be compriſed in it, and that they of the League, who w
                     •
                  re returned to the Kings obedience,

ſhould pay to the Lord des Diguieres, for the intertainement of his companies, eyghtéene thouſand Crownes, and the one halfe of all tolles,  which was thought to amount to fifty Crownes a day. Moreouer, they agréed to pay him eyght thouſand Crownes, for the intertaining of certaine Miniſters, and workes of pietie in Daulphine.
               
               Alſo that the Fort of Bogencie, and diuers other holdes kept by the Leaguers, ſhould be beaten downe, and raſed to the geound. This truce was proclaymed in Grenoble on Eaſter day.
               About the ſame time, there was an aſſembly of the Prouince of Languedock, holden in Niſmes and Lunel, about the like truce.
               It is ſaid before, how the Lord des Diguieres and la Valete, had ioyned themſelues in amity for the Kings ſeruice, and how the Lord Valete after hauing ſoiorned with the ſaid des Diguieres, to take counſell 
                     •
                  og
                     •
                  
                  ther about the Kings affayres in Daulphine and Prouance: the Lord Valete with his forces went into his gouernement of Prouance, where finding that Countrey full of confuſions and factions, by the meanes of the Court of Parliament at Aix, and the Lord of Vins, which not onely were rebels, but alſo had ſolicited the Countrey to the like rebellion; the ſaid Lord Velete had cauſed an aſſembly of the ſtates of Prouance, to be holden after his arriuing there: and being very ſtrong, and hauing the greateſt part of the holdes in the Countrey, they agreed in the ſaide aſſembly, to make warre againſt the ſaid court of Parliament and Lorde of 
                     Ʋins, and for that purpoſe the States there deliuered him ten thouſand Crownes.
               The Lord Monbrune ioyned himſelfe with the Lord Valete, and ſurpriſed ſome ſtrong places in that Prouince.
               The King had called the Lord Mommorency from the gouernement of Languedock, and had giuen that charge to the Lord Ioyeuſe, but at length the King perceauing, that the ſaid Ioyeuſe by the perſwaſions of his mother, inclined to the rebellion of the Leaguers, he tooke that gouernement againe from him, & reſtored the Lord Mommorencie to that charge, with commaundement to remoue the Parl
                     •
                  ament of Tholouze to the Citie of Narbonne, becauſe that Tholouze had rebelled againſt the King as is aforeſaid.
               The Citie of Narbonne, vnderſtanding of the reſtabliſhment of the Lord Mommorencie by the King, ſhut vp their gates againſt Ioyeuſe, & ſent for the ſaid Mommorency, being then in Auignon, proffering to receaue him, ſaeing that it was the kings pleaſure to haue reſtabliſhed him in that gouernemēt. The ſaid Mommorency departed from Orenge the 28. of March to Narbonne ward.
               The Townes of Languedock, which were in the power of them of the Religion, refuſed to haue his authoritie publiſhed among them, without

the expreſſe commaundement of the King of Nauarre.
               
               The Lord des Diguieres hauing concluded a truce as is aforeſaid, in  
                  Daulphine, and ſet that Prouince in ſome good ſtay, with his campe marched toward Prouance, to ioyne with the Lord Valete, to reduce that countrey to the Kings obedience.
               It is ſaid before, how the King during the déepe winter, did great exploytes, with proſperous ſucceſſe, in ſubduing the Countries of Beauſse, Anjou, Toureyne, Mayne, Lauall, Perche, and moſt part of Normandie, in reducing them to their duetie of aleageance, reſtored them peace, iuſtice and iudgement, vtterly ſubuerted and troden vnder foote by the Leagu
                     •
                  rs, and how hauing continued few dayes at the ſiege of Falaize, tooke it by aſſault.
               Now we will returne againe to few matters, which were done in the end of this yeare. It is ſaid how the Duke de Maine after the Kings departure from Paris, gaue himſelfe to fight with the Coffers and counting houſes of the Pariſiens. But for recreation ſake alſo he put on the armor of Venus to fight with the Curtizans of Paris, ſo that beeing molten in all filthy pleaſures, the Lady Saint Beufue, or ſome other ſuch Uirgin did ſo dreſſe him, that his name ſhortly after was writtē in the Chirurgians hall, among them that had the pockes: and lying in Paris about two moneths with his army about the Citty, without dooing any thing for the aduancement of the holy Union, onely that it might appeare that he was a King of Fryers, he was firſt annointed King of Fryers by the Chirurgians of Paris, with that holy Oile and extreame vnction, wherewith the Popes Prieſts, Monks, Fryers and Ieſuits are oftentimes annoynted, and after that crowned with ſuch a crowne, as the Fryers themſelues are crowned with: and about the time that he had ſomewhat recouered his ſtrength, and téeth began to be ſomewhat faſt in his head, and his drabbling had left him, Fryer Sixtus (who ſomewhat afore the Kings death had called home his Legat, who was a Uenetian Biſhop of Brixia, for that he was thought in Rome to fauour very much the kings affaires) vnderſtanding the kings affaires to haue better ſucceſſe then hee would wiſh or had expected, ſent a new Legat into France to comfort, aſſiſt and further the affaires of the Rebels: he ſent I ſay Fryer Henrique, Cardinall Caietan his brother, Canuillo Caietan, Patriark of Alexandria, when he can haue it, Frier Philip Siga Byſhop of Placentia, Frier Francis Pauigarola Biſhop of Aſte, Hieronimo Moceuigo Biſhop of Ceueda, Laurence Bauchet Iudge de Rota, and Secretarie of this Legacy, all whelps of one litter, and by one ye may know all the reſt, who were ſent in company with their traine to rid Rome of ſo many Caterpillers. Theſe routes of filthy Friers with their Mouchachos arriued in Paris about the middle of December, with loads of ſuch bleſſings and holy reliques of Rome, as the Mules of Frier Campegius
                  
did ouerthrow and ſcatter in Cheapſide, when hee came into England about the diuorſement of King Henry the eight, and Queene Catharine  of Spaine his firſt wife.
               This Frier Henrique called the heads of the League to counſell, keepeth a ſtirre with them, chid them, that they were lurking in taking their pleaſures, without dooing any thing for holy Church and holy vnion: but now they muſt go about their buſineſſe handſomly, wherefore comprehendeth the whole affaires in four principall points, whereof three of them he would performe himſelfe.
               And firſt after the maner of Fryers, which is alwaies in their Sermons to remember their conuent to begin with the Deuill, hee proclaimed a Iubile through all France, to prooue yet whether hee might with that old patched net of robbery, called indulgences, fiſh any money, to helpe his maſter (who had ſent him to fiſh) to maintaine in their brauery the holy Mochachos and Curtizans in Rome.
               
               During the time of this Iubile, which began at the feaſt of the natiuity of Chriſt, Frier Henrique do repleniſh the minds of the Pariſiens with ſuperſtitions, the ſtreates of Paris with proceſſions, the Churches with ſottiſh Idolaters, his belly with the beſt meat he could get, and his purſe with as much money as he could.
               This Fiſher with his ragged net was not ſo much ſuperſtitiouſly receaued in Paris, as he was deſpiſed and laught to ſcorue euen by the Catholiks generally through all France, maruelling that this Saint Peter fiſher had no better tooles to goe about his buſines: and ſo as the Prouerbe is, ſeldome doo ſpeede the fowler, neuer the fiſher: for beſide what he did in Paris, in any where elſe he get not a poore peny to bleſſe himſelfe.
               Secondly, he goeth about to weaken the King: for hee wrote letters to the Cardinals, Biſhops, and Nobility of the Catholick religion, wherewith he warned them of the great danger of their ſoules, in following, ayding, & aſſiſting a King heretick, ſhewing them the great harme which this ſchiſme would doo in time to the Catholick Church: by which word he meant the Legioss of Locuſtes, of Prieſtes, Monkes, Friers and Ieſuites. He wrote this, ſuppoſing that his bare letter would haue cauſed the Catholicks by heapes, to forſake the Kings defence, and to ioyne with the rebels.
               This letter of Frier Henryque had thrée diuers effects: for firſt ſome Biſhops thought good to repayre to the King, to ſée whether they could make him a Catholick: to whome the King anſwered, as he had once before anſwered a Cardinall, that he was able ſooner to make a Cardinall a Hugonet, then a Cardinall would make him a Catholick.
               Others, as the Cardinals of Vendoſme and Leuoncourt, with diuers other Byſhops were of opinion, that it was moſt expedient to call a nationall

counſel, according to the which the king had promiſed to reforme himſelfe. But vnto this Frier Henrique the Legat would not harken by any meanes, fearing both the light and the pinch. 
               
               The nobility anſwered, that they did hold him for the true heire and ſucceſſor of the Crown, whom they would eſtabliſh in the full poſſeſſion therof: and when the king had pacifyed the Realme, they will thinke on that matter.
               The third thing was to encourage the rebels to ſet vpon the king two manner of waies, by counſell and money.
               Firſt, he ſhewed vnto them, that it was ſhame for them, that while the king and hereticks had made great conqueſts, they had done nothing but lurke and take their pleaſures. That Frier Sixtus, his Maſters pleaſure was, to ſet vppon the king with all their forces, before hee were ſtrengthened and confirmed in the kingdome, the longer they ſhould delay and linger, the harder it would be for them to preuaile againſt him. Now they ought to beate the yron while it is hot, and followe the matter while the rebellion is vniuerſall, the number of partakers great, the hearts of them animated, while there is great ſtore of money gotten out of the coffers of the inhabitants of Paris, out of the confiſcations and pro
                  
                     •
                  criptions of the Royalls, they had receaued great ſtore of the Catholick K. of Spayne, and he had alſo charge from Fier Sixtus to deliuer to them fiftie thouſand Duckets. On the contrary, he ſhewed vnto them how the King was deſtitute of men and meanes, there were a great number againſt few, their furniture and munition was farre paſſing that of the King, they had the countrey fauorable, and enemy vnto him. They were ſtrong, 
                     •
                  uſty, & reſted long, but the K. with his forces was wearie, weather beaten and weake, by reaſon of his long toyling and moyling all the déepe of winter. They had Frier Sixtus bleſſings, but the king had the accurle: therefore he concluded, that they ſhould make no difficulty of the victory, it was too ſure on their ſide, and in a manner, if GOD himſelfe would fight for him (for the Friers former ſpéeches emported but little leſſe) he could not preuaile. He ſhewed alſo, that there were already in the way, forces out of Flanders comming to them, by the procurement of Bernardino Mendoza, and Frier Cardinall Damnj, the King therefore was to be ſet on, before he had any leaſure to employ forten Princes to aſſiſt him: and to ſhewe the great good affection which Frier Sixtus had to this worke of mercie, hée had ſent them fiftie thouſand Duckets.
               The Duke d' Mayne, with the heads of the League, receaued this holy money, with as great deuotion as the Iubile and pardons, or rather greater. And if Frier Sixtus had ſent all Saint Peters treaſures, it had been yet more deuoutly accepted, and ſpent as merrily in Paris, inter bonas
                  
                  ſocias, as in Rome, but they were content to receaue that in hoping for more. 
               
               Now wée ſée the ſtate of the Leaguers and rebels very ſtrong and rich: for they had ſet and gathered an exceſſiue impoſt, and ſomme of money vpon Paris: they had made aboue a million of Gold, of the robbing and confiſcations and ranſoms of the Royalls in the Citie. They had receaued three hundred thouſand crownes of the Spaniard. They receiued fiftie thouſand Crownes from Rome: nowe they are very luſty, they deck themſelues all with gold and iewels: and perſwaded by Frier Henryque, they prepare themſelues to goe forth out of Paris, ſoone after the holy dayes, and to goe to ſéeke the King, vntill they had found a miſhap.
               Here endeth the 7. Booke.
            
            
               THE EIGHT BOOKE.
               
                  WE haue ſéene what the Legacie of Frier Henrique hath done in Paris, how he hath heated the  rebels, ſet them on horſeback, and ſent them packing to ſéeke ventures. Now in this eight booke we will ſee how they haue ſped after their departing from Paris.
               
               Kind Henry the third, intending to beſiege Paris, ſent Captaine Saint Martin, with a ſtrong Gariſon, to ſeaze vpon and kéepe the Caſtell 
                     Ʋicennes nigh Paris, which the rebels had forſaken after their loſſe at Seulis, from whence hée did ſo moleſt the Pariſiens with continuall roades and courſes, that no man could venture that way.
               The Duke d' Mayne, to pluck that thorne out of the héele of the Pariſiens, and to ſet them at liberty, that way had practized by all meanes, the ſaid Captaine to render the place, and to ioyne himſelfe with the Leaguers, which he would neuer doo: therefore about the beginning of Ianuary, after they had made their 
                     This is a dronken bā
                        quet vpon Twelf tide, as waſſellis in England.
                   
                  Roy boy in Paris, he went forth to beſiege that Caſtell, and battered it with foure péeces of Ordinance. The ſaid Saint Martin, ſéeing that the King was farre of, and he not able to defend the place, yéelded it, with condition for him and his to goe foorth

with bag and bagage, and to be ſuffered ſafely to repayre to Seulis, which was performed. 
               
               It is ſaid alſo, how the ſaid King Henry the third, in his way to the ſiege of Paris, had taken Pontoyſe, and ſet a ſtrong gariſon there, to intercept all manner of victuals, prouiſions, or marchandize, which were carried vp by the riuer Seyne to Paris, which did greatly annoy and diſtreſſe the Citie.
               The Duke d'Mayne hauing taken Vicennes, muſtered all his forces, and found them all luſtie, and more gliſtering with gold, then valiant in courage, and found his forces to ariſe to thrée thouſand horſes, and thirtéene thouſand footemen, with whome, whileſt his ſuccour of Flanders ſhould draw néere, about the latter end of Ianuarie hee lead his forces againſt Pontoyſe, which hee beſieged, in hope to eaſe the Pariſians of that heauie burthen, and when he had battered the ſame, they within conſidering that they were not able to defend it, yéelded the place vpon the ſame conditions, that the Leaguers had yéelded it to the King not long before, to wit, with their armies, whereof part went to the King, to continue in the Kings ſeruice, and part ioyned with the Leaguers.
               The Duke d'Mayne hauing taken Pontoyſe, more full of money and hope, then courage, determined to deſcend into Normandie. And in his iourney, with his great army was ſtayed at Meulan, a Towne ſituated vpon Seyne betweene Mante and Pontoyſe, diſtant from Paris ten leagues, and from Homfleur where the king was, thirtie leagues. There he boaſted and threatned that he would goe to make the king to raiſe the ſiege, or elſe fetch him out of Homfleur: but he protracted ſo the time, that the king had time both to ſeaze vpon the ſaid Towne of Homfleur, and to reſt and refreſh his army there ſome dayes.
               The cauſes of the Dukes delay were two: Firſt, the miſtruſt of his cauſe, which did ſtill abate his courage, which otherwiſe was neuer great: Secondly, for that he expected great forces out of Flanders, who were already comming vnto him, vnder the conduct of the County Egmond, and the Lord la Mote gouernour of Graueling.
               
               Whereupon he tooke occaſion to excuſe the baſenes of his heart, who durſt neuer ſee the king face to face, except they were three to one, or very nigh: yet to eaſe his ſtomack, hee caſteth forth theſe vaine, boaſtings and threatnings aboue ſaid, but he durſt not come nigh the king, afore he had ioyned with this new ſupply, for feare of the baſtonado.
               The king on the other ſide, hauing taken the Towne of Homfleur, and reſted there his forces for certaine dayes, ſaid nothing, but about the middeſt of February, tooke his iourney to high Normandie, to cauſe the Duke to raiſe the ſiege from before Meulan, and hauing trauailed thréeſcore miles in the déepe of winter, proffered battell to the enemy.
               
                  
But the Dukes heart fayling him, and hauing aduertiſement that the forces of the Low Countrey were entred into France, after that hee had  battered Meulan diuers dayes, hee went to méete the Flemmings and to muſter them.
               The Duke de Mayne receaued in Picardie betweene foure and fiue thouſand Wallons, conducted by the Lord Mot Gouernour of Graueling, and a little after arriued the horſemen, conducted by the County Egmond, with thirtéene companies of ſouldiers taken out of the garriſons of Fl
                        •
                     nders: three companies of Launces of Spanyards, conducted by Don Iuan Moreo, Don Pedro Moreo his brother, Don Iuan de Cordoua, and a great company of Harquebuſiers on horſebacke, led by Captaine Colin, riſing all to two thouſand men all old Souldiers.
               The Duke being flided away, and the King ſeeing the opportunitie of battaile gone with him, determined to do his buſineſſe and to take Dreux, garded by Captaine Falande with a ſtrong garriſon, that if he had it in his obedience, he might ouerlooke and bridle the Citie of Chartres, vntill that conueniently he might haue opportunitie to enterpriſe vpon it.
               The King in going to the ſiege of Dreux tooke Noueyncourt, and being at Dreux, and the breach being readie to giue the aſſault, the King vnderſtoode that the Duke was returning toward Seyne, for to paſſe ouer the bridge at the Towne of Nante, which then did hold for the Leaguers, full of confidence and truſt in that proude and mightie army which conſiſted of thrée and twentie thouſand men of all ſorts. The King conſidered wel that the Dukes forces were but borrowed, and that now out of hand hee muſt hazard, or els his companies in a ſmall time would diſband themſelues and retyre home, and that with delaying with him he might diſſipate his forces. He knewe well alſo that they who doo proffer iniurie, are commonly more deſperat then they who doo withſtand it. He weighed well his ſmall number in compariſon of the great multitude, and that there were forces comming to him out of Champaigne, as good as theſe which his enemie had receaued out of the Low Countrey, which he might in protracting the time receaue ſhortly. He ſawe well that the countrey was fauourable to the enemie; which reaſons might haue perſwaded a great warriour, by policie to haue weakened the enemie, as Fabius did Hannibal.
               
               But the King had more ſufficient and ſubſtanciall reaſons, which did bid him to encounter the enemie, as the aſſured confidence whereby he repoſed himſelfe in Gods goodneſſe and protection, and caſted himſelfe in his armes; the equitie of his cauſe, his lawful vocation agaynſt mutinous traytors and parricides: ſo that each of theſe reaſons was ſtronger to him then ſo many hundred thouſand men: which made him to conclude, that conſidering theſe cauſes God could and would diſſipate his enemies, notwithſtanding their great forces, as well with fewe as with many. Being

alſo confirmed by the experience which he had at Arques, and in the Suburbs of Paris.
               
               In the meane time while the King was at Dreux, the Duke de Mayne 
                   hauing receaued the forces which came out of the low Countrey, thought himſelfe ſure of a proſperous ſucceſſe: and promiſing an aſſured victory to his partakers, paſſed his forces ouer the bridge of Manie, and marched toward Dammartin, which was but four miles off.
               The King vppon the reaſons aforeſayd, reſolute to encounter with few that huge multitude, on a ſudden from before the breach rayſed vp the ſiege from Dreux, and departed the ſecond day of March: the beſieged with great  reioyſing, beholding and wondering at the cauſe of ſuch a ſudden departing.
               The ſame day the King went backe the way that he was come, and lodged in the Towne of Noueyncourt, to cut the paſſage to the enemy of a little riuer which runneth by. Aſſoone as he came thether, hee cauſed warning to be giuen, that on the next morning euery man ſhould bee in a readines.
               The night following that day, the King ſet in order the manner of the battaile, which in the morning early the third day of March, he ſhewed to the Prince Montpenſier, to the Marſhals Biron and Aumont, to the Baron Biron Marſhall of the field, and to other Princes and Captains of the army, who with one voice hauing conſidered of it according to the ſkill of warre, they approoued, and would change nothing of it.
               That day hee gaue charge to the Baron of Biron, to ſet euery man in his place and order, and did chooſe that morning the Lord Vieques ſargeant Maior of the battell, who was one of the ancient maſters of the footmen in France.
               
               This thing beeing done, the King willing to begin this great worke with prayer, with great vehemency and confidence hee made his prayers vnto God in the hearing of all men: wherein hee called God to witnes, that hee knew the purpoſe of his hart, and well vnderſtood whether it were for deſire of glory, or for ambition, or for deſire of blood, or longing for reuenge, which made him reſolute to this battaile, that hee was his iudge and witnes vnreproueable, that nothing mooued him thereto, but the tender loue that hee did beare to his poore people, whoſe peaceable and quiet eſtate hee eſteemed more then the ſafety of his owne life: he beſought God ſo to direct his will as hee ſhould beſt ſee to be good for the benefite of Chriſtendome. And as for himſelfe he prayed God to ſaue and helpe him, as he knew to be good and profitable to the weale and quiet of the ſtate, and not otherwiſe.
               This prayer eloquent in words, but more paſſing pure and deuout in ſenſe, did ſo rauiſh all thoſe that were nigh, that euery man after his example did the like. And after that, all that after noone was ſeene in Noneyncourt
                  
the Churches full of Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Souldiers of all Nations hearing Maſſe, communicating and playing the good Catholikes.  They of the reformed religion made their humble prayers and ſupplications to God.
               The court of Parliament at Tours being aduertiſed of the things which were like to paſſe betweene the King and his enemies, commaunded generall proceſſions and prayers to be made the third and fourth of March, for the King and for his good and proſperous ſucceſſe. Lyke commaundement was ſent vnto the reformed Churches about to do the like in their congregations, though not in the like forme: ſo that at Tours the Catholikes did almoſt nothing elſe theſe two daies men women and children, but pray after their maner.
               This deuotion beeing done at the Campe, the whole army did ſhew ſuch countenances, as though euery man had receaued a ſeuerall anſwer
                     •
                   of God, concerning the happie ſucceſſe which each of them ſhould obtaine.
               The King had cauſed ſommons to bee giuen to the Towne of Saint Andrew, beeing from Noueincourt eight miles in the way going to Iury, where he ſuppoſed the enemy and his army had béen lodged.
               The Kings companies came to a great plaine nigh the towne Saint Andrew. About the ſame plaine there are certaine villages, and a litle wood called la haye de Pres, that is the medowes border, or hedge. There the King with the Marſhals Biron, Aumont, and the Baron of Birō
                   marſhal of the field, began to ſet the battaile in order, following the plot agreed vpon before.
               The King hauing tryed in battels and ſkirmiſhes before, that it is more aduantage to make horſemen fight in ſquadrons then in rings, ſpecially his that haue no launces, deuided all his horſemen in ſeauen ſquadrons, and all the footmen placed at the flankes of the ſaid ſquadrons, and euery ſquadron had a company of forlorne footmen.
               The front of the battel was in a right line, bending ſomewhat at the 2. endes.
               The firſt Squadron on the left ſide was that of the Marſhall Aumont, conſiſting of three hundred good horſemen, hauing on his two ſides 12. regiments of French footmen.
               The ſecond, was the ſquadron of the Prince Montpenſier conſiſting of three hundred Horſes, and on his left hand foure or fiue hundred Lanceknights, and on the right hand a regiment of Swiſſers, euery company of the ſtrangers forces being lyned with footmen.
               The third Squadron was of light horſemen deuided into two companies, the one, whereof the great Prior Colonell was the Leader, and the other company of the light horſemen was conducted by the Lord Gyurye,
                  
Marſhall of the field of the ſaid light horſes, hee was able to make foure hundred horſes. Theſe two companies of light horſes were placed a little  before the foreſaid ſquadrons, and at the left hand of them was the artillerie, to wit, foure cannons and two culuerins.
               The fourth ſquadron was that of the Baron of Biron, which might bee of two hundred and fifty horſes, and in the ſame ranke and order at the left hand towards the Prince Montpenſier was a company of light Horſemen.
               The fifth ſquadron was the Kings, which made fiue rankes, and in euery ranke ſixe ſcore horſes: he had on the left ſide two regiments of Swiſſers, of the Canton of Glaris, and of the Griſons, and on his right hand a great Battailon of two other regiments of Swiſſers, the one of the Cantons of Solethurne, and the other of the Colonel Balthazare, which amount in the whole eighteene enſignes.
               The Battailon on the right hand had the regiment of Brigueulx, and on the left wing the regiments of Vignoles and S. Iohn.
               
               The ſixt Squadron was of the Marſhall Byron, who had two hundred and fiftie good horſes, with two regiments of French footmen.
               The ſeauenth Squadron was of the Rutters, who had ioyned with them French footmen like as other companies had.
               Things were ſo ordered by the King, and Lord Marſhalls and Baron of Byron plied the matter ſo, that in leſſe then an houre all was ſo fitly diſpoſed, that it could not be deuiſed better. And while the King did thus ſet in order his battell, the night before and that morning there arriued vnto him ſixe hundred horſes vnlooked for, to wit, the companyes of the Prince Countie both horſemen and footmen, there came alſo the Lord Guiche great maſter of the Ordinance, and the Lord Pleſsis Morney with their companies, to whom vpon deliberation was graunted place in the Kings Squadron.
               The ſame day alſo while the King ſtayed in battell array, came companies from the garriſons of Deepe and Arques, and other companies and Lords out of Normandie, to the number of two hundred horſe and more, who were placed ſome vnder the gouernment of the Prince Montpencier, ſome with the King, and ſome with the Baron Byron.
               
               In the meane time the King ſent light horſemen for Spyes on the left ſide of the battell, ſuppoſing that the enemie did lye at Iury, which is a great towne, hauing a bridge ouer the riuer Eure, thinking there to ſet vppon the enemie. But when they had ſcarſe paſſed halfe a mile, they vnderſtood that the enemie was aware of the matter more then they thought, and that the enemie had paſſed the riuer Eure, and that they began to ſhew themſelues in battell array.
               The enemie had paſſed that riuer, not thinking to haue the Kings army

ſo nigh. But the king hearing of their going to Verneuille, thought to méet them there: and arriuing thether, found that the enemie had ſent his  Harbingers for to take vp lodgings, euen néere the place where the kings army lay.
               When theſe newes came to the Campe, there was an excéeding ioy among all men of all degrees. Betweene the two armies there was a Village, in the playne which was holden by the enemie, which the King made ſtraight way yeeld to him: but for al this occaſion giuen the enemie did not ſtirre. But the King ſeeing that it was nigh Sunne ſetting, and hauing not yet deſcryed the manner of the lodging of their Campe, and conſidering they might bee at ſome aduantage, was aduiſed not to march for that time any further: whereupon there he ſtayed his armie for that night. All that day the two armies were in ſight one of the other. There were onely ſome odd ſkirmiſhes betweene them, in the which priſoners were taken, who reported that the number of the enemie was greater then they were aware off, and that they were giuen to vnderſtand, that the Kings companyes were come thether rather for a faſhion, then minding to bid battaile.
               The night drewe on, which cauſed the army to encampe there where they were ſet in battell array.
               It is reported that the night following the third day two armies were ſeene in the Skye, and the leſſer number put the greater to flight.
               The King would not departe from the army, before hee had knowledge of the enemies lodging, and had ſet all his watches in order. The Noble men lodged in the villages about the playne, which the enemies thought to haue ſurprized that day: the king was the laſt at fielde, and two howers in the night lodged at Foucraynuille, which is a Village at the left hand of the ſame plaine, and there hauing a little refreſhed himſelfe, ſent word to his men, euery one to be in a readines againſt the morning: and after he had reſted himſelfe about two howres on a pallet, obſeruing the auncient precept by Homer, giuen to the Princes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , very early he ſent to enquire for newes of the enemies: newes came that the enemie ſéemed to haue repaſſed the riuer Eure: hee ſent the ſecond time, then word came, that vndoubtedly they had not repaſſed Eure, but that they lay in the Villages about Eure, ſome what further then they were ſuppoſed to be. Theſe newes cheered the king, who deſired greatly to come to hand with the enemy.
               Day light being come, the Princes and Lords Marſhalls came to the king, and ſet their men in battaile aray. The king b
                     •
                  gan in the preſence of his houſhold ſeruants and other preſent, to make a moſt feruent and deuout prayer to God, committing his life, and the liues of his faithfull ſubiects and ſeruants, and the defence of his cauſe vnto him who is the

mightie God of battailes. The Princes and Lords Catholicks, went to heare Maſſe, and their deuotions done, went to refreſh themſelues. The  King ſent to them of the reformed Religion in like manner, to commit themſelues to Gods moſt mercifull protection by prayers, & went in like manner to refreſh themſelues. The king liueth ſo in the preſence of God, that hee is a ſpectacle of royall godlineſſe and vertue to men, and to the bleſſ
                     •
                  d Angels of God.
               All the kings companies hearing that they ſhould ioyne in battaile that day with the enemies, did exceedingly reioyce, and by nine a clock the king came into the field, and vppon warning giuen by two Canon ſhot, by ten a clock all the companies were in order in their places.
               The placing of the Duke d' Mayne his battaile, was much like to the kings: the Duke d' Mayne with his Cornet, which might bee of two hundred and fiftie horſes, was in the middeſt of two Squadrons of Launces, of them that were come out of Flanders, which might be of twelue or thirteene hundred horſe.
               The Duke of Nemours with his Squadron of two hundred and fiftie horſe for his ſafety, ſet himſelfe in the middle of theſe Squadrons of launces.
               The Knight d'Aumale likewiſe thruſt himſelfe into that companie, thinking himſelfe there to be ſafe, ſo that there was in that huge company about eighteene hundred horſemen marching in a front. On the ſides 
                     •
                  t this great huge companie, were two regiments of Swiſſers, lined with French foote men.
               There were two other Squadrons of Launces, the one of light horſemen, French, Italians and Albaneſes on the right hand: the other on the left ſide of Wallons and Spanyards: in the middle betweene both were French-footemen and Lance-knights.
               The two wings were two great companies of Rutters, which might bee on the right wing ſeauen hundred horſe, and on the left ſide fiue hundred, they had on their left wing two Culuerins and two baſtard Culuerins.
               The king perceauing that the enemy would not come forward, went toward them, and hauing marched about a hundred and fiftie paces, got the aduantage of the ſunne and winde, and perceaued that his enemies were in number more then they thought: for the king perceaued that they were fiue thouſand horſemen, and eightéene thouſand footemen.
               The rebels were gliſtering with gold, which they had gotten out of the coffers of the Citizens of Paris, Rhemes, and other townes by violence and robery, and out of the king of Spayne his coffers, and alſo out of Saint Peters treaſure.
               The kings army was gliſtering with yron and ſtéele, there were in the

kings army to bée ſéene a terrible ſight, of two thouſand Gentlemen in complet armour from top to toe, burning in affection to doo their king  and Countrey good ſeruice, for the conſeruation of their wiues, children, houſes and goods.
               The King was in the front of his Squadron, with a great bunch of white feathers on his Helmet, and another bunch on his horſes forehead.
               The Princes, Earles, and knights of the holy Ghoſt, and other principall Lords, and Gentlemen of the chiefeſt houſes in France, were in the fore ranke.
               The king exhorted all his company with great modeſty, with their humble prayers, to commit themſelues vnto God, and to ſhew example to others, began to conceaue a feruent praier: which done, the king walked vp and downe, willing them to doo the like, and encouraging them like valiant men, to ſtand to the defence of a iuſt cauſe.
               As ſoone as hée was come to his place, the Lord Mariuault brought him newes, that certaine companies of Picardie, vnder the conduct of the Lords Humiers and Mouoy, with other Lords and Gentlemen, to the number of two hundred horſe, were within two miles of him.
               But the king fully reſolued to giue battaile with that power which he had, would not delay any longer, but ſent commaundement to the Lord Guiche, to cauſe him to ſhoote with the Ordinance: which thing hée did ſtraight waies, whereby the enemies receaued great hurt: for the king had diſcharged nine Canon ſhot, with great effect, before the enemy could begin.
               After thrée or foure voleyes of ſhot had paſſed on both ſides, the 1. Onſet.
                   Squadron of their old light horſemen compounded of French men, Italians, & Albaneſes, conſiſting of fiue or ſixe hundred horſes, came to giue the charge to the Marſhall Aumont, carrying with them the Lanceknights who were on their ſide.
               But the Marſhall Aumont willing to begin, ſet vppon the enemy ſo hardly, that he enforced them to ſcatter, and to flée with great confuſion and feare, whome he chaſed to a little wood on the back ſide, where the ſaid Lord Marſhall ſtayed, attending the Kings comming as hee had in charge.
               During this chaſe, the company of Rutters on the right hand of the 2. Onſet.
                   battaile of the enemies, marched to haue ſeazed vppon the artillerie, but they were met with light horſemen, who made them quicklie retyre.
               Then the Squadron of Launces, Wallons and Flemmings, marched 3. Onſet.
                   on to haue charged with a freſh charge, the ſaide light horſemen fighting with the Rutters: but the Baron Byron ſhewed himſelfe in the field, and

gaue the onſet on the reregard, becauſe he could not ſet on the forefront, there in the conflict he was hurt in the arme, and in the face, but at length  the enemy was de
                     •
                  eted and ſcattered.
               The Lord Montpencier ſéeing a great army of ſeauen hundred Spaniſh Launciers, and thrée hundred Harquebuſiers on horſeback, with corſelets and murrions, with thrée great ſtandards that were vnder the gouernement of the County Egmond, aduaunced toward them, and gaue them ſuch a charge, as that (albeit he was vnhorſed) yet quickly getting vp againe, brake their aray, put them to flight, and aboade there Maſter of the field. There was a frantick Franciſcan Frier of Biſcay, called Frier Mathew de Aguirre, who runne vp and downe with his GOD, (whome they call Crucifix) in his hand, (all his wit was in his Crucifixes head) and incouraging the rebells, and running againſt the Hugonets, as though he would haue frighted them, and wrought ſome myracle with his Idoll, or played the bulbegger in a cloyſter, but a ſhot of Ordinance did beate him downe and his God, ſo that there he ended his frantick fit.
               At the ſelfe ſame time, the great Squadron of the Duke d'Mayne came marching to the battailion, hauing on the left wing foure hundred 4. Onſet.
                   Harquebuſiers on horſeback, who gaue a volley of ſhot within fiue and twentie paces of the Kings Squadron: the ſame volley being ended, the head of the enemies Squadron ſet on the Kings Squadron. The King receaued the enemy with ſuch a conſtancy and courage, that after a quarter of an hower of hard figh
                     •
                  ing (hauing before played the part of a king and great Captaine, in commaunding and ordering of things) now hee playeth the part of a luſty and braue Souldiour. So that in ſuch a great and furious aſſault, he behaued himſelf ſo valiantly, that he brake and put in diſaray that terrible Forreſt of Launces, and at length after he had put them to fl
                     •
                  ght with great confuſion and terror, he followed the victory, and being loſt in the chaſe, cauſed a great heauines in his army, vntil that within a while they ſpyed him, comming all berayed with the bloud of his enemies, without any hurt receaued.
               And as the king was returning from the chaſe to his company, with fifteene or ſixtéene horſes, he was ſet on by two battailions of Swiſſers enemies, and three companies of Wallons, and certaine other who did weare redd croſſes. The king did ſet vpon them with his ſmall number, tooke away their Cornets, and killed thoſe that carryed and guarded them.
               When the King had come to his place againe, the whole armie in token of thankſgiuing to God for his ſafe returne, 
                     •
                  aluted him with this acclamation, God ſaue the King.
               Two thouſand horſemen in all, of Princes, noble men and gentlemen,

did defeat al this huge army of fiue thouſand horſemen and eight thouſand footmen, the reſt of the Kings forces neuer ſ
                     •
                  irring from their places. 
               
               Thus the Horſemen béeing ſcattered, there remained yet Swiſſers, Lanceknights, and French footmen.
               The Launceknights and French footmen were charged, and about two thouſand and foure hundred remained on the place, as it were in a moment. The reſt were taken priſoners, and ſome of them fled into the woods, whereof a great number wandering abroad were ſlaine by the Peſants.
               The Swiſſers notwithſtanding they had loſt their Horſemen, which were at their wings part beeing ſlaine, and part fled, ſet a good countenance on the matter.
               The King once was minded to ſet the French companies on them to diſaray them, and had ſent the Baron Biron to that effect: but calling to mind the ancient aliance betweene that nation and the crowne of France, called him back againe with his companies, and offered them grace and mercy: ſo much he did to thoſe companies of Frenchmen, who were with them, who refuſed not his gracious fauour, but comming and paſſing by him, rendered vnto his Maieſty their Colonels, Captains, Souldiers and Enſignes.
               The King ſtaying to pardon the Swiſſers, gaue the enemy leaſure to auoid by flight. And whileſt he ſtayed to do this Princelike act, iudging that he was not called to that high degree of Maieſty, ad interitum: but ad beneficentiam generis humani. The Marſhall Aumont with a great company which he had aſſembled from the purſute, in like manner the grand Prior, and the Marſhall Biron, who by reaſon of his great experience (for that hee had béen at ſo many ſtormes of battails and ſkirmiſhes) with his horſemen and companies of French footmen, was reſerued to the laſt on
                  
                     •
                  et, if need had béen relyed themſelues to the King.
               The companies alſo of the Lord Humiers, Mony, and other gentlemen of Picardy, came in the middle of the battell, and after the victory came to the King.
               The Duke de Maine ſeeing that the miſhap which he wiſhed to others fel vpon him, tooke his way with great terrour toward Iury, leauing behind his ordinance, bagge and baggage, and as many beſide as could not runne away ſo ſwiftly as he did, the great kill▪ Deuils Don Pedro Moreo, and Don Iuan de Cordoua, two Spaniſh Moores, with ſuch as could follow them ran after him. Great companies of the enemie had gotten before, ſome followed after: and as feare made them haſt to preſſe ouer the bridge of Iury to runne a ſecond courſe toward Mante, it is reported that he killed ſome with his owne hand to make him a way ouer, leaſt he ſhould be the hindermoſt: and when he had paſſed ouer he cauſed the bridge to be

broken, leauing his friendes to ſhift for themſelues, and by that occaſion many through feare beeing out of their wits, caſt themſelues into the riuer,  where were drowned aboue fifteene hundred perſons. Others fearing to be taken by them who followed in the chaſe, killed their Horſes to ſtop the wayes, and many ſuppoſing to haue ſaued themſelues in the woods, fell into the hands of the Peſants and countrey people, which vſed them more cruelly then the Souldiers would haue done.
               The Duke de Mayne hauing paſſed Iurye & broken the bridge, tooke his way to Mante, there to paſſe ouer the bridge, and to retire to Pontoiſe. The inhabitants once had determined not to let him in: whereupon ſome do report, that beeing before Mante, he ſwore with great othes that hee had diſcomfited the Kings forces, and had killed the King with his owne hand: but when they would not be mooued therewith, knowing the contrary, hee began to intreat them, ſhewing them the danger wherein hee was; they mooued with his prayers to compaſſion of his eſtate, let him in, with condition that his retinue ſhould paſſe by ten and ten that night ouer the Bridge.
               The Duke of Nemours, Baſſampierre, the Vicount Tauaine, Roſne, and many others fled to Dreux, and the day after to Chartres: many who could not follow them went aſtray, and knowing not whither they went, were taken priſoners.
               The King hauing played the great Captaine and luſty Souldier in getting the victory, now ſheweth himſelfe a right Generall of an army in purſuing the ſayd victory: for which well to doe, he deuideth his forces as followeth.
               The grand Prior with a great company hee ſent to chaſe the enemy on the left hand toward Eureux. The Baron of Biron, and with him the reſidue of horſemen, who were gathered together, and the companies which were arriued out of Picardie at the inſtant of the battel, he ſent at the right hand toward Dreux.
               
               The King himſelfe accompanied with the Princes Countie and Montpenſier, the Marſhals of Aumont, and Trimouille, with a great company of other Lords and Captayns of the ſame army, followed on the victory, and continued the chaſe fiue howers.
               The King vnderſtanding how the Duke de Mayne had entred into Mante, tooke vp his lodging at Roſnye, two miles from Mante, where he was as meanly lodged as the enemy.
               Many were ſlaine in the purſute, many were taken priſoners.
               The King with two thouſand horſes killed aboue two thouſand horſemen, and many of them Commanders: fiftéene hundred and aboue were drowned at the riuer Iury in the flight. The moſt part of the footemen were cut off in peeces, fewe ranne away who were either ſlayne in the chaſe, or

by the people of the country, & aboue 4. hundred of the enemies were takē priſoners. The Swiſſers and the Frenchmen ioyned with them, yeelded  themſelues to the Kings clemencie: So that of three and twentie thouſand of ye enemie, there returned neuer home aboue eight thouſand. Their bagge, baggage, artillerie and munition was ſtayed in the Kings hand. There were aboue twentie Cornets of horſemen taken, and among them the white Cornet, and the bearer thereof, to wit, the Lord Boyſdaul phine taken priſoner by the King. The great Enſigne of the Generall of the Spanyards and Flemmings, the Colonell Cornets of the Rutters were taken, aboue threeſcore Enſignes of footmen, as Flemmings, French men and Launce-knights, and foure and twentie of the Swiffers that yeelded themſelues: all theſe 
                     •
                  ame into the Kings hands.
               Among them that were ſlayne were chiefeſt of all the Countie Egmond, the Duke Brunſwicke, Captaine Colin a Spanyard, the Lord Chaſtaigueray, and many others.
               Of priſoners taken were the Earle Auſtfriſt, who was with the Rutters: many Lords, Spanyards, Italians, Frenchmen and Flemmings. Of Frenchmen, the Lord Boyſdaulphine, Cigoigne, who bare the white Cornet of the Duke de Mayne. This is the third time that this Rebell had fallen into the Kings hands within foure moneths, and had alwayes found fauour at his hands.
               There were alſo priſoners, Meſdauid, Fouteyne, Martil, Lechant, Lodon, Hugueſan, Falandre, Teniſay, Chaſteliere, Deſcuueaux, with many others.
               Of the Kings ſide were ſlayne the Lords Clermont, Antragues, & one of the Captaynes of the Kings gards, who deceaſed nigh the Kings perſon. The Lord Tiſchombert who had borne great charges in warre, and now would needes ſerue as a ſouldier in the Kings Cornet. The Lord of Longauluay in Normandy of foureſcore yeares of age, the Lord of Creuay Cornet bearer to the Prince Montpencier, the Lord Vienne Lieftenant to the Lord Benuron, the Lords of Manuille, Fequers, Ʋaloys, and twentie Gentlemen more at the moſt.
               There were hurt the Marqueſſe of Neste, the Earle of Choyſy, the Lord d'O, the Earle Lude, the Lords Montluet, Lauergne and Roſny, and about twentie Gentlemen more without any danger of death.
               The King going to chaſe the enemie, and hauing deuided his companies (as is aforeſayd) left the Marſhall Byron with the reſt of his forces to conduct them and followe after him.
               Here (good Chriſtian Reader) thou haſt to note certaine fatall periods of things, to wit, the circumſtances of the perſons, time and place in the execution of Gods iuſtice vpon his enemies.
               The 23. day of December 1559. Claude Duke of Guize, and Charles
                  
Cardinall of Lorreyne his brother, in the raigne of Francis the ſecond, procured Annas du Borg, one of the chiefeſt Senators of the Court of Parliament  of Paris, to be burned for the Goſpell at Saint Ihan in Greues in Paris.
               
               The 23. of December (as their Calender is now, which was the day of the natiuitie of Henry of Bourbon which now raigneth) in the yeare 1588. the laſt Duke and Cardinall of Guize were ſlayne at Bloys, when they had concluded to murther the King the next morning following that day.
               The fourth day of March 1561. Claude of Guize, father to this laſt, tooke armes agaynſt the edict of Ianuary, and committed the cruell murther of Vaſſie, by the which breach of the peace were ciuill warres raiſed vp in France, and euer ſince haue béen entertayned and nouriſhed by his poſteritie: which warre was his vndoing.
               The ſame day of the ſame moneth in the yeare 1585. the laſt Duke of Guize, ſonne to the ſayd Claude, tooke armes againſt the King, which was the beginning of theſe laſt ciuill warres of the League, by the which they haue procured their owne vndoing and of many others.
               The ſame day of the moneth, the Duke de Mayne, brother to the ſayd laſt Duke of Guize, and heire of the Captainſhip of the rebellion, made a ſhipwracke of all his forces at Saynt Andrewes plaine, without hope euer to recouer the like forces.
               
                  Claude Duke of Guyze, in December, in the year 1561. fought the firſt battell that was giuen in all theſe ciuill Warres with Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of Condie, Prince of famous and bleſſed memory, in the plaine of Dreux, with an vncertaiue iſſue, but in equall loſſes, ſo that to this day, it is vniudged who had ye victory: but well knowen that the Duke of Guyze had the greateſt loſſe.
               The Duke de Maine fought agaynſt Henry of Bourbon, the fourth of that name, now King of France and Nauarre, at the plaine of Saint Andrew, next adioyning to the other, and the places not diſtant paſſing a mile a ſunder, with a reparable loſſe.
               The Lord Rendan a rebellious Leaguer in Auuergne, with ſuch power as he could make in the ſayd countrey, but ſpecially in the Townes of Rions and Brion, rebelled, and holden in the ſame rebellion by the Ieſuits, beſieged Iſoire, a great and populous towne in the ſaid Auuergne, becauſe it continued in the Kings obedience.
               The Lords Chaſſeran, and Rochemayne, willing to do ſome honorable ſeruice to the King, and good to their countrey, gathered ſuch power as they could of the Kings ſubiectes to reſcue the ſayd towne of Iſoire, from falling into the handes of the rebels, and with a meane power, truſting in GOD the defender of his Ordinance, and wayghing the right of the

cauſe, marched towards Iſoire.
               
               The ſayd Lord Rendan, vnderſtanding of their approach, rayſed vp the  ſiege, and went intending to meete the ſayd Lordes Chaſſeran and Rochemayne, and at the ſame day and time of the battell at Saint Andrewes playne, meeting in a playne field not farre from Jſoire, tried the quarell by the ſword.
               There the ſayd Rendan was ouerthrowen, and aboue foureſcore Gentlemen of his were ſlayne on the place, all his footmen cut to pieces, the artillery, bagge and bagage, with many priſoners taken: ſo the Towne of Iſoyre was deliuered from the danger of the enemie, retayned and confirmed in the Kings dutifull obedience.
               It is ſaid, how after the victory the King deuided his army into foure parts, three of them were appointed their quarters to follow the chaſe, and the Marſhall Biron to follow after the King with the reſidue of the army.
               The King hauing taken this order, followed after the Duke de Mayne: but finding the bridg broaken, was faine to go thrée miles about, to paſſe the riuer afoord, and in that way he found many ſtraglers, whom he tooke priſoners, which was a good turne for them, or elſe they had béen ſlaine by others: he came ſo faſt after the Duke d' Mayne that hee did miſſe him but a little: but vnderſtanding how he was receaued in Mant, the king lodged that night at Roſni (as is ſaid) very ſimple.
               The fift day the Duke d'Mayne very early, fearing to be beſieged there, retyred from Mante to Pontoyſe, where he ſoiourned few dayes, to take ſome ſure order for the ſafety of the Towne, and after went to Saint Denis.
               
               The ſame day the King ſent to ſommon the Towne of Mante, which deliuered the keyes of their towne to his Maieſty, receaued and acknowledged him their king and prince, and continued there vntill the twentie day of March to refreſh his army, wearied with ſo many labours and hardnes of winter, to take counſel of the courſe which he was to take hereafter, and to expect certaine munition of warre, which was comming to him from Diepe.
               
               The Citie of Paris firſt author of this warre, had conceaued an aſſured confidence of all proſperous ſucceſſe, by the vaine bragges which the Duke d'Mayne did caſt foorth, afore hee went out with the army. The Friers & Ieſuites increaſed this vain confidence in their pulpets, by aſſuring them, either of a certaine victory, or elſe of recoyling of the King as farre as beyond Loyre: ſo that euery day they looked for the King dead or aliue, and all his ſpoyles to be brought for a ſpectacle, and to bee ſolde and bought among them, or elſe to heare of his flight as farre as the riuer of Loyre.
               
               
                  
This great confidence made them to liue very ſecure and careleſſe in prouiding for the Citie: beſides that they reſted much vpon the great multitude which is within the ſayd Citie, there beeing great bablers and boaſters  (for the Pariſien is as Epimenides ſpeaketh of the Cretayns, a lyer, euill beaſt, and ſlothfull belly)
               The towns alſo which then did hold round about their Citie, as Pontoyſe, beneath vpon the ſame riuer, Charonton, Meaux, Laguye, Corbeil, Melun, Montereau, aboue vpon the riuer, perſwaded them that the King whatſoeuer might happen neither durſt come neere them, neither was able to let the carriage of the victuals to their citie, which was the cauſe that they liued from hand to mouth, and had prouided no more then in tyme of the greateſt peace that can be. But after the rumor of the ouerthrow of the Leaguers came to Paris, all the Cittie was repleniſhed with terror: many of the Citizens came to the King to plead their innocency, but ſpecially two of the chiefeſt of the citie, to wit, Belieure, who was one of the Kings lately deceaſed Secretaries of eſtate, and Brulart Preſident of the Court of Parliament in Paris.
               
               Theſe two men had béen wauering a great while, not faythfull to their old maiſter King Henry the third, who had preferred them, neither did greatly truſt the Leaguers, and yet liued in ſome ſuſpition of this King now raygning. But when they heard of the Kings good ſucceſſe, contrary to their expectation, like good Mariners they turned their ſaile
                     •
                   to the wind, came to the King to make their excuſe and ſubmiſſion, and both of them were receaued curteouſly of the King. The King ſaid vnto Belieure, that he had thought him to be an honeſt man, vntill he fell to the Q Mother, and ioyned to the company of Vileroy: but Brulard was receaued with greater fauour, whom the King hath employed ſince in great affayrs, as to bee his Ambaſſador to the Cantons of Swiſſerland.
               In this conſternation, the Pariſiens who had liued in great ſecurity began to open their eies, and ſee the danger whereto the great bragges of the Duke de Mayne, the promiſes of the Fryers and Ieſuits, & their vaine hope had caſt them, and did threaten them at their doores, and cauſed them to bee deuided into diuers opinions: for ſome who were of a hot nature, would haue a new muſter to be made in the Cittie, and on a ſudden, afore he had ſuplyed the roome of them which were dead in the battell, to ſet vppon him: but this courſe was thought raſh and dangerous for many eauſes. Other gaue a wiſer counſell, if it could haue béen followed, to wit, to try his elemency, and that vpon reaſonable conditions, ther was no doubt, but they ſhould find fauour and peace: and for the proofe thereof, alleaged his gentle diſpoſition far from all cruelty, and deſyre of reuenging which hee hath alwayes ſhewed in all his actions.
               Some were of a contrary opinion, and gaue counſell to take order for

the prouiſion and fortifications and pollicy of the citie, they ſhewed that by the multitude and other meanes which they had they were able to geue  him a new battell, if he would goe about to draw neere to their C
                     •
                  tie, and at the worſt they were able to abide a ſiege: they ſhewed, that he was not able with as great forces agayne as hee had to force them, and that hee would not hazard his old experienced Souldiers ſo raſhly, knowing that it were hard for him to recouer the like againe: to be ſhort, great variance roſe among them, as the manner is in ſuch a caſe.
               Whileſt this variance was among them, the Duke de Mayne came to Saint Denis to view the countenance of the Pariſiens, feare and ſhame warning him not to come into Paris. None or few of the inhabitants of Paris went to ſalute him, but they onely who had ſent him to the butchery in the playne of Saint Andrew, to wit, Frier Henrico Caietano, Frier Sixtus his Nuncio, the blinde Captaine Bernardino Mendoza the Spaniſh Moore, Ambaſſador of Spayne there, and the inceſtuous Fryer Byſhop of Lyons, with few more to comfort him, and to goe forward in his begun rebellion. Therefore it was thought good to remedy the affayrs as well as they could deuiſe, that the ſayd Duke de Mayne and the Comendador Moreo who was then in Paris, ſhould goe with all ſpeede into Picardie to ſtay the remnant of the forces of Flanders, which were going home through Picardie, after they had loſt their guide the County Egmond, and that there the Duke de Mayne ſhould gather ſuch new forces as he could: the Comendador Moreo ſhould goe to the Duke of Parma to bring him ye goodnewes of the victory of the County Egmond and his company: but ſpecially great care ſhould bee had, leaſt Paris and Saint Denis ſhould in any caſe yeeld to the King.
               In the meane time Frier Henrico and Bernardino would take order to pacify the ſtrife and diuerſity of opinions.
               They returning to Paris, ſcattered few Piſtolets of Spayne, and Ducados Italianos among the Fryers and Ieſuits, to teach them Frierlike Rhetorike. Theſe rauing Prophets, and among them one Peter Creſtin (ſuch a one as was of my remembrance magiſter noſtor de cornibus, or magiſter noster Olyuer Maillard) ſtept vp: they fret, they fume, they fome lyke Boars, they rayle, they reuile, there is nothing holy before them: they ſhew how the King is an heretik, a relapſe, ſon of an heretike father and mother, they looke euery day for a new excommunication from Rome, he is out of the boſome of holy Church, incapable of the Crowne of France, no obedience is due vnto him: they deſcant vppon the praiſe of his gentle nature, how it is but fayned, and if he were once eſtabliſhed, hee would ſhew ſuch cruelty vppon holy Church, as hee did vppon Borgoyn, Geſſey, and few other Fryers, he would roote out the Catholik religion, and plant here ſie. It were far better to die all, then to admit ſuch an heretike ouer them: if

they die in this quarrell, they goe ſtraight way to heauen, they are bleſſed Martirs, they ſhall be Saints, as Frier Iames Clement was of late: theſe  raging furies of hell do ſo perſwade the people, that as a people deſtitute of reaſon, and 
                     •
                  ere
                     •
                  t of their witts are lead to their owne deſtruction by theſe enchaunters: ſo that afterward if any man ſhould ſpeake of peace with the King, or of any thing beſides warre, fire and deſolation, hee was preſently murthered by them, or caſt into the riuer: in one day more then twenty perſons were ſo murthered. But fearing to bee compaſſed with a ſiege afore they had ſet order in their affayres and pollicy to daly with the King, they ſent from Paris Fryer Paniguerola, Biſhop of Aſte, and in haſt, and Vileroy to buſie him, and to dilay the ſiege, which they ſuppoſed the K. would haue layedd preſently, with ſpeeches of truces or peace, that they might fortify themſelues in the meane ſpace.
               The King would haue no ſpeeches with ſuch companions, but yet of his accuſtomed clemency, ſent Paniguerola to the Marſhall Biron to ſee what he had to ſay, and what wiſedome he had brought with him out of Italy.
               
               After many ſalutations and popiſh bleſſings, the Frier did wonder much to ſee (ſayd he) that ſo great companie of Catholikes could finde in their hearts to followe after an hereticall King.
               The Marſhall Byron anſwered the ſaucie impudent & malapert Frier, that it would not be ſafe for him nor good for his maſter to meddle with the Kings affayres: we (ſayd the Lord Byron) hold the King for the true and naturall heire of the Crowne of France. That the King maintained their lawes and liberties inuiolable, and had none for enemies but fewe ſtraungers, thruſt forward by ambition, who vnder ye pretence of religion ſought to ouerthrowe all good lawes, to lay downe the foundation of their tyrannie, to giue entrance to the Spaniſh King, and for religion to bring in all Atheiſme.
               The Frier proteſted that his maſter was free from medling in any ſuch enterpriſes. But his doings, his practiſes, his miniſtring of money to the Rebels, his conuerſation and familiaritie with Bernardine Mendoza, was ſo auerred to the fooliſh Friers face, that he was proued a lying falſe flattering Frier.
               Thereupon maſter Frier (his ſtomacke being not yet ſatiſfied) would haue a ſaucie Frierlike fling againſt the King, and demaunded the Marſhall Byron, how they being profeſſors of the Catholike religion, made ſo light account of his maſters holines and purpoſes, to carrie armes againſt the Catholikes their brethren.
               The Lord Byron anſwered, that they carried armes agaynſt rebels and traytors, and told him agayne, that it were very wiſely done for him & his maſter to looke ſomewhat neerer to his owne eſtate. For if he ſo encroached and medled with them, they would quickly excommunicate him. And that

there were diuers Biſhops in France as good Catholikes as his maſter, who would bee glad to bee made Patriaches in their ſeuerall Prouinces,  and would finde as good Scripture to maintaine their authoritie, as his maſter had any to defend his. Some reaſoning being vpon this poynt, Frier Paniguerola was found to be ſo great a Clark, that he could anſwer little or nothing. But at length to conclude the talke, he ſhewed the ſomme of his Ambaſſage, to wit, he deſired a good peace to be concluded, and ſome paynes to be taken to bring the King to be a Catholike. But he ſhewed not his intent which was to delay the ſiege of Paris, if the king had intended to beſiege it out of hand.
               The other Ambaſſadour, to wit Vileroy, was ſent by the King to the Lord Pleſsis Morney, a noble man of great wiſedome and profound learning, who handled the ſayd Vileroy very plainly and roughly, reproaching vnto him his vnfaithfull and treacherous ſeruice to his old maſter Henry the third. And when he had denyed theſe things wherewith he was charged, the Lord Beaulieu both condemned his fayre flattering wordes and promiſes which he brought now full of diſſimulation, and verified his olde trayterous practiſes agaynſt his olde maſter: it was thought that iuſtice ſhould haue been executed vppon him for his treaſons, according to the Kings edicts.
               The King hauing ſoiourned at Mante fewe dayes, tooke his way to Vernon, which lyeth between Mante and Pont de larche, which alſo yéelded vnto him. From Vernon the Gentlemen of Normandy, to the number of fifteene hundred horſes, retyred to their home about the eight of March. The Lord Chartres gouernour of Deepe, returned to Deepe ſicke, in whoſe abſence certaine Leaguers (inhabitants there) went about to haue ſeazed vpon the towne for the League, who being detected and preuented at his returne, were exiled out of the Towne to the number of ſixe ſcore, among whom were many of the richeſt ſort of all the towne.
               About the ſame time that the King ſoiourned at Vernon, the Duke of Longueuile, & the Lord of Tinteuille arriued to the King with eight thouſand Rutters.
               The King hauing ſeazed on Vernon and Mante, and ſtopped the traffique of that riuer with the Citie of Paris on that ſide, and prouided for the ſafetie of the ſayd Townes, concluded in his counſell to beſiege Paris, the principalleſt Citie of the Realme, where it was conſidered that the Citie being populous and great, would eaſily be woon by famine, which would eſchewe ſlaughter both of his owne Souldiers and Citizens, whome hée would by all gentle meanes bring to their duetie of obedience: and therefore it was thought good to ſtop the paſſages of the riuers Oyſe, Marne, and Seyne aboue Paris. For in ſtopping Oyſe the Towne of Pontoyſe alſo ſhould bee diſtreſſed. Therefore the King deuideth his armie as followeth.

The Duke of Longueuile ſhould haue part of his armie to beſiege Beaumont vpon Oyſe. He ſent the Marſhall Byron with another part of the armie to ſcoure the riuer Marne, where he tooke Creſſie, a towne ſituated in  
                  Brie betweene Meaulx and Corbeil, where a Pariſien named Peter was Captaine, for whoſe raunſome was proffered eight hundred Crownes: but the King for ſome ſpeciall cauſes commaunded him to be hanged, and fiue and twentie of the chiefeſt of the towne with him.
               The ſayd Marſhall Byron immediatly after the taking of Creſſie, layed the ſiege before Lagnye vpon the riuer Marne right agaynſt Corbeil. The Citizens required ſpace of time to ſend vnto the King, which was yet in Normandy, to craue his gracious mercie, which they obtayned.
               The King about the 21. of March hauing receiued certayne munitions from Deepe, and taken order for the ſafetie of Normandy, with part of his armie coaſted betweene the riuers of Seyne and Eure, and tooke the townes of Poſſie and S. Germain, and the Pont S. Clow, and marched toward Corbeil, to ſeaze vpon the riuer of Seyne on that ſide.
               It is ſaid before how the Leaguers had compacted with the King of Spayne, vpon ſome conditions of receiuing a certaine ſomme of money, to haue deliuered the Citie of Marſels, a great & ſtrong Citie in Prouance, vpon the Mediterran Sea: but being diſappoynted of his purpoſe, as is ſaid in the firſt Booke, that Citie continued faithfull vnto the King, vntil the Duke of Guize his death.
               The King of Spayne had corrupted aforehand the chiefe gouernour of the Citie, by giuing him pay, to the ſumme of fifty Crownes a day, he had alſo drawne to his faction, three ſcore of the chiefeſt Citizens, paying to ſome forty crownes, ſome more, and ſome leſſe a day. Thus the hearts of a great number of Citizens being diſpoſed, the death of the Duke of Guize was bruted euen to the coaſt of the Mediterrane Sea. The gouernour and his complices hearing of that, began to 
                     •
                  nuaigh and bring the City to a wau
                     •
                  ring and inconſtancy of wills & counſels: ſome would haue the Towne to yéelde to the League, and ſome would not: ſo the Citie remayned as neuter, hanging neither to Spayne nor to France.
               
               In the meane time, the Lord Valete as is ſaid, hauing made peace with the Lord Diguieres, and conſidering the wauering of that Citie, had prepared a nauy of Galeys on the Sea before the ſaid City, to controule ſuch Ships or other veſſels, as might come or goe that way to benefit the ſaid Towne, whome he mol
                     •
                  ſted as Leaguers.
               The gouernour and the reſt of malcontents, hired by the King of Spayne practized, that the ſaid King of Spayne, and the Duke of Sauoy, ſhould ſend Galleys thether, in ſhew to clenſe the Seas: but in déede to bring with them thrée thouſand men, that ſhould vpon a luddaine be landed there at the time appoynted, and ſhould ſeaze vpon the City, to the

King of Spaynes vſe. At the time appoynted, came the Galeys and Souldiours and tooke land. The ſecond magiſtrate of the city being a faithfull  Citizen, and in that neutrality of the City, ſuſpecting ſome treaſon, thought to preuent it by diligence, and as it pleaſed God, that night tooke vpon him to view the watch, and in his way met with certaine Mariners all amazed and frighted, requiring him to prouide for the ſafety of the city, for that there were a great number of Spanyards already landed: wherupon he commaunded the towneſmen preſently to arme themſelues. And going a little further accompanied with ſome good Citizens, did light on the company where the chiefe gouernour was, there taking order with the enemy for the entring of the Towne.
               This magiſtrate dnderſtanding of theſe things already, well accompanied with towneſmen, commaunded the dromme to ſound the alarum, and with great courage charged vpon the Spanyards, whome they ſlew in great number, he tooke many of them, and the gouernour of the City priſoner with them, and ſuch of his complices as were with them: ſo the City was yet once preſerued from the Turkiſh bondage of the Spaniards. Euen as the ſhéepe ſtraying from their ſhepheards, runne into the Wolues daunger; ſo townes and Cities, euen whole Prouinces, with drawing themſelues from the obedience of their Lords, are dayly in danger to be made a pray to their enemies.
               It is ſaid how the Duke d'Mayne, after his flight from Saint Andrews plaine, went to Saint Denis, to ſée what entertainement the Pariſiens would ſhew him: and after he with few had concluded to holde Paris, and Saint Denis ſpecially, faſt from the Kings power, and ſo he and the Spaniſh Moore, Commendator Moreo went into Picardie, & thence to Bruxels to the Duke of Parma.
               
               The Duke d'Mayne ſoiorned at P
                        •
                     ronne, a towne in Picardie, ſituated vpon the riuer Sonie, betwéene Amiens and Saint Quintine, to gather ſuch forces as he could, he craued aide from al parts, but they are as ſlowly to come to him, as he is earneſt to enuite them. Balagny Gouernour of Cambray, did promiſe him fiftéene hundred horſes out of Picardie. There the Duke d'Mayne ſéeing that al things went contrary, yet to eaſe his ſtomack, he maketh great braggs, how that he will make againe an army of thirty thouſand men.
               Theſe great bragges did procéede of the vaine hope which they had already conceaued of the King of Spayne: for while theſe things aboue ſaide were a dooing by the King, about the 20. of March they ſent foure Ambaſſadors into Spayne: firſt from the Duke d'Mayne, and another from the Duke of Lorreyne, the third from the Duke Merceur, and the laſt in the name of the whole body of the League. They arriued at Vadolit, in the latter end of Aprill.
               
                  
The ſomme of their Ambaſſage was to begge, and not much neither, but thrée Milions of Gold, and thirty thouſand men, vpon that condition  that they would make him King of France, if he could get it, yet promiſing their furtherance. So after much capping and crouching, begging and crauing, chopping and changing, what money they obtayned, it is not certaine, but it is reported that they were promiſed one Milion, and that they had thirty thouſand Crownes, which they tooke, in hope that more would come, and an army out of the Lowe Countreyes of Flanders.
               
               The King of Spayne was willing to hearken to theſe Ambaſſadors for thrée cauſes, ambition, feare, and deſire of reuenging.
               Firſt, by the proffer of this Ambaſſage, hée was put in ſome hope, that conſidering the great power of theſe three Dukes, and the great power of the League, that is of the Townes, Cities, and commons rebelled, hée might perhaps ſpéede better then he looked for. And if he ſhould not ſpéed in the whole, yet he might in part thereof.
               The ſecond cauſe was feare, which cauſed him with all his meanes to keepe the King from growing mighty: for conſidering his great valoure, and the iniuries which both his predeceſſors & he had receaued at the Spaniards handes, would in time call them to remembrance, and ſeeke the means to recouer his owne.
               The third cauſe was deſire of reuenge, ſuppoſing that in working him miſchiefe, he might bee reuenged of the loſſe, reproch and diſhonour of his Spaniards and Flemmings, who had remayned to dung the playne of S. Andrew: by reaſon of theſe particular affections, & not for any loue which hee had to the Leaguers or Leagued, he wrote to the Duke of Parma, to paſſe in perſon with ſuch Forces as hee had and could ſpare in the lowe Countreis, to ſuccour the rebels in France.
               
               In the meane while that the King ſoiorned at Mante, the Pariſiens beeing hardened by the Deuilliſh and ſeditious Sermons of the Fryers and Ieſuits, as the Egyptians were by the enchauntmentes of Iamnes & Iambres: they elected for gouernor of their city the Duke of Nemours, by whoſe conduct they began to fortify their walles: men, women and Children, night and day, they pulled downe many houſes in the Suburbs, they receaued into the City three thouſand Germans, whom they placed part of them in the Arſenall, and others in watch and ward in the moſt needfull places of the city. They gathered corne and wine into the Citie ſo much as the could.
               They fortified alſo Saint Denis, Corbeil, Melun, Montereau fault yonne and Sennes.
               
               The King paſſing in the ſight of the Citie of Paris, layed the ſiege before Corbeil, which ſhortly after yelded: the King ſtopped the riuer of Seine with a chayne of Iron, ſo that no boats being neuer ſo little could paſſe by.
               
                  
From Corbeil the King went to lay the ſiege before Montereau, which is a great towne ſituated vppon the fall of the riuer Yonne into Seine, which  yeelded without any reſiſting.
               From Montereau the King returned to Melune, a ſtrong towne vppon Seine: this town part of it lyeth vpon the South banke of Seine, and part is in an Iland within the ſayd riuer, there the Rebels had placed a ſtrong garriſon: but the Citizens and Souldiers perceauing that they would be forced, and that there was no hope of ſuccour, yeelded the place, and put themſelues in the Kings ſeruice.
               The King hauing placed a ſtrong garriſon there, wentbacke agayne to Sens, compaſſed it, doth plant ſixe pieces of Ordinance agaynſt the wall, ſent a T
                     •
                  ompeter to the City to ſommon them to render the place, promiſing them all good and gracious fauour.
               The Gouernor called the Lord Chambalon, determined not to receaue him, except firſt he would become a good Catholike. Whereupon the K. began to batter the towne in two ſeuerall places, gaue two aſſaults, where he was repulſed, beeing within the town one thouſand and eight hundred Souldiers, beſides the Citizens and Inhabitants, who were able to make two thouſand Souldiers more. The king therfore thought good to leaue of that enterpriſe, and to follow the courſe taken, to wit, the ſiege of Paris, rayſed therefore the ſiege, and marched toward Paris.
               
               The 25. of Aprill the king layed the ſiege agaynſt Charanton, a towne ſituated vpon the fall of Marne into Seine, in the ſight of the City of Paris. There was in a Tower ten ſouldiers of Paris, which did obſtinat themſelues in the defenſe of the ſame, whom he forced and cauſed their Gouernour to be hanged.
               Hauing ſeazed vpon Charanton, the king doth preſent himſelf before the Citie, about the 28. of Aprill, tooke the Villages about, began to lay downe the forme of the ſiege, where he determined to ſend part of his forces on the South ſide of the Cittie, therewith to compaſſe that ſide. And with the other part to beſiege the North ſide, and the Towne of S. Denis all at once: there he maketh all things ready, maketh his approches, ſitteth ſtill without proffering any force, but onely doth ſtop the entring in of victuals, hoping that ſcarcenes and neede would haue mollifyed their hartes, and the preſent danger of the very famin which did threaten them would haue mooued them to ſome moderat counſell.
               Now wee will leaue the king before this ſiege, harkening what the determination of the Pariſiens is, and goe to ſee what is done in other places. 
               
               About the beginning of May, there was in the noble and loyall Citie of Renes in Britaine a ſauey ſot, prating Frier, who in the pulpit to ſtir vp ſedition in the cittie, tooke it for a poynt of diuinity, and an ornament of Fryerlike

Rhetorike to call the king heretike: but the Court of Parliament there ſo gagged him with a cord about his necke, that when hee had preached  his laſt Sermon on the top of a Ladder, he brake his necke with a ſore fall: there were alſo ſixe of the chiefeſt Cittizens hanged with him for company, for hauing procured this ſeditious Frier in his Sermons to ſtirre vp ſedition.
               About the ſelfe ſame time, the Lord Rieux defeated the Duke of Lorreyn nigh M
                        •
                     tes, and tooke away all his artillery.
               It is ſayd before, how the King ſent the Duke of Longueuille with part of the army to ſcoure and ſtop the riuer Oyſe, who accompanied with the L. la Nouë tooke Beaumont, which was gouerned by the Lord Pierrencourt: there the Duke of Longueuille cauſed the chiefeſt men of the Towne to bee hanged.
               
                  Paris beeing beſieged by the king, as is ſayd, the people do harden their harts more and more, being perſwaded by the Fryers and Ieſuits, and by them whom that ſottiſh and Idolatrous people had in admiration, to wit, the Popes Legat, the Spaniſh Ambaſſador, the Biſhops of Paris, Lyons, Glaſco, Placentia, Aſte, Rhemes, Sanlis: there were the Ducheſſes de Nemours, Mayne, Montpenſier.
               
               The Prouoſt, Eſcheuins, & other officers, they partly encourage, partly do terrifie the people, doo yet once agayne gather a great ſomme of money vpon the inhabitants: they doo caſt great ſtore of artillerie, and prepare all things to withſtand the ſiege.
               They made a ſearch of all the grayne and prouiſion of victuals which were within the Citie. They made alſo a reckoning of the people, which did amoūt to two hundred thouſand perſons: the corne came to that quantitie as would ſuffice the citie for a whole moneth, allowing a pound of bread to euery one a day, and beſides fourtie thouſand buſhels of Oates. They appoynted one Anthony L'amy, a rich Marchant of the Citie, to haue the charge of the market, and to appoynt Bakers in euery quarter of the Citie, to whom he deliuered the corne at foure Crownes the buſhell, and not aboue, & after that rate they ſhould ſell the pound of bread at halfe a Spaniſh royall.
               This order being taken, they went about to aſſure themſelues of the wil of the Citizens, for feare that any ſedition ſhould ariſe by reaſon of the ſcarſenes, which vndoubtedly they ſawe would enſue. They gathered all the chiefeſt Citizens and Captaynes in the halles of their quarters, and there they were made ſweare neuer to conſent to receaue any hereticall King. They were ſworne alſo to detect and reueale any man whom they knewe to diſſent from this their vnion and oath.
               This laſt part of the oth taken, repleniſhed the citie with proſcriptions, confiſcations, baniſhments, cruell torments, executions, funeralls and lamentations:

for a great many were murthered, many iudicially executed, many empriſoned, many ſaued them by flight: but all loſt their goods and  ſubſtance, which was no ſmall pray to the heads of the rebels.
               And that they might moleſt the King with ſallies, they hyred the Lord Vitry, Captayne of one hundred and fiftie horſes, with the ſomme of two thouſand Duckets, which the Ambaſſadour of Spayne did pay.
               Thus hauing ſet a Militarie policie in the Citie, touching the ſtrength of the Citie and the ſinewes thereof, they ſometime would ſet their heads out of the gates to ſee what weather was about: but fearing ſome ſhewer of blowes, they ranne in agayne.
               The King hauing diſtreſſed Paris alreadie twentie dayes, or very nigh, and looking that vpon ſome reaſonable condition they would haue ſought meanes of peace: and ſeeing them contrary to his expectation hardened, and waxed more obſtinate and malicious, with part of his forces ſet vppon the Suburbs of S. Martin, which he tooke without any great reſiſtance. From that day vntill the beginning of Iune, the time paſſed away without any great exployts, but onely certayne light ſkirmiſhes. For the king would not ſhewe any extreame force, hauing a care of them, hoping ſtill that famine would haue mooued them to hearken to reaſon, and to remember their dueties. In the meane time the King cauſed the peeces of artillerie, wherwith the Duke of Longueuille had battered Beaumont vpon Oyſe, to be brought to Paris, which being arriued, the King battered the walles with thirteene péeces of double Canon.
               The Duke of Nemours had in the meane time caſt great ſtore of Ordinance, whereof hee cauſed threeſcore and fiue peeces to bee ſet vppon the walles.
               About the 13. of Iune there came foorth out of Paris a ſtrange kinde of men of warre, which were neuer ſeene in the field before▪ 
                  Quintus Curtius in the life of Alexander (if I remember well) reported of ſuch a kind of ſtrange warriours. For when Alexander came into India with his victorious armie, they perceaued on the top of a mountaine an army of men, as they thought with pikes and long ſtaues: whereupon that terrible armie of Macedonians ſounded the alarum. Alexander ſent horſemen to viewe the enemie: when they came néere they perceaued an armie of Apes, which had imitated the armie of the Macedonians, whom they had ſpyed out of the trees and mountaynes. All the courage of the Macedonians was turned to laughter.
               So the Biſhop of Sanlis would play the like part, he made himſelfe a Captain, his Souldiers were the Cartuſien Friers, the reformed Bernardines and barefoote Friers: the Cartuſiens are of the dyet of the Otter, for they eate nothing but fiſh, their cowle is like vnto the bag wherewith the Apothecaries doo ſtraine their wine hippocras: and by reaſon of

their flegmatick féeding, they are all rotten, and leapers afore they come to halfe of their age, they doo crawle with lice, and taken with that ſicknes,  which the ancients doo call Hydrokephalia, that is a madnes procured by rotten flegme enflamed. The reformed Bernardines are of the dyet of the aſſe, which féedeth vpon graſſe and thiſtles, for they eate nothing but hearbs ſod or rawe, which thing doth cauſe them to haue dry and ſkiruy bodies, and that diſeaze which is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but with all to haue aſſes wits: they goe all in black, hereby they doo repreſent to the world their melancholik humor.
               The bare foote Friers doo ſhew what humor dooth trouble their braine, imitating the frantick mad men, which haue delight to goe bare foote winter and ſommer: for we account that man mad that will go bare foote, when he may haue ſhooes to put on.
               All theſe rakehels armed themſelues vnder their louſie raggs, doo march in battaile aray through the City, mumbling their portuſes, and when they had giuen a ſight of their proweſſe vnto the Citizens, they would alſo goe to ſée what weather was out of the Towne: and when they had marched a while, the Kings gardes in the Suburbs tooke the alarum, ſuppoſing to haue to deale with men; but when they had the ſight of this legion, and perceauing that they were apes imitating men, they turned their fury to 
                     •
                  aughter, hooping & ſhooting: whereupon the apes returned with great ſpeed into the City, and this was the end of this ſkirmiſh. They had for an enſigne a Crucifixe, and our Lady carried before them to play the bulbegger.
               About this time bread began to be ſcarſe in Paris. whereupon the maſters of the Citie fearing the increaſing of famine, ſought out all the poore within the Citie, who came to thirty thouſand, and determined to haue turned them forth out of the City to take their fortune. But ſome of the counſell of the Citie, thought that it could not ſtand with the greatnes and honour of the Citie, and therefore were ſtayed in, which thing did greatly haſten the famine, which ſhortly after followed.
               In the middeſt of Iune the famine being very great, there was little or nothing to eate, the Souldiours had no pay, neither was there money to pay them, the Citiz
                     •
                  ns refuſed any more to contribute, aleaging the great and huge ſommes of money which they had diſbourſed: and for feare of ſome ſedition in the Citie, Frier Henrico Caietano, Frier Goundj Byſhop of Paris, and the blinde Captaine Bernardino Mendoza, conſented to rob all the Gods which were in the Temples of Paris, they take the golden cuppes of their Gods, and all the ſhrines of golde and ſiluer, which Demetrius his prentizes had made to Diana, to Venus, to Belona, and to many Diuels of hell: they turne their reliques & old rotten bones of old Friers, old dogges and horſes, (which they had made the people

worſhip, for the bones of Apoſtles, Martyrs, and other Saints of God) out of their coates of gold and ſiluer, and make good money to pay the rebells to warre againſt their naturall and lawfull King, contrary to Gods  ordinance, to that end that things moſt wickedly abuſed, might remayne ſtill in the ſame nature. The blind Captaine Don Bernardino, doth promiſe to beſtow euery day in almes ſixe ſcore Crownes: Frier Henrico Caietano, ſaid he would doo the like: but that deuotion waxed as could as the weather was hot, according to the Aphoriſme of Hypocrates: ventres hyeme calidiores estate frigidiores.
               
               The King knowing well of the great extremity, wherewith the Citie was diſtreſſed, pittyed them, and willed them to take ſome pitty of their diſtreſſed eſtate, promiſed them mercy and fauour: but the Friers Henrico Caietano and Goundi, anſwered contrary to the meaning of the poore people, that they had determined to dy all, rather then to admit an hereticall King.
               Vpon this anſwer of the Pariſiens, in the latter end of Iune, many noble men and gentlemen began to mutter in the Kings army, what great imminent danger, was hanging ouer France; the ruine of the nobility, the decay of ſo great and noble a City as Paris was: and the deſolation of the whole realme, which euills the King could redreſſe, in making himſelfe a Catholicke. Of this faction, tending to ſome enterpriſe, was chiefeſt the prince of Soiſſon, and went ſo farre as to ſpeake openly, that they will ſerue no longer vnder an hereticall King.
               The King aduertized of this muttering, called his nobles and Captaines, ſhewed them what hee was, what his right and cauſe was. And whereas they willed him to become a Catholicke, he put thē out of doubt, that for to purchaſe many Kingdomes, as great as the realme of France was, hee would neuer ſo little depart from his religion, which hee knewe was grounded vpon the infallible truth of God.
               As for their ſeruice, he made no great account, knowing that it was God who was his ſtrength, force, and defender of his cauſe, willed them to depart from his army when they would, and that hee had rather haue their roome as their company: he knew that GOD would giue him the meanes and power in time to repreſſe his enemies: he knew that GOD would raiſe him friends enough to aſſiſt him.
               It is ſayd before, how the King all in one worke did beſiege S. Denis, which is a towne walled within foure miles of Paris. In this Towne in an Abbey where the burials and monuments of the kings were: this towne was ſo gretaly diſtreſſed, that they had neither bread nor munition to defend themſelues, they had conſumed all their prouiſion, Horſes, Aſſes, Dogges, Cattes, Rattes, Mice, Hearbes, Rootes, and whatſoeuer the belly could aduiſe them: Euen to haue tryed to make bread with flower of Oates,

huſke and all, and duſt of old rotten poſtes, ſome tryed ſtraw grownd to duſt. 
               
               The ſayd towne therfore conſidering how the famin within, & the ſword without did threaten them, proffered parly, and at length concluded to deliuer the towne to the King, with liues reſerued vnto all maner of men, the ſouldiers and all manner of men to retire with all thinges which they would carry away: who of his great clemency gaue them Horſes and Cartes for their carriage.
               The ſame day the King entred into Saint Denis with great reioycing of all men, who had proued his gracious fauour and clemency.
               And beeing ſetled in his lodging, he ſpyed in the chamber of preſence three men walking in the habit of gentlemen, whom hee knew not, but he ſuſpected that they were there for no good. They vppon that ſuſpition were apprehended, and examined by certayne noble men appointed by the King: vppon a ſudden they faultered in their anſweres, and changing their countenance were ſent to priſon: but afterward being narrowly examined, they confeſſed that two of them were Fryers of Saint Francis order, and the third to be a Prieſt, and they three were of the 24. who had cō
                  ſpired, vowed and ſworn the kings death. They were hanged without any ſcraping of the holy greaſing which they had of their Biſhop. Theſe murtherers left a preſident what truſt princes may haue in the rable of Friers, Monkes and ſhaueling Prieſts.
               About the ſame time the Lord Rubempre, gouernour for the King in Tourreyne, gaue an ouerthrow to the Lord Chaſtre in the Countrey of Berrye.
               
               About the beginning of Iuly, the Lord Viques a moſt cruell Leaguer, had beſieged Pontarſon a towne in baſe Britaine, holding for the King againſt the Leaguers, and after three aſſaults, in the which he was repulſed, he heard that the county of Thorigni was comming with great forces to rayſe the ſiege: wherupon he retired to S. Michaels mount, & wrote letters vnto the Duke Merceur, who was then at Nantes for ſuccour, fearing leaſt he ſhould bee forced in the ſayd mount Saint Michaell.
               
               Hee that carryed the letters came with the ſayd letters to the Earle of Thorigny, who hauing peruſed the letters, ſent the copie of the ſame to the Prince Dombes, who was betweene Saint Mal
                        •
                     
                   and 
                     Ʋitre, and forthwith ſent the Meſſenger to the Duke Merceur with his letters: who after hee had ſeene them, ſent by and by an anſwere to the ſayd Lord Viques, praying him to be ſtrong, and that within three daies he would come to his aide with three thouſand men to reſcue him from the Earle Thorigny, and to oppreſſe him, ſeeing that the ſayd Earle could not haue helpe from the Prince.
               The Meſſenger came agayne to the ſayd Earle, and ſhewed him the anſwere

of Merceur: the copie thereof was ſent immediatly to the Prince, the reſolution was ſo taken betweene them, that the Prince cauſed all the horſemen to march ſpeedily, and to get betweene the ſayd Merceur and  
                  Nantes, and the Earle of Thorigny marched towards the ſayd Merceur.
               
               The Duke perceauing that hee was compaſſed betweene two armies, ventured to fight with the Prince Dombes, and whileſt they were a fighting, the Earle came vppon him on the other ſide: hee was ſo beaten betweene them, that he loſt ſeuenteene Enſignes, and twelue hundred of his company were ſlayne on the place: he ſaued himſelfe by flight into the Caſtell Joſſelin, one of the ſtrongeſt places in all France.
               
               When the Lord Viques vnderſtood of this ouerthrow, he yeelded, and in the concluſion he gaue his Daughter in marriage to the yonger brother of the Lord Montgomery, who was kept priſoner by him. He was permitted to keepe Saint Michaell for his ſafety.
               About the ſame tyme the ſtrong Towne of Dinan in baſe Normandie hearing of the ſayd ouerthrow of Merceur, did beat out of their town their gouernour, brother of the Duke Merceur, killed many of his Souldiers, and among them the chiefeſt of his Captayns named Iahn, and ſo yeelded vnto the King.
               About this time alſo the inhabitants of Kilbeuf in Normandie took a galley of the Duke Aumale laden with his goods, as it was going vp to Roan.
               
               In this moneth of Iuly, the Franciſcan Fryers of Sanlis muſt needes plaie a Fryerlike part: they were greatly deſyrous to betray the towne, and to deliuer the ſame into the Leaguers handes: which for to bring to paſſe, they cauſed many Captains of the rebels to come thether, apparrelled like Countrey men, hauing each of them a baſket full of Cheries vppon their ſhoulders, as though they were market-folkes to ſell Cheries.
               Theſe Cherie mongers were receaued by the ſaid Friers into their Fryery houſe, where they had gathered together great prouiſion of armor. But this thing beeing ſuſpected by ſome good Citizens, they notifyed it to the King. Whereuppon many were taken, and of the Fryers, Maſſe-mongers, Chery-mongers and treaſon-mongers of the Towne were hanged, to the number of ſeauen ſcore, and ſo the play was ended.
               Wee haue left the King at Saint Denis, whileſt wee went to ſee what was done in other places of the realme: now wee will come to the ſiege of Paris, and firſt ſpeake of the ſtate of the Citie.
               There the famin had ſo preuailed in the beginning of Iuly, that it far paſſed the famous famin of Saguntum. Then began they to denounce war agaynſt all the leane horſes and ſkiruy iades, agaynſt the aſſes, cats and dogges: theſe things were more dayntie vnto them then the daynties of Sibaris little bread, and that of Oates with huſke and all was very ſcant, it

was for Princes and great Ladies, and that a ſmall quantity euery day.
               In this extremity Fryer Henrico Caietano had ſold and waſted all his  money and plate, and begging was there little regarded: he with the reſt of his Maſſe-mongers did bury in their ſtomackes their God, whom they had made with fiue words, in horſe dung, if they could get it: but a ſtrange thing there happened, as had béen heard of in any age, to wit, the Aſſes of Sorboun were enforced to deuour their owne brothers fleſh.
               There were foure ſorts of men who went about to remedie this extremity, each one following their courſe.
               Some of the beſt ſort and ſtouteſt ſtomacke pittying themſelues & their fellow Citizens, whom they ſaw periſh by heaps for the pleaſure of few rebels; by the aduiſe of one Renard Atturney in the Court of Parliament, tooke counſell how to deliuer the Cittie into the Kings hands, of whoſe clemency and gracious fauour toward the poore diſtreſſed people, they aſſured themſelues. But beeing diſcouered, ſome fled to the King, who were graciouſly of him receaued: ſome were taken priſoners, and the ſaid Renard with ſome others were executed, but the goods of all were forfayted to the heads of the League.
               The ſecond was the Duke de Mayne, who fearing greatly the loſſe of Paris, being abroad where he made ſhift for good cheere, though it were at other mens charge, as the ſaying is: Qui ſatur eſt pleno laudat ieiunia ventre. He writeth letters to the inhabitants of Paris, commending them for their great conſtancie, promiſeth them ſuccour and great prouiſion of victuals within a certayne time prefixed in the letter, willing them to bee patient yet, and not to goe about any making of peace with the King.
               The Friers and Ieſuites tooke the copies of theſe letters, read them in their pulpets, and ſerued them for text to diſcourſe vpon, and to make braue and luſtie ſermous.
               The third was the blind Captaine Bernardine, who taught the delicate Pariſiens the dyet of his countrey, to wit, to take Oates ground, meale huſke and all, and therewith to make a kinde of pap, ſuch as the countrey men in Spayne doo vſe for their ordinarie dyet, and as they doo in France for the fatting of their hogges, and here in England the Hunters doo for their houndes: and that ſlubber ſauce to bee ſould to them that had money by a meaſure, which was followed as long as Oates did laſt.
               The fourth was the Prieſts, who would alſo feede their mindes with idolatrous fantaſies, as their bodies were fed ſparingly with ſpaniſh ſlubber waſh: and firſt to begin, they perſwaded them to vow to Nostra donna di Loretta, a lampe and a ſhip of pure ſiluer of the waight of three hundred markes, which ſhould be ſent by ſome of the chiefeſt of the Citie.
               The ſecond id
                     •
                  latrous fantaſie wherewith they deluded that beſotted people, was, that they made them runne to and fro in proceſſion bare footed

and bare legged from Church to Church, from Idoll to Idoll, carrying  their God in the ſtreetes, which their Prieſt had made with fiue words. All the ſtreetes did ſound with weake Ora pro nobis.
               
               The third was a Pageant which they played in this wiſe: they had made vppon the great Altar of their Churches a graue like a monument, there they buried their God, (who be like was dead with famine) and let him lye for the ſpace of 8. daies, and in the ſame ſpace the Churches were full night and day with Candles, ſmoake, idolatries and ſtarued people. Who had required theſe things at your hands? It is ſubmitting themſelues vnto Gods ordinance, that would quickly remedie this diſtreſſe, and not theſe idolatries.
               The Oates being ſpent, the famine preuailed more and more, the harueſt time alſo was come. The King did winke at many ſallies which they did, to ſteale away ſome ſheaues of corne, hoping by that meanes to intercept ſome of the heads of the rebellion: ſo there were daily ſkirmiſhes about the harueſt, and they alſo carried away with them ſomewhat, which (although dearely bought) did relieue ſomewhat the extremitie of their hunger.
               Whileſt theſe ſallies were adoing, about the fifteene day of Iuly the Lord Chaſtilion arriued vnto the King with one thouſand horſemen and two thouſand footmen Gaſcoynes.
               The King perceauing the wilfull obſtinacie of that people, or rather the hard bondage that they were in vnder fewe rebels, ſet all his forces in order, and ſet vpon all the Suburbs of Paris all at once, which ſeazed vppon without any loſſe the 18. of Iuly, ſuppoſing that his neighborhead would cauſe them enter in conſideration of their miſeries and daungers.
               This narrow ſiege, debarring them wholy from the fields, made the famine yet to preuaile more: ſo that now in few dayes, the people dyed by heapes in the houſes within, and in the ſtreates without. Now the common people wiſheth for peace, and imputeth all their miſeries vnto blind Bernardine, many did threaten openly in the ſtreates, that it were a good déede to hang that Spaniſh Moore, and all his company of Sarrazins broode.
               Blinde Bernardine hearing of theſe newes, wiſhed himſelfe to haue béen in Spayne a dauncing naked with the Sarrazen Moores of Spayne: yet to pacifie the people, hee did beſtow of his Spaniſh potage made of Oates, vpon them ſo much as he could ſpare, for hée was fallen to his olde dyet of Spayne, and withall hee gaue them old ſtarued horſes which were like to dye, for to kill and to e
                     •
                  te, yet all this poore liberality which then was great, conſi
                     •
                  ering the time, could not pacifie the people: for as the Prou
                     •
                  rb is▪ 
                  Ventur non habet aures. Therefore many tooke counſell together in the night, to haue ſeazed vppon a gate, and to haue let in the

Kings forces, but this counſel being detected, this enterpriſe could not be effected.
               The morrow after being the 19. day of Iuly, a great multitude aſſembled  themſelues in the palace, and requir
                     •
                  d of the Pſeudoſenat, that they might haue peace with the King, otherwiſe there was no remedy, but they were like to periſh miſerably, they were intreated to quiet themſelues, and to haue pacience for ten dayes, ſo they departed like to dye in the meane time with hunger.
               The 27. of Iuly, they aſſembled themſelues againe into the palace with ſtrong hand, and required of the Pſeudeſenat, either bread or peace: and whereas a Marchant of the City named Goys, did reproue them, by them he was hurt, ſo that within few dayes he yeelded his rebellious ſoule: the matter tending to ſedition, the Duke of Aumale came to the palace, ſhut vp the doores, and tooke ſome priſoners, whereof two of them were hanged.
               Then the mutiny of the people encreaſing, they went to the Biſhops houſe, willing him to goe about the matter, that they might haue either bread or peace: whereupon ſome of the counſelers of the Pſeudoſenat, pittying their owne, and the miſery of the people, with the Biſhop of Lions, the Duke of Nemours, and others of the chiefeſt of the rebellion entred in counſell, whether they ought to admit the King vpon reaſonable conditions, ſpecially hauing their autonomy. The matter being diſcourſed, and ſome altogether inclining to peace, withſtanding that counſell, the Duke of Nemours, gouernour of the city, ſaid in great anger, that he had rather ſee the City conſumed then loſt: meaning that if it were yéelded vnto the King, he eſtéemed it loſt, and going foorth in great anger, would not be preſent any longer in ſuch deliberation: notwithſtanding, they agréed all to ſend Ambaſſadors to the King, to entreate of an vniuerſall peace. The meſſengers were the Biſhops of Paris and Lions, and certaine others deputed for the City, who went to the King, lodged them in Saint Antonies Abbey nigh the City, whome he receaued more courteouſly then they thought he would haue done.
               They propounded to the King two things, an vniuerſall peace, and that he ſhould become a Catholick, and ſo the City of Paris would ſet open their gates, acknowledge and Crowne him King of France.
               
               The King anſwered that he would receaue them to mercy, without binding himſelfe to any thing: it appertained vnto Kings to pardon his ſubiects, but not to ſubiects to preſcribe peace, and to deuide peares with their King, as for his religion hee commaunded them not to mooue any talke thereof, for hee was reſolued in his faith, which he did not meane to change, and willed them with this reſolution to returne to Paris.
               
               The Duke d'Mayne vnderſtanding that the Kings forces were lodged

at the gates of Paris, and that the City within was full of vprores of the people, periſhing for hunger: perceauing alſo the long delayes of the  Duke of Parma, and fearing greatly that the City would fall into the Kings hands, one way or another, he ſent Vileroy to the King, and writeth a letter to the Pariſiens, to ſend the Biſhops of Paris and Lions, to ſhew how deſirous they were to make peace.
               The King gaue them licenſe to come in his preſence, and alſo to repaire to the Duke d'Mayne with this anſwer, that hée had not any delight in their miſery and vndooing. The intent of this Ambaſſage, was but to delay the time, leaſt the K. ſhould force the City while he poſted to Bruxels, there to ſolicit the Duke of Parma. For he wrote a letter vnto the Pariſiens by a ſecretary of the Biſhop, by the which he willed them to hold out, and to make no peace, for there was a reſcue comming, great forces, and great ſtore of victuals.
               Now we will leaue the King in the Suburbs, and walke to Bruxels in Brabant, to ſee how the Leaguers affaires doo ſpeede there.
               It is ſaide before how the Leaguers ſent foure Ambaſſadors into Spayne at one clap, and there the cauſes were ſhewed, which moued the King of Spayne to hearken vnto their petition, & how he ſent to the Duke of Parma to goe into France, with ſuch power as he could conueniently make, to relieue and reſcue Paris. Now wée will ſhew the intent which the King of Spayne kept, vncommunicable to himſelfe.
               The King of Spayne hauing placed the Duke of Parma, as regent in the Low Countries, and perceauing that he being ſetled in the Country, and hauing purchaſed friends and partakers there, began to ſuſpect him, as that hée ſhould not bée able to haue him out, without ſome wrangling and wreſtling, 
                     〈◊〉
                   that the Duke would keepe that countrey in recompence of the Kingdome of Portingal, whereof he thought himſelfe vniuſtly defrauded.
               This ſuſpition made the King oftentimes to play the Phiſition with the Duke, and to miniſter him ſpaniſh phiſick, afore he was ſick, as boles, pills and potions. But the ſaid Duke being ſkilfull in Italian Phiſick, prouided ſuch counter phiſick, that by boles, pills and potions, he preuented the druggs of Spayne.
               
               The Spaniſh King therefore ſéeing that his Phiſick would not work, tooke occaſion by this Ambaſſage, to rid his hands of him, either by ſome blow yt he might receaue, or elſe by preuention: therefore he commaunded him to take ſuch regiments of Wallons & Italians, as he knew well to fauour the ſaid Duke, & ſuch Lords as had any amity with him, to go with all ſpéed to ayde the Leaguers: yt by theſe meanes the Spaniards remaining in the countrey while another gouernour ſhould be ſent, might ſeaze vpon the holds and forts of the land, & ſo to ſhut him out, and exclude him

from that gouernement, to be ſent into Italy, from whence he came, there to be a petty Duke, and to buſie his head about the prouiding of a Galey,  if the Turke ſhould chance to inuade Italy.
               
               But the Duke of Parma hauing learned this Latine in his youth, fraudē fraude fullere laus est, thought good to obey his maſters commaundement, though little to his aduauntage: for beſide his commiſſion hée purpoſed to take with him the two regiments of Spanyards, that were appoynted to remayne in the Countrey, and to haue ſhut him out of the doores.
               The Duke of Parma had béene long ſicke of the purre, the pockes, the murre, the cough and the glaunders, and yet his teeth were ſcarſe faſt in his head. And beeing moſt reſolued en his iourney, then ſeemed hee coldeſt and moſt vncertayne.
               The Spaniards hauing already (through a brain ſike imagination) conquered France, did vrge the iourney: the Dukes friends did excuſe the delay by his weaknes. There was dayly quarrels betweene Spaniards and Italians: ſome Spaniardes were ſo bold to call him Viliago tradidore.
               
               The Duke did dilay his iourney to terrify the Duke de Mayne, and to driue him of neceſſity to come in his owne perſon to begge his helpe.
               The Duke de Mayne (as is before ſayd) hauing taken ſome order to ſtay the Kings power from forcing the citie of Paris, poſted to Bruxels in Brabant, there the Duke of Parma entertained him as a gentleman would entertaine a lackay. There the D. de Mayne afore he might be admitted to come in the preſence of that great Potentate, was put to learne ſo many Italian abaſſios, ſo many duckinges and Spaniſh ceremonies, by crouching to euery raſcall Spaniard, that at length when h
                     •
                   had learned well to make a legge af
                     ••
                  r the Italian or Spaniſh maner, he was let into baſiare las manos.
               
               There he vrged and prayed very deuoutly for ſpeedy helpe, ſhe wing the extremity that Paris ſtood in if it were not with ſpeed relieued, farewell all the League, Leaguers, and Leagued, and Catholike fayth.
               Vppon this extremity, the Duke of Parma (who had all things in a readines) ſent the D. de Mayne before him, to put ſuch forces in a readines, as he could make vp againſt his comming, that entring on the frontiers, they might ioyne their forces together.
               The Duke de Mayne returned into France, put all the Leaguers in great hope of good ſucceſſe, reuiued ye hungry Pariſiens with fair words, ſent to the Duke de Aumale and Vidſame d' Amiens, who were gone into Picardy to relye ſuch forces there as they could, and to repaire into Champaigne to him.
               Now hauing brought the Duke de Mayne from Bruxeles into Champaigne
                  
againe, there we will leaue him to prepare for the comming of the Duke of Parma, and returne to the ſiege of Paris. 
                  
               
               Now in the latter end of Iulye, the famin did ſo preuaile in the Citie of Paris, and encreaſed more and more daily, that they dyed by heaps euery where ſinking downe in the Streetes ſtarke dead.
               They who were able to buy oaten bread were allowed no more but ſixe ounces a day.
               By the end of Iuly, they had eaten in the Citie aboue two thouſand horſes, and eight hundred Aſſes, or Moyles: great warre was denounced in the Citie agaynſt Dogges, Whelps, Catte
                     •
                  , Kitlings, Rats, Mice, and other ſuch thing
                     •
                  s which the bellie could deuiſe.
               There was no wine in the Citie, nor graine to brue beare. They who had money did drinke Tiſen made with water and liquorice, which was to be ſold in wine Tauerns in ſtead of Wine.
               They who had no money did drinke with the Cow out of the riuer Sein, which for the ſpace of thirty yeares they had defiled and coloured red with the bloud of the Saints, and now of late with the bloud of the royals.
               In the beginning of Auguſt, they ſought all hearbs and weedes which  could bee had and ſed them in water without ſalt, which they did ſell for a Spaniſh Royall a pound to them which had money.
               A buſhell of wheat was ſold for 70. crownes and more.
               Blind Bernardine Ambaſſador of Spayne, one of the chiefeſt workers of all theſe miſchiefs, hapned to tell in a company how he had heard ſay, that in a certain fort of the Turke beſieged by ye Perſians, in like caſe they did grind bones of dead men, and made bread thereof. Some who heard this tale told, tooke that for a counſell, tooke bones (whereof is great ſtore in Paris, ſpecially in the Churchyard of the Innocents) ground them, and made bread of that kind of ſtuffe.
               Some did take the ſmall duſt of worm eaten poſts mingled with a ſmall deale of Oaten meale, wherewith they made bread.
               From the latter ende of Iuly, vntill the time that the King raiſed the ſiege, this miſerable people did ſhift with that kind of poore fare.
               About the 29. of Iuly the aſſes of Sorboun, Monks, Friers and Ieſuits, conſidering now that aſſe fleſh could not be had any more, or that they had no money to buy any, and alſo that it would not bee had neither vpon credit, nor for begging. Conſidering alſo that the 50. thouſand duckets which the Pope had ſent (which they thought to haue had either wholly or in part) was beſtowed vppon men and Souldiers, not vppon Aſſes, and that they had no part thereof: and ſeeing that contrarie to promiſe they were out of 
                     〈◊〉
                   to receaue any, but rather that they were like to die for hunger, and were alrea
                     ••
                   ſtarued▪ they fell into a 
                     •
                  elting chafe, and in that anger wrote vnto Frier Sixtus a letter, wherein they reproch vnto him the great good

turnes, which the Vickars of Rome had receaued of their aunceſtors, whereof he ſhewed himſelfe very vnthankefull. 
               
               They quarell with him how they hauing encouraged the people in their Sermons (to withſtand their King, and to ſet the realme in a combuſtion) to the catholike faith, vpon promiſes of his aid and ſuccour, but now when they haue need nothing is perfourmed: the people doo take them (as they may well) for abuſers, and the Pope for a cogging Fryer, a deceauer, a giuer of good morrows and faire wordes.
               They ſay, when they haue ſhewed their néed and gréefs vnto his Nuncio, they had faire words, how the Pope is very wiſe, knoweth well what hee hath to doe, hee will do his promiſe when he ſeeth his tyme.
               Maiſter Frier Sixtus and his Nuncio, you doe not vnderſtand well 
                     Note.
                   perhaps the nature of Sorboun: they haue a rage in the belly, which will not be aſſwaged by words, I thinke no people in this world is ſo troubled with that ſicknes as theſe bee, but ſpecially now when Aſſe fleſh faileth them.
               They accuſe Frier Sixtus that he playeth Iack of both ſides, he holdeth with the hounde and runneth with the hare: hee holdeth with the Catholikes, and ſecretly fauoureth the King, that they prooue by two Arguments. Firſt by the good entertainment which was giuen to the Lord Luxenbourg, who firſt with diſſimulation was excluded, and afterward vſed very frendly.
               The ſecond argument is, that Fryer Sixtus had beene greatly deſired by the holy vnion, and alſo had promiſed to pronounce excommunication againſt the King and the Royals, which he would neuer doo. They pray him inſtantly to ſend forth that excommunication, and let them alone with that.
               And whereas theſe Magistrinostri dare not beg openly, yet they ſay that letters haue béene written from Italy, by many great men, to bee but folly to expect any money from Rome. The reaſon I can giue you, for they haue little enough to ſerue their turne.
               At length they fall out with him openly, with this praier, that God ſo help him as he dooth help them.
               But to returne to the purpoſe, the ſtaruing and eating of ſuch vncleane things, did bring generally to all the diſeaſe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and a dropſie, ſo that betwéene the famine and theſe diſeaſes, there was moſt commonly two hundred and more in a morning, found dead at the doores of the rich, where they came to get ſomewhat, and were not able to depart from thence, beſide numbers which did dye euery where by heapes.
               Al the muſick that was in the ſtreates was mourning, wéeping, lamentations, and weake voyces of begging people, and none able to relieue them. The pompe of the City was turned into funerals, leanenes, pitifull

ſights, and euident tokens of Gods wrath powred vpon a people, which lead by ſeducers, haue reſiſted Gods power and Ordinance. 
               
               The ſtate of that people being ſo lamentable: Frier Henrico, Frier Sixtus Nuncio (who was come himſelfe to ſixe ounces of 
                     •
                  aten bread, and halfe a pound of aſſe fleſh if he could get it) ſuppoſing to be in antro Trophoni, where the Poets doo faine the people to liue by ſhadowes, went abut to relieue this people with idolatrous fātaſies, to wit, with pardōs & indulgences: whereupon proceſſions doo runne (but ſoftly) vp and down, they ſet their Idoll which their Prieſts did make with fiue words, in his graue againe, which they made for h
                     •
                  m vpon the great altar, to ſee whether they might awake him out of his ſwound with ſmoak, or candels, or thumping on the breaſt, or with weake miſericordia, or a faintie ora pronobis: 
                   the more the famine did encreaſe, the more Idolatries did multiply.
               The Friers and Ieſuites would ſometime ſtep vp in the puſpit: there they did looke like their woody and ſmoaky Idols, which are by heapes in their temples, differing nothing from them but in apparell and ſpea
                     •
                  h. They had lacked their bread of chapter, and vinum capitulare ſo long, that they could no more rumble and thunder their ſermons, beate and ſhake their pulpets, but with a mourning voyce, prayed them whom they had caſt headlong into that heape of miſer
                     •
                  es to bée patient; if they dye, they ſhall be made confeſſors; within ten dayes they ſhall haue victuals and ſuccour enough. But when they heard for a truth of the Duke of Parma his marching, there they did with their weake voyces extoll him, as the only Captaine of the world, the deliuerer of France, and of the holy Church. What was he not:
               Thus this miſerable people, kept downe by the tyrrany of the Leaguers, hardned by ſeditious ſermons of ſtarued Friers and Ieſuites, fed with vanities of the Popes Nuncio, blinded with ignorāce and Idolatry of ignorant and Idolatrous leaders, was not ſuffered to goe fo
                     •
                  th, and to ſubmit themſelues to their King (to whom nothing was more deare then their preſeruation) neither could they be prouided. But the tirranous rebels hauing yet ſomewhat to kéepe ſoule and body together, had delight to behold with their cruell eyes, that wretched people to pyne away by hunger.
               The famine goeth worſe one day then another, in ſomuch, that if the King had continued his ſiege any tyme longer, that deſperat rabble of rebellious Idolaters, would haue done as the Saguntines & Lampſarcens which deſtroyed themſelues.
               In the beginning of Auguſt the rebels did iſſue foorth, conducted by the Duke of Nemours, to charge the Kings forces: but they were ſo receaued by the Kings Captaines, that they who returned home, ſaid they would do ſo no more.
               
                  
The King perceauing that the meſſage of Vileroy, was nothing elſe but to delude him, and vnderſtanding that the Duke d'Mayne was gone into  
                  Brabant, to haſt the Duke of Parma his iourney, placed thirtéene pieces of Ordinance to batter the gate of S. Germaine, on the ſouth ſide of the City. But hearing that for a certainty, the Duke of Parma was ready to march with fiftéene thouſand men, Spanyards, Italians, Wallons, and Flemmings, all of the old bands & gariſons of the Countrey, he thought good not to giue any aſſault: but knowing that they were extreamely diſtreſſed with famine, thought to vrge them with the ſame more narrowly then euer he did, and ſo to enforce them to come to ſome reaſonable compoſition, and ſo to reſerue his nobility and braue Souldiours, to the enemies comming.
               The famine did ſo preuaile, that nothing being left to eate, but themſelues, they began to fall to mans fleſh. Pedro Corneio a Spanyard, who was in that ſiege, dooth report that one of the Pſeudopreſidents there, told him for a truth, which hee knew very well, that there were of his knowledge two and twenty Children eaten in that ſiege.
               The King vnderſtanding of the greatnes of the famine, the wil
                     •
                  ull obſtinacy of that damned people, who will rather periſh like the heatheniſh Saguntines, then to try his clemen
                     •
                  y and fauour, whom they knew to be therewith indued, more then euer had béen any King in France before him: hearing alſo of this ſauage and barbarous act of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , by ſome that fled vnto him out of the City, was greatly moued: ſo that lifting vp his hands to Heauen before his nobility, proteſted vnto the Lord, as Titus did in like caſe at the ſiege of Ieruſalem, that hee was not guilty of thoſe abominations, which were there committed, neither of the bloud of them that ſo deſperatly periſhed. That hee was their lawfull King, ordayned of God to gouerne them, that he had proffered vnto them (contrary to their deſerts) mercy: that he might haue forced them; but to ſpare their bloud, he had delayed it to his great hinderance, hoping that néed would haue cauſed them to conſider their duty. But contrary vnto duty and nature, they had obſtinated themſelues, and committed more abominations, then any City euer did among the heathens. This good King, his eyes full of teares, retyred into his Chamber, full of compaſſion, admiration and loue of iuſtice.
               Compaſſion was not in him only, as it was in Scipio, at the burning of Carthage, an affection procéeding of a milde nature, but a true Chriſtian mercy, by the which he did féele the griefes euen of his mortall enemies, and therefore gaue certaine paſſeports vnto many, to haue dayly out of his campe a certaine alowance of victuals, and liberty to his ſouldiours, to ſell ſome victuals vnto the beſieged for neceſſary thinges, as ſhooes, hoſe, apparell, and other ſuch things, which did ſomewhat relieue them,

and ſtopped the barbarous eating one another.
               The admirations of this ſtrange hardnes of hart of that people, brought  him to conſider Gods iuſt and ſecret iudgements, who in his wrath hath ſent euill ſpirits of Idolomany in the mouthes of their falſe prophets, that as through blindnes of Idolatrie this fiftie yeres paſt and more, they had repleniſhed their ſtreates with burnings, murthers, and maſſacres of the Saints, and had ſtopped their eares vnto the voyce of Chriſt; ſo they ſhould bee repleniſhed with error and idolatrous hardnes by the wicked Friers and Ieſuites, poſſeſſed with lying ſpirites, to bring them to that thraldome and obloquie: neither will that Citie euer be reſtored to peace and iuſtice, vntill that the ſtreetes thereof be waſhed with the bloud of that damned generation.
               The King conſidering his office and charge annexed and inſeparably ioyned to his Crowne, to miniſter iuſtice, that is, to puniſh the offenders and tranſgreſſors, and that there began the rebellion, there was by the conſent of moſt wrought the death of the King, and that by the reioycing and approbation of the ſayd death, they had rendred themſelues acceſſarie and guiltie of the ſame, euen their walles, houſes, temples, all whatſoeuer they had. Therefore he conſidering correlatiuely his office & their offence, could not giue ouer the ſiege: and ſeeing that they refuſed lawfull try all by their rebellion, hee would followe that which in ſuch a caſe God hath ordained, that is, force, violence and warre: yet hee determined to trye (faſhioning himſelfe after Gods Image, who is long ſuffering) whether they might be prouoked to take pitie vpon their afflicted eſtate.
               Here we will leaue the King for a time, and will paſſe into other places to ſee what preparations of warre be made. We haue ſayd how the Duke de Mayne returned from Bruxels (where hee was royally receaued as a poore ſimple lackie (as is ſayd) into Champaigne: thence he ſent to the Duke Aumale, and the Vidaſme d'Amiens into Picardie, to gather ſuch forces as they could, and to repayre vnto him with as much ſpeede as they might to ioyne with the Duke of Parma, who was comming with great forces.
               Wherevpon, about the middeſt of Auguſt, the Lord Iumeges vnderſtanding that the ſayd Duke Aumale and Vidaſme had gathered forces, & were going toward the Duke de Mayne to ioyne with the Spanyards comming out of the Lowe Countrey, met with them nigh Amiens, diſcomfited them, and ſlewe thrée thouſand of them, as the common report is, among whom was the Vidaſme of Amiens. The Duke Aumale by flight ſaued himſelfe within Amiens.
               
               The Duke of Parma in the meane time commanded the two regiments of Spanyards, appoynted by the King of Spayne to keepe home, and to doo their feate as they ſhould vnderſtand when the opportunitie ſhould ſerue to march forward before him. For although (leauing the countrey

vnprouided of ſufficient forces) the States would take occaſion to do their buſines, and to ſurpriſe places: yet according to the prouerbe, he conſented  to ſome loſſe for feare of looſing all.
               The Spaniards were very vnwilling to goe to that iourney: but hee put them in hope of doing ſome great and waightie exployts, which were not for euery man to knowe, and which could not be effected without their counſell and helpe, making them beléeue that they were the onely Souldiers of the world. At length the Spanyards as a reſtie horſe which ſtriueth with the rider, and goeth backward afore hee will take his way forward.
               Vpon their departure, hee ſent foorth euery where to ſhewe his iourney into France; hee ſetteth foorth a deſcription of his armie, how many thouſand footmen, how many thouſand horſemen, how many Princes, Dukes and Earles; what Caeſars and Alexanders there was in that armie. And when all came to all, there were three which are by him called Princes, euen ſuch as he is himſelfe, ſuch as may be a Knight here in England, which do hold ſome ſmall Dukedomes of ſmall townes in Italy either of ye Pope, or els of King Philip, ſuch as are holden in flauerie, as the Baſſas by the Turke, to wit, the Princes (for ſo hee tearmeth them) of Aſcoly, Castel Bertran, and Symay, two Princes as obſcure, as the name of their principalities. There were ye Marqueſſe of Renty, the Earle Berlamount. There were alſo Dons of Spayne, as Sanctio Layeua, Iuan Baptista, Taſis, Alonſo Idiaques, Antonio de Zuniga, Pedro Gaetano, and Capechuca Romano. All theſe Dons were ſuch as might be twentie groates in the bookes of Subſidie: ſo great noble men they were, men that could haue ſhewed great proweſſe vpon the naked Iudiens. To be ſhort, there were three great Lords, Pride, Vanitie and Folly, who were maſters of the Campe. There were alſo fewe Carrowſſers out of Flanders, Henault and Brabant: hee gaue them terrible names, as Amutinados, that is, angry men, Manſferidos, and other ſuch I wot not what, as would make the poore heathniſh women in Italy and Spayne croſſe their foreheads, thinking to heare ſome names of diuels.
               He ſetteth foorth his furniture, his ſtable, his pages, the couerings of his coffers and moyles, and why not the belles of his moyles. But a great ouerſight was committed by him that made no mention of his Curtizans; that was not for lacke of good will, but now his age doth great iniurie to his memorie. O man too much pride hath put thee out of thy wittes, or els hath blowne thy wiſedome into thy cap.
               When hee entred into France, hee began to enquire how many dayes marching there was to Roch
                        •
                     l; for he would take it by the way. Man looke well to the would of thy cap. He imagined that the king at the firſt hearing of his comming would haue runne away, and he would haue purſued him

as far as the playns of Bourdeaux, where he would haue fought with him, & ſent his head in a charger to his maſter, as Herode did of Iohn Baptiſt. 
                  
               
               The Friers and Ieſuits lacked no monkiſh Rhetorick to encreaſe, nor winde to blowe vp theſe bladders. Whereſoeuer he paſſed there he left tokens of his progenie, to wit, tokens of the moſt vilanous 
                     ••
                  lthines and moſt barbarous crueltie that euer was vſed by any wilde people, except it were by the Popes adulterous broode.
               But whileſt theſe things were a dooing, there fel out ſuch a chance, as almoſt marred all. Frier Sixtus a little before he went to render a count of the treaſons & murthers, which he had cauſed (to his power) to be committed, fearing by the threatning of the Lord Luxembourg (who was ſent to Rome by the Catholick nobility, to doo a meſſage in their name) leaſt the King would ſéeke for reuengement of the preſumptuous iniuries receaued at his hands, ſent a flattering mandamus, by the which hée diſchargeth the King from excommunication, and willed all his ſubiects, nobles, and others to obey him, and pray for him, whoſe ſubuerſion hee himſelfe deſired.
               Here Chriſtiā reader, thou maiſt ſée what piety, iuſtice or godlines is in this ſinke of lewd Friers: for aduantage this Frier Sixtus was the chiefeſt inſtrument & countenance of the Leaguers, to raiſe vp that moſt cruel warre, and confuſed rebellion that euer was heard of 
                     •
                  n any realme, by his excommunication, by his aduiſe, practiſes, counſell and money. Now when he ſeeth the whip in the Kings hands, fearing to be handled as his countrey men did handle their flaues, or as one of the Kings predeceſſors handled Boniface the eight, whom he hanged at his owne window in the Citie Perugia: now he ſent his Curriero with his mandamus with his praiers, he commeth as the Demoni
                     •
                  cles came vnto Chriſt.
               Let therefore Chriſtian Princes, take héede not to truſt theſe falſe diſſembling Friers, who do carry two faces vnder a hoode: for there is nothing ſo wicked, but for aduantage they dare doo: there is nothing ſo vile, but for aduantage they will debaſe themſelues thereto. But Frier Sixtus his mandamus, his Curriero, his commaundement was as much regarded of the Catholicks and Leaguers, as of them of the reformed religion: for the Leaguers will follow their deuotions, that is, their rebellion, though all the Popes that haue béen euer ſince the diuel layed downe the foundation of that ſeate, ſhould ſay nay, and therefore they tooke that mandamus abuſiue for aſsentamur.
               
               The Catholick Nobles who were with the King, tooke that for a thing which is neither here nor there, which could neither hinder nor further the cauſe, wiſhing that Frier Sixtus would ſit at home, and make ſome new almanack, or ſome new calender, becauſe yet we lack one or two to furniſh the table, and that by his Apoſtolicall authority, hée would

commaund the Sunne, not to goe any more out of the way, but to kéepe 
                     •
                  is courſe: as ſome of his predeceſſors was ſo bold, as to commaund the  Angels.
               They of the reformed religion laughed at the impudency and variablenes of the Friers wit, who had breath both to warme his fingers, and to coole his potage.
               The K. did make account of all this Frierlike flattering, rather to redound to his hindrance and diſhonor, then to any futtherance of his cauſe: for he knoweth well, that the praiets of I
                     •
                  olaters would not be accepted of God, and that all the godly minded, would without the Popes bidding, make their humble praiers and ſupplications to God for him, not onely in France, but in all Chriſtendome. Neither will he accept that obedience which is done by the Popes c
                     ••
                  maundement rather, then in conſideration of Gods ordinance. And to receaue any goodnes of him, or depend of him, the King dooth knowe well, that euery good gift commeth from aboue, euen from the father of ligh
                     •
                  s, and that hee is his aboundant reward. But the Pope is equus Seianus, vnto as many as do meddle with him.
               Whileſt the Duke of Parma marched toward France, the Duke de Mayne returned home to gather forces, as is ſaid before: ſome were cut off by the waies, as Aumale, and the Vidaſme of Amiens: but certaine forces he receaned of Balagny gouernour of Cambray, and the Lord Saint Paul, with whom he made toward Paris.
               
               The King vnderſtanding of this, went from his armie with a troupe of horſemen without any baggage, and marched 17. Leagues without bayte, to meete with the ſaid Duke de Mayne to bid him welcome out of Brabant: but the K. came too ſhort by an hower. For the Duke de Maine vſed with long experience to flee away from the Kings preſence, had ſaued himſelfe in the towne of Laon in Champaygne: but the King ſeeing that he had eſcaped out of the net, he returned to his army.
               Shortly after the D. de Mayne hauing gathered all his forces, came to Meaux in Brie: & to eaſe his ſtomack geuing out that he came to giue battell to the King, whereupon the King departing againe went almoſt to Meaux: but ſeeing that the Duke had encloſed himſelfe betweene the riuers of Marne, and that which commeth from Crecy, the King returned to his army once more.
               In the latter end of Auguſt, the Duke of Parma, that great Soltan Solymon, Muſſulman, Siech, with his dronken Belerbeyes, Baſſas and Ianiſſaries entred into France. The Duke de Mayne, to requite his curteſy ſhewed him at Bruxels, ſent the Lord Saint Paul (who the other day was a lackay, and afterward houſhold ſeruant to the Lord Beauuayes Nangy, then he roſe a ſtep higher, to wit, hee was made one of the bawdes of the

Duke de Mayne, and now one of the chiefeſt of the League.
               When the Duke of Parma came to Meaux vpon Marne, about the 27.  of Auguſt he thought himſelfe to ſhew yet once an Italian proud tricke to the D. de Mayne, for his ſo baſely receauing of him in the land: then he began to looke with a ſower Italian brow, and as the ſaying is, Fronte caperata: neither would he goe further, except hee had an abſolute power to commaund ouer all the forces, as well French as Suaniſh: which thing when he had obtayned, he began to eſteeme leſſe the Duke de Mayne and his Captaines, then the Duke de Mayne had eſteemed him in ſending a lackay in a Noble mans apparell to receaue him.
               Now the Duke of Parma beeing on Cockhorſe, beginneth to triumph and diſdayne all: he altered the Duke de Mayne his reſolution, and the courſe of this voiage: yet neceſſitie which hath no law, made the Duke de Mayne to take all theſe Italian inſolencies & pranks in good part: & néede (which maketh the old woman trot) enforced him to put in vre all the reuerences and ceremonies which he learned at Bruxels among the Spaniars, wherein he had profited very wel for his time.
               The Duke of Parma in taking his iourney, beeing troubled with the humor that Monarcho his countrey man (who was here in England, the gaſing & paſtime of children in London) was troubled with, had imagination in his conceit, that by that time he ſhould enter France, the King would be fled from Paris halfe the way out of France. But when he came to Meaux, whileſt they played theſe mery parts betweene them, he heard that the K. was ſtill at the 
                     •
                  iege of Paris: whereat he maruailed greatly, muſing why the King ſhould ſtay there: and perceauing that the King ſtood not in any feare, they eaſed their harts and couered their dread by publiſhing abroad euery where how they wil giue battell to the King, of him and all his there is not a breakefaſt. And thereupon in great earneſt he called for the Cards, and thinking himſelfe far wiſer then the Duke de Mayne, who now was but a poore Souldier vnder him: and hauing appointed to lodge at Chelles, began to march forth out 
                     ••
                   
                  Meaux, to take his lodging wher the King had appointed.
               The King hauing intelligences of the Duke of Parma his marching out of Meaux the 30. of Auguſt, raiſed his armie from before Paris, leauing ye citie and the Suburbs at liberty. The King with part of his armie went before, with commaundement to the reſt to follow after. Pedro Corneio a Spaniard, who was in the Citie during that ſiege, reporteth, that if the King had ſtaied two daies more, it was impoſſible for that Citie to haue holden any longer, but that the gates had beene opened to him.
               The Pariſtens ſeeing, that when they had come to an extreame period of danger (which in truth had béen an eaſie and an ineſtimable benefite to haue fallen into the Kings hands) were filled with great ioy. The Duke

                  de Nemours, Frier Henrico, Fryer Sixtus his Nuncio, blind Bernardino and all other rabble of Rebels went in proceſſion to the great church called  our Lady, with a great number of people, drawing their drie and ſtarued bodies after them with much adoo, and there they ſong merily te Deum laudamus.
               
               The laſt wheat that had béene ſold there was ſold aboue two hundred Crownes, and within three daies after it was there for foure or fiue Crownes.
               The Duke of Parma at his firſt marching from Meaux, hauing paſſed the brooke, which runneth by the Towne of Clay, lodged at the Caſtell Freſme.
               
               The King departed from the Village Chaliot, neere to Paris, and appointed a generall meeting of his whole army in the plaine of Boundie, making his reckoning the next day to haue battell. Therefore hee muſtered his army there all that day, and there he ſtaied two daies expecting the enemies comming: but hearing no newes of the enemy all that time, hee reſolued to draw neere to them, and for that intent ſent the Lords Lauerdine and Chaſtilion to ſeaze vppon Chelles, where he intended to lodge.
               The ſaid Lords there arriued, found the enemies Harbingers, who had begun to take lodgings, whom they put to flight.
               The King comming after them, deſeried ſome 7. or eight hundred horſes of the enemie, whom he charged ſo violently with farre leſſer number that he conducted, beating them euen vnto their lodgings.
               The Duke of Parma vnderſtanding that his Harbingers had béene beaten out of Chelles, and that the King lodged there, did double his feare, and diſappointed of his lodging, would néeds goe (accompanied with the D. de Mayne) to view the plaine where the King ſtood in battel aray: but perceauing the King comming with a good troup directly toward them, was contented for that time to take no neerer ſight.
               The fifth day the Duke of Parma placed his army incloſed betweene two brookes, and on the one ſide vpon one of the brookes, there is a wood and a Caſtell called Brow, and a little aboue the Caſtell a hill. All that day the King ſtood in battell array in the plaine by Chelles.
               
               The Kinges power of ten thouſand foot Frenchmen, foure thouſand Swiſſers, four thouſand horſemen, whereof three thouſand were gentlemen of the chiefeſt families of Nobility in all France, eight hundred Rutters. In that army were ſixe Princes, two Marſhals of France, and a great number of noble men and Captains, who were able to leade as great an army as that was.
               About 11. a clocke that day the Duke of Parma with the Duke de Maine went vp on the top of the hill to view the army, and the ſituation of the plaine, which when hee had deſcried hee gaue a deepe ſigh, and fell into a

chilling cold, and after in a pelting Italian chafe (after the maner of Italy, and the cuſtume of his predeceſſors the Popes of Rome) ſwore and blaſphemed God moſt horribly, and reproched vnto the Duke de Mayne, that  he had brought him to the ſlaughter, and that he deſcried before his eies not ten thouſand men, as he made him beleeue, but twenty thouſand men the braueſt and beſt ordered that euer hee had ſeene.
               This great Caeſar that heretofore would kill the Deuill, hethertoo had couered the fear which did lurk in his hart, with ſwearings, blaſphemings, braggings and boaſtings, now not able to keepe it any longer hidden, doth lay it open: for he maketh haſt to his campe, biddeth his men to lay downe their weapons, and to take in hand pickaxes, ſhouels and mattocks. The Macedonians were neuer ſo buſie in building Alexandria, as theſe men were in trenching themſelues in their Moore, for feare to bee ſet on by the King.
               The King continued thrée dayes more, in ſhewing himſelfe in battaile aray vpon the ſaid plaine, and prouoked them continually by ſkirmiſhes, alwaies ſome remayning behinde vppon the place, or carried away priſoners.
               The 6. day the King aſſaulted them, and did beate them from one of the brookes, the wood and the Caſtell, and driue them all into the moore, where they in great haſt (as is aforeſaid) had entrenched themſelues very ſtrongly.
               Some priſoners being demaunded wherefore the Duke of Parma would not make a way through the Kings campe to goe to Paris, and hazard the lot of the battaile. They anſwered, that after they had deſcryed the Kings power, they had loſt all ſtomacke to fight.
               The Duke d'Mayne had left behinde him the Towne of Lagny, which is vpon the riuer of Marne, right againſt Corbeil, which he thought could work him ſome diſpleaſure, he therefore did ſend the ſeauenth day of September, certaine companies of Spanyards and Italians with ordinance, to take the ſaid Lagny, which was but a weake Towne. The Captaine named Laphin, otherwiſe determined to leaue the Towne as not defenſible, when he ſawe the enemies approach with ſuch diſorder as they did, tooke another reſolution, to wit, to defend it, to hold them play: the enemies paſſing ouer the riuer, vppon a bridge made with boates, began to batter it with nine pieces of artillery, the breach was made before the King had any notice thereof, by reaſon of the great winde which was contrary, and a great thick myſt: yet aſſoone as the King had any knowledge thereof, he ſent ſuccour to haue reſcued the Towne: but the enemy giuing the aſſault afore the Kings forces could come, and being few againſt many, the enemy carried it away, which being entred into the Towne, omitted no barbarous cruelty and villany, which that Sarraſenicall ſauage

nation could deuiſe, there were betwéene two and thrée hundred Souldiours within the Towne, gouerned by the Lord Laphin, who defended that  weake towne ſo valiantly, that the enemy loſt in that aſſault the moſt part of them that were at ye ſiege, all the Gariſon Souldiours with their Captaines were ſlaine in like ſorte, as Leonidas with his Lacoues at Thermopylas.
               
               The King tooke that loſſe very ſorrowfully, and ſuppoſing that this beginning would haue cheered and fleſhed the enemy, commaunded the ſkirmiſh to be giuen ho
                     •
                  ter then euer before. But as the Wool
                     •
                  e purſued and hunted, hauing gotten his den ouer his head, will rather dye there then to get him forth, and trie the matter with the hunter: ſo theſe ſauage rauening monſters, could not be drawne out of their moore.
               The King perceauing that nothing would encourage theſe fearefull warriours, departed out of the campe with a good company of horſemen with ladders, and marched toward Paris, and cauſed certaine companies to draw nere the walls, betwéene the gates of Saint Iames and Saint Marcel, which being detected, the alarum was giuen in the City, the Kings Souldiours did hide themſelues in the darkenes of the night, being a great myſt withall. The Pariſiens returned euery one home: the Ieſuites, who are the moſt deſperat and warlike of all the legions of the locuſtes of the kingdome of Antichriſt, watched all the night vpon the wal, fearing ſome ſurpriſe, and about foure a clock in the morning, the Kings Souldiours lying in the towne ditch, began to ſcale the wall: the Ieſuits fearing to be reſearched, firſt for their horrible treaſons doo ſound the alarum, and doo kéepe of the Kings men from leaping vpon the wall as well as they can, whileſt company doo run to helpe. The inhabitants doo caſt fagots kindled into the ditch, by which meanes the Kings Souldiours being diſcouered, did ſound the retire, gaue ouer the enterpriſe, and ſo the King returned no more to Paris.
               
               Here Chriſtian reader, thou ſhalt note in this City, the notorious ſins of the inhabitants, the iudgements of God ſhewed vpon them, and what is yet to come. This City hath béen firſt of all the bulwark and ſtrong hold of all Idolatry, and heatheniſh ſuperſtitio
                     •
                  s, which they haue increaſed of meere malicious wickednes, and as it were to ſpight the Goſpell, whoſe voyce had been heard, and had knocked at their g
                     •
                  tes many yeares. They raiſed the alarum at the ſound thereof, they haue murthered the Saintes in the ſtreates, they haue ſhed their bloud vpon the earth like water, their bodies they haue drawne by heapes, and giuen them to bee meate for the beaſtes of the field, and the fowles of the ayre, they haue ſearched them out as it were with a lanterne, that they might roote out the knowledge of God from the earth, they haue made the goſpel of life a hiſſing, a by word, a nodding of the head, and a ſong of deſpight and contempt among them.

Therefore the Lord hath giuen them to a reprobate minde, to commit among themſelues all the abominations of the heathens, and hath ſolde  them to ſeducers and rauing falſe Prophets. For beſide the infinit heards of Epicures, and idle bellies of idolatrous Prieſts, Monkes and Friers, about the yeare 1560. when the Goſpell did knock at their gates, there crept out of Spayne and Italy the vermine of Ieſuit
                     •
                  s, whome Sachan did burſt out as vltimum 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , by whoſe deſperat rage, ſpecially theſe ſinfull people haue béen blinded and ſeduced to the vt
                     •
                  ermoſt. They haue kindled and maintained to the vttermoſt of their power, war againſt them of the reformed religion. They were the firſt in all France, to ſhew the fruite of their helliſh Idolatry, that haue rebelled againſt the King, who was of their owne religion, & as great and deuout a Catholick, as any was in the world: they ſtirred vp and inuited to their reb
                     •
                  llion all other Cities of France, by their example, letters and Ambaſſadors, and at length they haue ſhortned his life, by an haynous parricide, by the which they haue made their walls, their houſes, their temples and themſelues guilty of the damnable crime of treaſon, hated both of GOD and man.
               Now let vs ſée the fearefull iudgements of God ſhewed vpon them: the Lord hath executed his iuſtice vppon that defiled City, defiled I ſay, with the bloud of the innocents at all times, by puniſhing them with his ſcourges of peſtilence and dearth. But after they had defiled their hands with the Kings bloud, the anoynted of the Lord, who repreſented before their eyes the image of God: the Lord ſtrooke them with the giddines of Sodome, and the darkenes of Aegipt, and ſent euill Angels among them, to vexe them with diſquietnes, with guilty conſciences, with vprores and ſeditions.
               And now when the Lord during the ſiege, had ſent them mercy and fauour, euen to their gates, by the band of his meſſenger and Lieutenant, Henry of Bourbon, now raigning Prince of great and famous renowne. They as men ſenſeles fallen into a letargy, and out of their wits, would hearken to nothing, but to the voyce of ſedition, of commotion, of bloud and murther, being deliuered into the bond
                     •
                  ge of 
                     •
                  raitors and tyrants. And when the Lord had broaken the ſtaffe of bread among them, with greater rigour then in any place, which euer was heard of, they did not turne vnto the Lord, who had giuen them bread, wine, oyle, flaxe, as Oſea ſpeaketh, but multiplyed their idols, & worſhipped diu
                     •
                  ls, as Iames Clement the parricide and others euen with gréedines. They did rather chooſe to eate the fleſh of their ſonnes and daughters, which by the lawes of that realme is a capitall crime, and to bee r
                     •
                  uenged with fire, then to accept grace and fauour at the hands of their King, whome law, nature and God had giuen vnto them.
               
                  
Now let vs conſider, what by al reaſons (grounded vppon the ſtedfaſtnes of Gods threatnings) is like to enſue: tha
                     •
                   God may powre downe the  fulnes of his wrath and iuſt indignation vppon that accurſed City, he (in whoſe gouern
                     •
                  ment are the hearts of Kings and Princes) doth alter the minde of the King, to giue ouer that City, vntill the day of vengeance. Not for that he was not able to haue diſtreſſed the ſame longer, and haue kept the Duke of Parma from approaching to it, but to that end to hamper his enemies yet more in wicked deſires, and to deliuer them into the hands of barbarous tyrants, as (it fell out after) more heauy and intollerable vnto them, then the extremity of the famine it ſelfe, that God might take vengeance of that ſinke of accurſed idolatrous rebels: firſt by a long calamity, like vnto a conſuming and pining diſeaſe. And to giue ſpace vnto them there, whome hee knew to bee his, to goe out of that Babilon, and cage of all abominations and vncleane fowles, that in great wrath, that blaſphemous and rebellious City may be ſwallowed down in deſtruction. It is ſaid before, how the King hauing miſſed to take Paris by Eſcalade, gaue it ouer, perceauing that God had a further and a heauier iudgement to execute vpon that City, then he was determined to ſhew, if it had come into his hands: and therefore reſting himſelfe vppon Gods good will, which will turne all things to the good and comfort of them that bee his, returned to his army, which had remoued from Chelles to Boundy. The enemies (notwithſtanding the King Campe had remoued) remayned ſtill in their myre, fearing ſtill to be drawne where they were not reſolued to goe.
               The Nobility, who vpon the newes and rumour of the battayle, had reſorted vnto the King without any prouiſion of neceſſary things, and by the obſtinacie of the enemies, perceauing that they were not determined to come to handy blowes, brged their departure.
               The King in like manner being out of hope to come to hand with the enemie, otherwiſe then leaſure might afoord, from Boundy tooke vp his lodging to goe to Goneſſe.
               
               The 12. day of September at Goneſſe the King aſſembled the Princes, officers of the Crowne, and the expert and valiant Captaynes of the Armie, which altogether made a noble and famous counſell. There he diſcourſed how it was playne that the Prince of Parma cannot, or dared not fight. But that there was ſome hope that by coaſting him ſtill, he might be hereafter had at aduantage. To returne to Paris, he ſhewed that he had not purpoſed, and was not willing to take it by force.
               And whereas the enemie would not warre after his maner, he thought conuenient to apply himſelfe vnto his. And ſith he would not haue the honour to fight with ſo many honourable perſonages, as were aſſembled for that purpoſe, it would be expedient to diſtreſſe him with other diſcommodities,

as want of victuals and ſurpriſes.
               He ſhewed alſo, that in furniſhing the Townes round about Paris with  ſtrong garriſons and victuals, the Citie would remayne ſtill diſtreſſed, as well as with an armie.
               Alſo that a meane power was ſufficient to coaſt the enemie, and to bée at his heeles whatſoeuer he would attempt, and that the reſt of the forces might returne to the Prouinces whence they came, which would be a great reliefe for them, and by relieuing themſelues, might haue opportunitie ſtill to get ſomewhat.
               Laſtly, by theſe meanes in bridling the enemie from doing any exployt, when forces of ſtraungers ſhould chaunce to enter into the Realme, they might eaſily aſſemble together agayne thus refreſhed, & be twiſe as ſtrong as they are now.
               Theſe things being propounded by the King, he required their good aduiſe and faithful counſell: which things being debated by that noble counſell, at length were approoued by the conſent of all and followed. And firſt the King did begin with the Towne of S. Denis, which after great ſuit of diuers noble men, it fell to the lot of the Lord Lauerdine, who thankfully accepted it.
               The King alſo prouided garriſons to fortifie the Townes of Melune, Corbeil, Sanlis, Meulan, Mante, and ſundrie others which did hold Paris diſtreſſed on euery ſide.
               The King ſent the Prince Countie into Toureyne, Anjou and Mayne.
               
               He ſent the Prince Montpenſier into Normandie.
               
               The Duke of Longueuille into Picardie.
               
               The Duke of Neuers into Champaigne.
               
               The Marſhall Aumont into Bourgondie. Euery one hauing ſufficient forces to keepe their Prouinces in peace. The King himſelfe with a companie of eight thouſand, and the Marſhall Byron croſſing the countrey lying betweene Marne and Oyſe, determined neither to goe farre from the enemie, neither to ſpend his time in idlenes: and therefore went to lay the ſiege before the town of Cl
                        •
                     rmont in Beauuoyſin, where he ſtayed about ten dayes, which he tooke partly by aſſault, and partly by compoſition.
               The Duke of Parma durſt neuer come foorth out of the myre where hée had wallowed himſelfe abou
                     •
                   14. dayes, vntill he heard the King was very nigh twentie leagues from him.
               At length hearing the King to bee farre enough, and that he had paſſed the riner Oyſe, towſing bunſelfe out of the dyrt, tooke his way to Paris in haſt, as one that is carried with a fearefull imagination.
               At that time as many noble men who had repayred to the King, vpon the rumour of a battaile which ſhould haue been fought out betweene the King & the Duke of Parma, were returning to their home: among others

the Lord Guiche, Ragny and Ciper returning into Normandy, met with the Vicount Tauanes with fiue hundred horſes néere to Meulay, whome  they charged, and left aboue fiftie on the place, and tooke as many priſoners with their baggage.
               The King being at the ſiege of Clermont, the Duke of Parma was receaued in Paris with great ioy and triumph. For they ſuppoſed to haue receaued ſome of the petie Idols of the Heathens, called Dij tutelares. To be ſhort, he was welcome, but his victuals which he brought with him yet better.
               Hauing ſoiourned there fewe dayes, the pride and vilanie of the Spanyards was ſo rife, that no man was any longer maſter of his houſe, wife, children and goods, all was expoſed to the appetite and luſt of fewe Gotes and Sarrazins, confuſedly heaped in Spayne, as into the ſinke of all Europe.
               The triall of fewe dayes gaue the Pariſiens a proofe of their folly, who had reiected a lawfull King, and had admitted moſt ſauage monſters to oppreſſe them with barbarous tyrannie. In theſe extremities they being not able to rid their hands of them, if by any meanes they might be ſhifted off, requeſted the ſayd Duke of Parma that hee would open the riuer for the traffique, without the which thing that mightie Citie could not be prouided of neceſſaries, wiſhing that their neighbours might bee combred with them rather then they themſelues.
               The Duke of Parma to pleaſe the people, made them beleeue that out of hand he would goe to take the Townes ſituated on the vpper part of the riuer, then hee would goe to reſcue Clermont, then will hee take all the Townes betweene Paris and Roan.
               
               At length with much adoo he vndertooke to aſſault Corbeil, as next neighbour. This is a ſmall town ſeauen leagues from Paris vpon the ſelfeſame riuer that Paris is, famous onely in Paris by reaſon of the great aboundance of Peaches which growe in their vineyards, which they ſent to the markets of Paris: otherwiſe it is nothing, neither in greatnes nor in ſtrength, by nature nor by art.
               This great Tamberlaine made ſuch a preparation with boaſtings and ſwearings alo modo Italiano, that Solyman the great Turke kept neuer ſuch adoo about the ſiege of Vienna, as this doth about poore Corbeil Hée draweth thether 22. peeces of Ordinance; he beſtoweth fifteene daies in making his approaches, in placing his Ordinance, planting his batterie, and at length the fifteene day of the ſiege, a great breach being made the aſſault was giuen. The beſieged did welcome him ſo curteouſly, that many remayned there among them longer then they had wiſhed.
               They within the towne were not commaunded to obſtinate themſelues in the defence of ſuch a naughtie place; but to linger the enemie for a time,

that in trying what great kunning and diſcipline of warre this newe God had brought out of Brabant, he might wearie himſelfe in doing nothing. 
               
               After this ſlaughter of Spaniards and Wallons, and the repulſe and foile giuen to a great multitude by few vpon the walles of Corbeil: this D. hauing learned from his infancie to ſweare o
                     •
                   his grand-father Pedro Aloyſio, or elſe his great grand-
                     •
                  ire Frier Paulo Farneſio (in deſpito del Dio) hee began to make greater preparations th
                     •
                  n before.
               Within few dayes after, they gaue the ſecond aſſault, which was as deare bought by the Spaniard as the firſt, ſo that moſt of them ſaid that they would no more come to ſuch a feaſt.
               After theſe two wellcommings the Duke of Parma reſted himſelfe vntill the fifteenth day of the firſt aſſault geuen: and in the meane while hee was not idle, for hee erected an Arſenall, wherein hee kept a number of workemen, that laboured night & day: they were not ſuffered to goe forth nor to ſpeake with any man. The Duke de Mayne could not know what great miſteries were wrought there. Many did expect ſhortly to ſée miracles, many did feare, leaſt by ſome new magick, not onely Corbeil, but alſo the countrey about, would be tranſported beyond Perow, or Gyapan: but beware yee ſhall ſee wonders. Naſcitur ridiculus mus. For there commeth forth few boats couered with earth and turfe to tranſport a few Souldiers ouer the water. This was receaued of many with as much laughter, as the mouſe which came forth out of the Mountains belly.
               The 30. day of the ſiege, when this great Sultan had ended his wonders at the breake of the day, he began to beat the wals agayne with 22. pieces of artillery, vntill almoſt night.
               The inhabitants conſidering their caſe, how the moſt of them were maimed and weary, few in number, and the enemy ſtrong in armor, ſtrength of body, and multitude, ſeeing the breach made wide and large, deſirous to ſaue the remnant, their wiues and Children: and waighing the danger wherein they ſtoud, ſeeing they were one hundred of the enemyes againſt one of theirs, came vppon the walles of their Towne to parley with the Prince, there they offered to the ſaid Prince to yeeld vp the ſaid towne, conditionally that hee would grant them their liues with bag and baggage.
               The Duke of Parma, by occaſion of their humble ſubmiſſion, waxed the more preſumptuous and cruell, contrary vnto all heroicall Princelike natures, which are ſooner ouercome by ſubmiſſion then with force, ſpewed out of his blaſphemous mouth two or three othes of Italie, that he would put them euery man, woman and childe to the ſword. The reaſon that mooued him to 
                     •••
                  cute this cruell anſwere vppon them, was, that whereas he firſt ſuppoſed that they would haue yeelded at his whiſtling (for ſuch conceits his Italian arrogancy had bred in his mind) they had ſo reſiſted him, and ſlayne a great number of his beſt and moſt approued Souldiers in three ſeuerall

aſſaults, by which meanes as he had greatly empaired his reputation, there he would make vtterly ſhipwrack of the reſt, by making himſelfe  famous with the reprochfull infamy of cruelty.
               The inhabitants hearing the ſentence of death pronounced againſt them, and perceauing yt nothing would perſwade him to ſaue their liues, neither of their wiues and children, reſolued themſelues and went ſo fiercely to the fourth and laſt ſkirmiſh, that they determined to bee reuenged of the enemies to the vttermoſt: the aſſault was ſharp and cruell which continued 2. howers together. In the ſaid aſſault the French men Leaguers made the firſt point.
               The inhabitants being moſt of them maimed and few in number, defended the breach valiantly, and made a foule ſlaughter of the enemies. The Spaniards ſeeing the great butcherie made of them by the towns men, recoiled, and let the French Leaguers atchiue the winning of the breach.
               The inhabitants being few, and wearie, maimed and out of breath, ouercome by the multitude of ſound, luſtie and freſh, were enforced to gene ouer the defence of the wall, and ſought to ſaue themſelues.
               The French Leaguers from the breach went to the gates, opened them to let the Spaniards enter in.
               The Spaniards and Wallons entring into the gates, leaſt it ſhould bee ſaid that they had done nothing, did meaſure to the French Leaguers with the ſelfe ſame meaſure full and preſſed downe which they had meaſured to the inhabitants. Between them therefore began a new ſkirmiſh, the Spaniards killed the French men, and the French men the Spaniards, and the Wallons againſt them both.
               Now when the Spaniards had ſhewed to the Leaguers what they could do, to wit, to kill them by whom they were called for helpe, when the fray began to be pacifyed. Then did they agree among themſelues to ſet all together vpon the poore vnarmed multitude, whom they murthered without reſpect of age or perſons.
               Here is to be obſerued (Chriſtian Reader) the iuſt iudgement of God, France, Picardie, Normandie, Britaine and Champaigne, to be ſhort, all the Prouinces betweene the Brittiſh ſea, and Loyre, moſt obſtinatly, maliciouſly & wilfully ſould themſelues to commit all that was euill in the ſight of the Lord, as to withſtand and perſecute the truth of God, to roote out the Goſpell by an immortall warre and hatred implacable: behold in all theſe warres begun and continued by the League in a maner all the ſpoiles, hauocks, ranſackinges and ſlaughters hath beene committed in the Popiſh countreyes, and by Papiſtes againſt and vpon Papiſts, and among others, in this place were Leaguers againſt Leaguers, Papiſt againſt Papiſt, Atheiſt againſt Atheiſt; ſo that this euill is not come nigh Gods people, but they haue & do behold the confuſion and butcheries of Idolaters a far

of. And why? Becauſe him that loueth iniquity, the Lord dooth hate, and vpon the wicked he raineth ſnares: fire, brimſtone, and ſtormy tempeſt  is the portion of their Cup.
               The execution being done vpon the inhabitants, there they committed what euer Gotes, Sarraſines, Atheiſts, and rebels, mingled and aſſociat together could deuiſe, when God hath deliuered them to Sathan, to fulfil the workes of darkenes. The execrable cruelties and villanies there committed, ſhall be buried in euerlaſting ſilence, for lack of words to expreſſe them.
               The Towne being taken by aſſault, and the people deſtroyed, the Duke of Parma made his entry into that Village, with his Italian ſower looke, and frowning brow, as though he had been ſome Paulus Aemilius, ſome Marcellus, or Scipio Aphricanus, who had triumphed of all France. Theſe noble Romans, whoſe names doo yéeld a ſwéete ſauour of princelike vertues, doo differ from this, becauſe there was nothing in them, which is in him, and there is nothing in him which was in them, like onely in the ſhape and forme of man.
               The newes of the taking of Corbeil▪
                   flying to Paris, cauſed ſuch a ioye, that Rome neuer did ſo reioyce for the burning of Carthage, as theſe poore ſotts did for the taking of this obſcure Village of Corbeil. They made an end of burning that ſmall ſtore of wood as remayned to them, in making of bonfires.
               The Macedonians did neuer wonder at their great valour, for to haue ſubdued Aſia, as farre as the riuer Ganges, as the Souldiours did triumph at the taking of the cottage of Corbeil.
               
               Then began the Pariſiens to conceaue great hope, and proclayme liberty: the Captaine began in his conceit, to dreame of conqueſt, and the Souldiour to cry victory, & all as the auncient ſaying is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               The Pariſiens to make him partaker of their ioy, muſt néeds inuite him: they dreſſed his lodging, and ſerued him with the beſt ſtuffe and furniture of the Kings of France, which they had riffled out of the Kings houſe, in the beginning of the rebellion.
               The Ladies Montpencier, Guize, d'Mayne, Aumale, and ſuch, did welcome him ſo kindely, as his great Grandfather Frier Paule Pharneſe, was neuer better welcome in the ſtewes of Rome.
               
               This feaſting ended, he returned to Corbeil, there he began to enquire for all the ingeniours that could be heard of, he will builde forts and bulwarks, he would fortifie that Towne ſo, that if the Gyants of old time ſhould put Oſſon vpon Pelias, & Pelias and Oſſon vpon Olympus, yet would they labour in vaine, ſo ſtrong and impregnable the Village of Corbeil ſhould be: to be ſhort, he would make it the chiefeſt key of France, not to

enter in, but to get out the nereſt way to the Arbre de Guize, by croſſing Brie and Champaigne, when he ſhould ſée his time to run away.
               Whileſt theſe fortifications were a dooing, this poore Duke ſat dayly  in counſell ſo hardly and ſo cloſely, that it was no more lawfull for the Duke d'Mayne to know what he did, then to knowe the myſteries of Ceres.
               
               The great matters put in deliberation in that counſell, were the mending of an errour, which he had committed afore he departed from Bruxels: for there he tooke counſell how to enter into France, but not how hée might goe forth. Now therefore (as his ſuddaine departing did euidently ſhew) he tooke counſell how to get out, and conſidered well the olde ſaying, facilis deſcenſus Auerni, ſed reuocare gradum hoc opus hic labor est.
               
               As the Pariſiens prayed him to goe forward in his good enterpriſes, to open the riuer for the traffik, hee fed them with theſe great morſels of words, that he would goe to beſiege Melun, Montereau, Prouins, and other ſmall Townes ſituated aboue Paris vpon the riuer, and after he will goe downe to take Poiſſy, Meulan, Mante, Vernon, Pontdelarche, &c. all theſe things were but one breakefaſt, or at the moſt a dayes worke: let him alone for his throat is ſo wide, that he will ſwallow all theſe townes in one morſell: for he is Pantagruels ſonne, who was Gargante Pharneſes Sonne.
               During theſe thrée wéekes, that he ſpent in conſulting more about his flight out of France, and ſafe returne to his home, then about the fortifying of Corbeil, the garriſon of Melun did dayly iſſue forth, vpon ſuch of his forces as were at Colbeil, vnder the conduct of the Lord Gyury, and for that ſpace did almoſt liue vpon nothing elſe, but vpon ſuch booties, victuals and ſpoyles, which they tooke dayly from the Spanyards, whome they dayly killed or tooke priſoners.
               The Duke of Parma ſeeing that he had no meanes to repreſſe the onſets of the Lord Gyury, retired ſixe leagues from ſuch trouble ſome neighbours. At length after the Duke of Parma had made his aboade in Paris and thereabouts, towar
                     •
                   the latter end of October, the cold hauing cooled his warr, came again to his right wits, from which too great opinion of himſelfe, and of his forces, and too great contempt of others his betters, had tranſported him. And perceaued by the experience which hée had at Corbeil, and with the Gariſon of M
                        •
                     lun, that hauing thouſands of Townes in France to win by conqueſt, he néeded after the taking of euery one, to make a new army, which was more then his maſter would alowe him or could doo, not if he ſhould arme all his apes of the Eaſt Indies: beſide that to performe it, he néeded to haue the life of Metuſelah Therefore he concluded with ſuch poore weather beaten and women beaten Souldiours, as had eſcaped from the breaches of Corbeil, to retyre into Brabant,
                  
where was fairer weather, leaſt hée ſhould hereafter be compelled to buy repentance dearer then he was able to pay for. 
               
               This great Cham of Tartaria had behaued himſelfe, both in Paris and elſe where, as at Lagny, Corbeil, and other places, ſo inſolently a lo modo Jtaliano, or Hispaniolo, that the Leaguers themſelues accurſed the time, that euer they ſent for ſuch a gueſt, féeling by experience, that hée had entred into France, not in preſidium, but in exitium, as a ſcourge of Gods wrath. So that al the Frenchmen rebels, who had accompanied him with the Duke d'Mayne, all in a manner retyred home, as loathing his company, and abhorring his dooings.
               Hee ſéeing himſelfe deſtitute of forces (for his chiefeſt forces and beſt Souldiours he had loſt already, both at the ſiege of Corbeil, and in other ſkirmiſhes) and that the leaguers had forſaken him, retyred home and left him in the briers, he thought to be high time for him to looke to his affaires. And in the latter end of October, taking his leaue from the Pariſiens, and commending them to the mercifull kéeping of our bleſſed Lady, who dwelleth there in the great tempell, and to the good old great S. Chriſtopher, dore kéeper of the ſaid tempell, marched homeward through Brie.
               
               But before his departing, fearing that hée would bée purſued by the King, he went about to beguile him with diſſimulations, for he procured the Duke d'Mayne to ſend Vileroy to the King, to moue a parley about the renuing of ſome treaty of truces, that in the ſhadow of the ſame, hée might ſlide home without any Sunne burning, vſing the pollicy of the fiſh, called Sepia, which powreth out his ynke in the water, that in the darknes thereof, he may auoide from the ſight of the fiſher.
               About the fourth day of Nouember, the King vnderſtanding of the Duke of Parma his retyre out of Paris, ſuppoſing that it was to returne home, departed from Eſcouis in Normandie, with few light horſemen with him, and certaine Harquebuſiers on horſeback, leauing the reſt of the army vnder the conduct of the Marſhall Byron, to employ it where he ſhould thinke moſt expedient. About the ſixt of Nouember, arriued at Compiegne, a Towne in Picardie, ſituated vppon the miéeting of the riuers Oyſe and Ayne, where immediatly after his arriuall, he ſent to the nobility of Picardy, to inuite them, to come and aſſiſt him, to reconduct the Duke  of Parma, according to the honour and papall nobility of his houſe, who had deſerued that fauour at his hand, if not for any ſeruice done, yet for the ſmall hurt that he had receaued by him.
               The Duke of Parma departed from Paris, and ſoiorned for ſome dayes in Brie, about Chauſt heaut herij, there in that fat ſoyle to refreſh his Soulours, hungerbitten and weake: to proue whether hee might procure any of the Leaguers (vpon the miſliking of ſéeking parley with the King) to

forſake the Duke d'Mayne, and to make him their Soueraigne generall, whereunto by ſecret practiſes he ſolicited a great number. But ſpecially  he feared greatly to venture his way alone: for being forſaken of the Frenchmen, he aſſured himſelfe that he would be aſſaulted in his retyre by the King, who did waite for the opportunity not farre of. Therefore hée inſtantly vrged the Duke d'Mayne, that he would rely his forces to kéepe him ſafe, caring little what might become, either of the Duke d'Mayne or of the Leaguers, ſo that hée might get out of this lurch that hée ſawe himſelfe in. This feare was the chiefeſt cauſe of his long ſoiourne in Brie.
               
               But whileſt hée was carefull of his ſafe returne into Brabant, the King had appoynted the Lord Gyury (a man of great valour & policie) to make choiſe of ſome ſufficient number of his beſt and moſt approoued ſouldiours, and to march toward Corbeil, there to ſeeke opportunitie to reuenge the cruel iniurie done to his ſubiects, by the Spanyards and Wallons, wherof part to the number of one thouſand were left there in garriſon.
               The occaſion of recouering Corbeil was thus. The maner of Wallons and Spanyards and popiſh nations beyond the Seas, is to drinke and quaffe very largely the tenth day of Nouember, in the worſhip of that good Biſhop S. Martin, who gaue halfe of his cloake to the diuell, when hee was through pouertie enforced to begge. But it is moſt like that they doo keepe that ryot more in the worſhip of the diuell who begged, then of that good man, who in his life time knewe very well, that it is not the cuſtome of the Church of God to worſhip the Saints, neither with drunkenneſſe, nor by any other meanes els.
               The Lord Gyury knowing that dronken faſhion of them very well, tooke that opportunitie to do his feate. For he delayed the time to approach the Towne vntill he ſuppoſed them to bee ſo crammed with good cheare and wine, that it was time for them to goe to ſleepe. Then about midnight when that Spaniſh garriſon were vino ſomné
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſepulti, he placed his peeces of Ordinance, and on a ſudden battered the ſame breach which the D. of Parma had made, which was not yet fully repayred. The breach being quickly opened, the aſſault was giuen. The Spanyards and Wallons halfe dronke and halfe a ſleepe, ranne as deſperat perſons to the walles, and made a very forcible reſiſtance, which continued all that night vntill nigh ſeauen a clocke in the morning.
               The Duke of Parma heard the battering of Corbeil, and fearing leaſt his Troph
                     •
                  e ſhould bee marred, ſent preſently a power of Spanyards to ſuccour them: but comming too late, were enforced to caſt away their weapons, as Demoſt henes did, that they might fight another time.
               The 11. day betweene ſixe and ſeauen of the clocke in the morning, the Town was throughly taken by the Kings forces, and reduced to his obedieuce,

who entred by the ſame breach which the Duke of Parma had done and entred before. There were found ſlayne two hundred Wallons, three  hundred Spanyards, and among them the Cheualier Aumale, brother to the Duke of Aumale, (one of the greateſt cutthrotes of all the Leaguers) was found dead. The cauſe of his being at that banquet, was, that he was appoynted to prouide victuals for Paris.
               
               Foure hundred were taken priſoners. There were taken alſo foure braſen peeces, and two Canons ready charged. There were taken many ſpaniſh Enſignes which were made newe, and newly diſplayed vppon the wall in token of victorie and in ſpite of the King.
               There were taken alſo two hundred fat Oxen, and foure hundred ſheep, ſome killed, and ſome dreſſed, and ſome aliue, which the Knight Aumale had prouided for Paris.
               
               This exployt being atchieued, the Lord Gyury with all his companies with feruent prayers gaue thankes to God, acknowledging this deliuerance and happie ſucceſſe to haue been the worke of his right hand and power.
               The newes of the retaking of Corbeil, cauſed diuers and contrary motions in diuers perſons: the King receauing the newes thereof, did admyre Gods iuſtice, which euery where thundreth the claps of his diſpleaſure vpon them who doo reſiſt his ordinance, and more and more conceaued hope that the Lord would performe the worke which he hath begun: firſt, in cloathing his enemies with ſhame and diſhonour as with a garment: and ſecondly in him to reſtore that afflicted eſtate.
               The Pariſiens and the Duke de Mayne were repleniſhed with rage and feare together: for they feared leaſt by the taking of Corbeil, and the retyre of the Duke of Parma, the ſhambles of horſes, aſſes and dogges ſhould be opened again. The Aſſes of Sorboun began to feare their ſkinne, leaſt for want of foure footed Aſſes, they ſhould be aſſaulted and brought to the ſhambles. Therefore they ranne to the ſayd Duke of Parma, they adiured and coniured him by the name of God, yea by Gog and Magog, and Beelzebub, to returne to the recouering of Corbeil.
               
               But the Duke of Parma remembring the price that hee payed for the ſayd Corbeil, would no more of that play, ſpecially knowing that he which did poſſeſſe it was a man reſolute of courage, valour and induſtrie. Yet to pleaſe them, he fed them daily (vntill he ſhould receaue ſupplie of forces to gard him) with fat morſels of words, to wit, that he would take Chaſteautherij and Compeigne, and in the meane while he walked in Brie and Champaigne, in like ſor
                     •
                   as the Hords of ſauage Tartarians doo remooue from place to place to graſe vp the countreyes: ſo did this great Crimme, ſaue that his cruelties and villanies which he vſed there, are yet vnknowne to the Tartarians.
               
                  
Whileſt he dooth raunge, ranſacke and riffle that countrey, ſome of the Kings Captaynes tooke the towne of Lagny, another Trophee or monument of the Duke of Parma his crueltie, which thing both encreaſed his  feare, and haſted his iourney out of France.
               
               Now we will leaue this omnipotent Cham with his hords of Tartarians to deuoure that countrey, whoſe comming the vnnatural inhabitants had procured to maintaine a moſt damnable rebellion and contempt of lawfull power, and we will ſee what the king had done ſoiourning in Compeigne, about fifteene or ſixteene dayes.
               The King ſoiourned in Compeigne for theſe cauſes following. Firſt to eſpye what the Duke of Parma would attempt: for after the taking of Corbeil, hee looked daily that he would haue returned backe to recouer it: for which cauſe the ſayd King had ſent for his forces to be in a readines at a dayes warning, intending vpon ſuch occaſion to trye the quarrell with a dayes worke. Secondly, to expect the Nobilitie of Picardie, whom he had inuited to reconduct home the Duke of Parma, as is ſayd.
               Thirdly, that by his neighbourhead he might repreſſe him from attempting vpon any places, which were vnder his obedience.
               Fourthly, hee ſtayed in Compeigne without interrupting the ſoiorning of the Duke of Parma in Brie, to geue leaſure to the rebellions Prouinces to prooue what difference there is betwixt the milde, good, iuſt, and fatherlike gouernment of a vertuous and lawful Prince, and the cruell bondage, of heatheniſh ſauage, and barbarous tyrants.
               The ſayd King during his abode there, among other deliberations concluded to purſue the ſaid Duke of Parma in his retire grounded vppon iuſtice, to wit, a wil and deſire to puniſh him who had offended, as far as God ſhould geue him power and lawfull means to do it: for as much as the D. of Parma beeing not prouoked with iniurie or vniuſt dealing, had not only againſt the law of nature maintained and aſſiſted the rebels in his realme, enemies to all iuſt and lawful ſuperiority, but alſo had committed horrible murthers and crueltyes contra ius ſupplicum, innumerable whoredoms, Sodomitries (hereditarie to the papall houſe of Pharneſes) & all maner of vilanies vpon his faithful Subiects, and alſo the neceſſary defence of his eſtate and ſafety of the places, which in that countrey were vnder his obedience.
               Uppon this iuſt reſolution, the twentith of Nouember the King with his forces departed from Coeuures in Picardie, hauing with him of the Nobility of that countrey about fiue hundred horſes beſide his own forces, and began to march directly againſt the ſaid Duke of Parma.
               
               It is ſaid how the Duke of Parma departed from Paris, and made their ab
                     •
                  ad in Brie: the cauſes alſo of that ſoiorning there haue béene opened, what euents alſo haue happened during that time.
               
                  
Now the ſayd Duke perceauing that all his practiſes (in ſeeking to ſupplant his friend) would not frame, vnderſtanding of the Kings preparations, for to accompany him into his countrey, and that the King was all  ready at the doore, began to feare yet more then euer before, ſéeing the tempeſt which would follow, and wiſhed that the Duke de Mayne had made more ſpeed to ſend him the ſuccour promiſed, wiſhed alſo that he might be quit in ceaſing the clampering noyſe of his Moiles belles: and in the meane time about the 23. day of Nouember hee remoued to the towne of Phiſmes vpon Voiſle, there within a wall he determined to expect the comming of the Duke de Mayne, who was comming with ſpeed.
               The King in this retire of Parma to Phiſmes arriued and met a certain companie of Spaniſh footmen, whom hee put all to the ſword without the loſſe of any of his men. The Duke de Maine with his forces repairing to Parma ſeeing all this exploit, and durſt neuer reſcue them: that exploit done, the King went to take his lodging in the Towne Feres in Tartenoys.
               
               The 25. of Nouember the Duke of Parma accompanied with the Duke de Maine, departed from Phiſmes, & tooke his way to Pontauers, which is a towne ſituated vppon the riuer Eſne, where he had determined to lodge the night following.
               The King hauing about eight hundred Launciers, and ſo many Harquebuſiers on horſeback, ſent the Baron of Biron with fifteene light horſes to view the enemie. In the meane time the King tooke 25. horſes, and kept to the right hand by a wood, ſeeking to iudge by ſight the enemies marching. But the Baron of Biron brought newes that the enemy was departed from a Village named Bazoges and marched toward Pontauers. The King immediatly with all his forces following the enemie entred into the ſaid Village, where he found few Farmers and huſoandmen armed and ready to fight in his Maieſties behalfe, of whom the King learned more particular newes concerning the enemy.
               The Kings Captaines, but ſpecially the Baron of Biron ſtill purſued them, and meeting with ſtraglers payed them their wages for their comming ſo farre, and gaue many onſets when occaſion ſerued, alwaies to the enemies coſts.
               The 27 the King ſent the Lords Fronterack, Chicot and Dauers, on the top of Saint Martins hill to view if the enemie had put any ambuſhes at the hilles foote, but they ſaw them in the open plaine marching apace toward Pontauers: the way beeing without ambuſhes, the King ſent the Baron of Biron with a troupe of horſemen, and he with an other company followed after, commaunding the Lord la Now to ſend him ten out of euery company, and to reſt the remnant.
               The King made fiue ſmal ſquadrons of fiftie horſes in euery one of al theſe

companies. There was a hot alarum geuen in the enemies camp, and gaue a dozen onſets on the enemies. But whileſt theſe things were a doing, the  King ſpied on an other ſide behind 300. Harquebuziers on horſeback, who conducted the carriage of tronkes and baggage: and fearing the retyre of the enemy would haue brought him out too farre from his forces, retired intending to charge theſe companies of Harquebuziers. One of the Kings Gards beeing fallen into the enemies hands, cried for helpe: whereuppon the Baron of Biron charged them, and ſlew twelue or thirteene of them, but his horſe was killed, whereby he was put in great danger, if he had not béene reſcued by the King. This fray beeing begun, there was a great alarum geuen in the enemies campe, which began to march toward the King. But he conſidering that it was better to hazard few common ſouldiers thē the Nobilitie, cauſed the companies on horſeback of the Captaines, Saint Denis and Saint Foelix to light, and to charge the enemy: there was a hot ſkirmiſh begun.
               The K. in the meane time retired with his nobillity to a Village called Longauall: thether alſo the Harquebuziers retired after they had fought a long ſpace, and in the retire Captain Saint Foelix was ſlaine with a ſhot, the Souldiers retyred ſo leaſutely that they did draw the dead corps with them by the legges.
               When the King had paſſed Longauall toward Pontarſie, the Harquebuziers of the enemy came to the wall, and in a brauing fury ſ
                     •
                  rooke with their ſwoords vpon the gates of the towne: but being ſaluted with the Harquebuziers within with ſhot through loope holes, and ſeeing many of their fellowes fall vpon the place, they retired and ſound the means by the guiding of a man of that Town to ſeaze vpon an other gate, and entered about ſixe of them. Captaine Bonmouoyr ſet vppon them and killed two of them: the other retired.
               The Harquebuziers tooke their horſes, forſooke that towne, and followed after the King, who was before to take his lodging about Pontarſy, ſituated vpon the riuer Eſne beneath Pontauers, and the enemy preſently entred the ſaid Towne of Longauall. Part of the Enemies followed after the King, and ſeeing a Wood betweene the ſayd Longaual and Pontarſie, ſtayed there, miſtruſting ſome ambuſhes: but at length paſſing through they met with the Baron of Byron, who charged them ſo roughly with a ſmall company of horſemen, that he layed downe vpon the ground thirtie of them.
               The King commanded Captayne Langemis to light and ſet a freſh on them, who killed a great number of them, and then retyred into the towne of Pontarſie.
               
               The enemy went not to Pontauers that night, but encamped in the plaine field with great feare of an alarum, vnderſtanding that the Duke of

                  Neuers with fiue hundred horſes out of Champaigne, and the Lords Gyury out of Corbeil, and Parabelle out of Melun with good and Iuſtie companies  of horſes were expected that day to come to the King, euery man accompted him happie that might returne into Brabant in a whole ſkinne, there to prooue whether they had forgotten the art of Carrowſing, the chiefeſt trade of that countrey.
               The 28. day in the morning, thirtie harquebuſiers of the enemies hauing loſt their way, went into the Towne of Longaual, enquiring for the Duke of Parmas quarter, whom the inhabitants diſarmed, and throwing them vnder the bridge drowned them.
               The ſame day came to the King the ſayd Duke of Neuers, and Lords Gyury and Parabelle with eight hundred horſes all well appoynted.
               The 29. day the King went out of Pontarſie with one thouſand horſes, intending to giue his enemies a freſh charge, and to carrie away the Rereward: but their Ordinance being ſtucke faſt in the myre, the whole armie remayned all that day in battell array in that place where their Ordinance was, and there alſo encamped themſelues all the night following; ſo that nothing could be enterpriſed vpon them.
               The 30. day of Nouember the King determined to did the enemie fare, well with a fight of horſemen: the Duke of Parma with a good will would haue ſpared that curteſie, and bee glad to get out of the Realme without ſo much adoo.
               In the morning very early the ſayd Duke marched toward Marle, a towne nigh the head ſpring of the riuer Oyſe, from thence to get Larbre de Guize, and ſo to leaue the realme of France.
               
               The King commanded all his horſemen to be in a readines, and directly to march toward Creſſie with all furniture, yet without baggage or carriage. And being firſt of all arriued at the rendes vous, vnwilling to ouerſlip any opportunitie to ſee his enemie that day, which hee thought ſhould bee the day of their ſeparation, ſent the Lord Baron of Byron to march before, and hee himſelfe to followe him within the diſtance of a hundred paces onely with fourtie gentlemen. The Lord Longaual followed the King with fiftie horſes and the reſt of the Cornet. As they had marched a good ſpace, there appeared at the ſide of a Wood about ſixe ſcore horſes vnder the leading of Colonell Baſte, who came in haſt to charge the Baron of Byron: the ſayd Baron gaue ſo reſolute a charge that he made them to retyre to theyr maine battaile: and when the enemie had ioyned with their fellowes, they came agayne to giue a freſh charge, in the which the ſayd Baron of Byron his horſe was killed, and he in great daunger to bee ſlaine: but the King did gather them quickly that were ſcattered, and with them cauſed the reſt of his troupes to come forward: which being in battaile aray, and ioyned with them that had bin gathered out of the ſkirmiſh,

gaue ſuch a fearefull charge, that all the rereward of the enemie thought vpon nothing but vpon the meanes how to ſaue themſelues, leauing their  dead armed vpon the place. If all the Kings companies had come in time enough, there had not returned ſo many home to play at carrowſe as there did.
               The firſt day of December, the D. of Parma entred the dominions of the low countrey. He had neuer ſo much neede of his Nurce about him with clowts, as he had during the ſpace of theſe laſt fiue dayes of Nouember: moſt of his companies accompanied him home as well as they could: part of them remained with the Duke de Mayne, vntill that tempeſt was ouer paſt.
               The firſt day of December, the Lords of Neuers, Giury and Parabel, who were come freſh and ſtrong to the King, departed from the Caſtell of Niſy, and purſued the enemie, marching toward the Larbre de Guize: but what exployts were done that day we haue nothing to ſpeake off, for lack of inſtructions.
               During this retraite, the Duke of Parma was ſo diſtreſſed, that he was very greatly diſappoynted of his lodgings. As he tooke no compaſſion at Corbeil of them which ſuppliant fell before his knees: ſo pitied he no more his owne Souldiers, who could not make ſo good ſpeede in running away as he could doo, but left them to ye mercie of the Peaſants of the countrey, with whom they found no more fauour then with their maſter.
               Of foureteene or fifteene thouſand men which he brought into France, there returned not home aboue eight thouſand, and they were in a manner in as great miſerie as their fellowes, who returned into Spayne from the conqueſt of England in the yeare 1588.
               The firſt day of December the King went to Saint Quintins, ſituated vpon the riuer of Oyſe, where he was royally receaued with great reioyſing and comfort of all men. And when the King had ſtayed there a few daies, he heard that the Lord Humiers, with other noble men of Picardie, had taken the towne of Corbey, ſituated vppon the riuer Some, and in the middle way betweene Amiens, Peronne and Dourlan, three great townes in Picardie, which haue continued in their rebellion.
               During the time that the King ſoiou
                     •
                  ned in Picardie, and purſued the Duke of Parma, the Marſhall Byron tooke fiue ſtrong Townes and aboue twentie Caſtles in Normandie and Beauuoy
                        •
                     in, wherein the Rebells had layed ſtrong garriſons.
               By theſe narrations (Chriſtian reader) thou mayeſt ſee what the rebels (enemies both of God and man) hauing drawne vpon theyr owne heads a ſtormie winde of tempeſt, leaſt they ſhould not haue calamities enough, according to the meaſure of their offence, they ſent for the Duke of Parma to deliuer them, who comming into the land, gaue them an egge and deuoured

the Hen, and where they were beaten by themſelues with ſcourges, now this deliuerer did bruſe them with barres of yron. 
               
               It pleaſed God (in whoſe hands the harts of Kings and Princes are) to turne the Kings will from hindering the ſayd Duke of Parma from dooing all that he durſt or could doo: that God might giue the King to vnderſtand what therehence hee had hereafter to feare, as long as he playeth the parts of a right King, and that hee is his aboundant reward.
               Secondly, that it might euidently appeare, that as the ſayd Duke of Parma was not able to doo good to his partakers, ſo came he not but to bée a ſcourge of Gods wrath vnto them.
               For he came to raiſe the ſiege from before Paris; if that had not béen done by dutifull ſubmiſſion, the Citie might haue been relieued, iuſtice & iudgement (which are more then cent
                        •
                     plex murus to a Cittie) had beene eſtabliſhed: they might haue had their owne Autonomie, to wi
                     •
                  , their Religion and Franchiſes in peace, ſecurity and libertie. Their commerce and traffike (by which the greatnes of that Citie is entertained and nouriſhed) had been opened: to bee ſhort, it would haue floriſhed more then euer it did, but the comming of the Duke of Parma diſappointed them of all theſe benefites.
               The Duke of Parma brought a little ſtore of victuals: but hee and his conſumed not onely that within a few dayes, but alſo all other prouiſions which could be made for the Citie: ſo the inhabitants were hungerbitten ſtill, & with ſorrowfull eies they ſaw others to intercept that which ſhould haue béen their ſuſtenance. So that (if it were not for the Kings goodnes, which by winking, and forbearing ſome ſtore of victuals to goe to their market) they would haue beene enforced in few dayes to open their ſhambles of horſe fleſh and dogs fleſh.
               Hee came to deliuer them (as they thought) from cruell handes: but what could Buſyris haue done to his enemies, that this man did not to his friends? to their wines and children?
               To be ſhort, now he is returne
                     •
                   home with ſhame, diſhonor, hunger, nakednes, feeblenes and ſtripes, and they remaine in a worſe caſe then euer they were before: for before they liued in hope of him, now they know that he neither may nor will do them good, but hath lingered their miſeries, and heape of euils, that they may periſh as with a ſharpe and conſuming ſicknes.
               Laſt of all, that al men may learne by ſeeing the puniſhment of rebellion, to ſubmit themſelues vnto the powers ordayned of God, as vnto his miniſters for the good of the iuſt and the puniſhment of the wicked and vniuſt, and that they may diſcerne between a ſawfull power and 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               It is ſayd before how after the death of the Duke of Guyze, the Lords Diguieres and Valete, vppon a good iudgement entred in league of amity,

for the Kinges ſeruice, and after that ſeparated themſelues, and within a ſhort ſpace ſcoured the Leaguers for the moſt part out of Daulphinee 
                   ſome he enforced to receaue the Kings commandement, and the reſt enforced to ſeeke for truces for foure yeares, which in March were granted and proclaimed in Grenoble vpon Eaſter day.
               It is ſaide how the Lord Valete went into Prouance, and gathering the ſtates of the countrey by a common conſent, they concluded to warre againſt the Senate of Aix, who were the ringleaders of the rebellion, and had intelligences with the Duke of Sauoy.
               
               The Lord Diguieres hauing put the countrey of Daulphine in a good ſtay, went into Prouance to the Lord Valete, making warre againſt the rebellious parliament there, and the Duke of Sauoy. The rumors went abroad that they had loſt a field, and were ſent into their countrey with ſtore of Baſtinadoes: but for lack of inſtructions I affirme nothing.
               The Lord Diguieres being in Prouance with the Lord Valete, had diuers letters from the King, but ſpecially in the latter end of May, commanding him to warre againſt the Duke of Sauoy. But the ſaide countrey of Prouance being aſſaulted by the Leaguers of Sauoy, Lionnoys and Daulphine, he thought good yet to employ the moneths of Iune and Iuly with the Lord Valete, for the eſtabliſhing of the affayres of the ſayd Prouance: wherein they had ſo good a ſucceſſe, that the enemie in token of that cowardneſſe, which their rebellion doth bréede in their hearts, abandoned the townes and Caſtells of Peruis, Pumichet, Valanſele, Montignak, Soluiers, Pignauers and Lorgis: ſome were brought to the kings obedience by force, and ſome by compoſition.
               In Iuly during the ſoiourning of the Lorde Diguieres in Prouance; there was in Daulphine one captaine Cazete, who with intelligences which he had with the Duke of Sauoy, would haue ſould him the townes of Briancon and Eſſiles in Piemont, yet pertayning to the Dolphinate.
               Theſe two townes were kept by the Neutrals, that is to ſay, by them who would admit neither the K. nor the Leaguers. The ſaid Cazete had receaued commiſſion from the Duke of Sauoy, to leauie ſouldiers to that intent, in expecting the arriuall of foure and twenty companies of Spaniards, to bring his enterprize the more eaſie to paſſe.
               The inhabitants of the valleies perceauing well, that if this trayterous captaine ſhould preuaile, great warre and miſerable deſolations of their countrey would enſue: therefore the chiefeſt of thoſe valleyes making acquainted the Lord Diguieres of their purpoſe, determined to rid the ſayd Cazete out of the way, and did worke ſo, that the fifteenth day of Iuly his houſe was blowne vp and he ſlaine.
               This traytor being made out of the way, the inhabitants of the valleis ſeat word to the Lord Diguieres, that they would ſend their deputies to

                  Ambrun, to treate with him.
               Vpon the receipt of this meſſage, the Lord Diguieres (conſidering the greatnes of the affayres, and that it was very expedient for the king to  haue thoſe townes of Briancon and Eſſiles in poſſeſſion, to haue paſſe and repaſſe into Piemont when néede ſhould be) departed out of Prouance, and in haſt marched towards Ambrun, where the deputies of the valeys did méete him. And among other things, ſhewed the treaſons of Cazete, by the papers which they had found in his houſe.
               After that they bound themſelues by oath to be faythfull to the King, they promiſed alſo to doe their indeuour to confirme the people into his Maieſties ſeruice and obedience: this was done about the fourth of Auguſt.
               Immediatly after this méeting, the Lord Diguieres being aduertized of the wauering which the death of the ſayd Cazete, and voluntarie yéelding of the valeys, did cauſe in the towne of Briancon, which was Neutrall, knowing alſo that thoſe who did fauour the kings ſide in the towne, began to be encouraged, cauſed foure Canons to be drawen and brought to that place, and after a breach made, the enemie did parley, and came to that iſſue, that Clauiſon (appoynted there gouernour by the Duke de Mayne) ſurrendred the towne and Caſtell the tenth day of Auguſt.
               Whileſt the Lord Diguieres did theſe exployts in Daulphine, Martinengo, one of the Duke of Sauoys great warriors, did beſiege Saint Maximine in Prouance: for which cauſe the L. Valete did daylie ſolicit the ſayd Diguieres to aſſiſt him in the reſcuing of the ſayd Saint Maximine.
               
               The Lord Diguieres conſidering the ſafetie of Saynt Maximine, to make much for the preſeruation of Prouance, when as hee had gone to Montgeneure, to take Eſſiles, vpon intelligences which hee had with the gouernour thereof, and ſéeing that there was neither certaintie in al that, neither was he ſufficiently prouided to force the place, was contented for that time to take the oaths onely of the commonaltie, who ſhewed them ſelues greatly affectionated vnto the kings ſeruice.
               Theſe affayrs beeing done in Daulphine, hee tooke his way into Prouance, and lodged nigh Barcelona▪ Barcelona is a towne in Piemont, in the countie of Nice▪ Salines an old Spaniſh Captayne beeing chiefe Colonell of the light horſemen of Piemont, was gouernour thereof vnder the D. of Sauoy: the ſaid Salines immediatly after the comming of Diguieres; went foorth out of Barcelona, and aſſaulted the quarter where the companie of footmen of Boyſet, and twelue launces of the Lord Brickmault were lodged. Theſe companies of Boyſet and Brickmault did receaue him ſo valiantly, that by the helpe of other companies which vppon the noiſe they heard, came running thether, that the ſayd Salines left behinde ſixe ſcore dead layd vpon the ground, and thirtie Spaniards taken priſoners, and

he ſaued himſelfe with ſixe men onely into the towne, from whence he came the fifteenth of Auguſt. 
               
               In that ſkirmiſh was hurt and taken Voluant, who two yeares before had ſold the ſtrong Towne and Caſtell of Carmaniole vnto the deceaſed D. of Sauoy, after the death of the Marſhall Bellegard.
               
               The ſixteenth day the ſaid Lord Diguieres tooke by compoſition the Caſtell of Roſoles in Piemont, which partained vnto the Duke. There was two companies of footmen in garriſon, who were permitted to depart with armor, leauing their Colours behind.
               After this exploit, the ſaid Diguieres continuing his way, about the 22. of Auguſt came into Prouance, hee was not ſo ſoone entred the countrey, that Martinengo who beſieged Saint Maximine, hearing of it, remooued the ſiege: which thing the Lord Diguieres hearing, brought three Canons before the Caſtell of Barles the 23. of Auguſt, and the 31. of the ſame Moneth tooke it at his diſcretion.
               Some time before the Lord Diguieres had fortifyed a Church called Saint Paul, with flankes and ditches about, diſtant foure or fiue leagues from Ambrun: during the time that the Lord Diguieres ſoiorned at the ſiege which he had laied before Barl
                        •
                     s, the Duke of Sauoy accompanied with thrée thouſand footmen, and foure hundred light horſemen, came to beſiege and batter with three Canon the ſaid Church Saint Paule, which the 31. of Auguſt he tooke by compoſition, the ſame day that Barles was taken, the garri
                     •
                  on thereof going away with their armor, colours and drum in battell array.
               The ſame day, the Lord Diguieres aduertized of the ſiege of Saint Paul, marched in all haſt to ſuccour it, with intent alſo to offer a battell to the D. and vſing a maruellous celerity, he lodged in Varret the third of September. The Duke vnderſtanding of this ſo ſudden and vnlooked for arriuall of the Lord Diguieres, fell into ſuch a diſmay and feare, that he retired that night from the mountaine Larche, and marched all that night with links, beeing followed the next day with his forces.
               The fourth day the Lord Diguieres commaunded ſome of his companies to follow after the enemy, who did ſlay many of the rereward of the Duke, and tooke one Don Pedro Vegieres a Spaniard of the gard of the Duke: hee himſelfe with the reſt marched toward S. Paul, reſolutely determined to aſſault Saint Paul with handie blowes for lacke of Canon, & hauing blowen vp one of the gates and a breach made tooke it by aſſault, which continued three houres, and cauſed two hundred Souldiers, that were within it, to be put to the ſword, taking none priſoner but Captaine Strata gouernor of the place, and his Enſigne named Hercules Couero of Milan: of the Kings ſide was killed only Captaine Bouloneuue, and few Souldiers hurt, he cauſed the place to be raſed hard to the ground.
               
                  
The ſayd fort remained not foure whole dayes in the Duke of Sauoy his power. 
               
               At the ſame time that the Duke did batter Saint Paul, which was in the end of Auguſt, he ſent his forces of Sauoy and Piemont, beeing foure thouſand footmen and three hundred horſemen into the valey of Eſsiles to ſpoyle the Countrey of Brianconoys, to batter Guyleſtre, and ouer runne Ambrunoys.
               
               The Lord Diguieres vnderſtanding of this, hauing raſed Saint Paul, preſently the fifth of September tooke his iourney toward Briancon, and beeing informed that the enemy was lodged in Chaumont, made preparation to force the paſſage Selt, kept and fortifyed by the inhabitants of the valeies, ſent thither the Lord Morges his Nephew, with his company of fiftie horſemen, and two enſignes of footmen, who arriuing at Selt the 19. day of September at the ſame inſtant that they were in ſkirmiſh, he lighted with his men, and ſetting them in battell array, did ſo both encourage his men and charge the enemie (aſſaulting the fort and bulworks in ſundry places with fifteene hundred footmen, and one hundred and foureſcore men of armes) that the ſaid enemy was not onely repulſed, but alſo beaten with the loſſe of ſixe ſcore men lying vpon the ground.
               The thirteenth day of September the Lord Diguieres after he had raſed Saint Paul, marching toward Eſsiles ouer the difficult Mountaines, arriued at Douley three leagues from Eſsiles, where newes was brought him that the Duke (hauing ſent part of his forces to the Lord Sonnes) was gone to Nice. Theſe newes made the ſayd Lord Diguieres iudge that the ſaid Sonnes beeing now ſtrengthened with a new ſupply of men, would aduenture to hazard the battell. And the more to prouoke him to it, determined to batter Eſſiles, and with foure Canons which hee brought from Ambrun, ouer the high & (as it ſéemeth) inacceſſible Mountains began the battery, and withal ſhewed himſelfe euery day before Chamoys, where the ſaid Sonnes was. But diſpleaſed with ye importunacy of the ſaid Diguieres, left Chamoys, and retyred to Suze, accompanied with fifteene hundred Harquebuziers, and fiue Cornets of Horſemen.
               The 26. day of September the Lord Diguieres followed the enemie, and found them at Ialaſſe halfe a league from Zuze, whom in the entring of the playne, hauing but eight ſcore horſemen, hée aſſaulted ſo furiouſly, that beſide ſome footmen, he laied dead downe to the ground foure hundred Launciers on the place: among whom were Clapot the elder, the Lords Montaignes and Valuernes, 17. Captaines or chiefe officers ſlayne or taken. Among the priſoners was Clapot the yonger wounded, and died two dayes after. There were alſo taken priſoners Labras, Lieutenant of the Marqueſſe Taforts, the Gouernour of Breſ
                        •
                     he, Captayne Triſolts, de la Riuiere and S. Lorens. Sonnes alſo was thought to be either ſlayne or taken:

but about midnight he came alone before the gates of Zuze.
               
               The 27. of September the Lord Diguieres receaued ſupplie of forces, as well of the inhabitants of the Townes of Briancon and Pons, as of the  gouernours there, and two or three hundred ſhot of the companies of S. Sauiour, which cauſed him to alter his purpoſe concerning Eſſiles, which began alreadie to parley, and cauſed him to continue the ſiege of the ſayd Eſſiles vnto the end of the ſame moneth.
               
                  Poſſonnes, the Duke de Mayne his gouernour there, conſidering the ſtate of the Duke of Sauoy his affayres, ſeeing the Canon planted, and the Lord Diguieres fortified with newe ſupplies, all the commonaltie bent againſt him, and being without any hope of ayde or reliefe, the 30. of September yeelded the Towne of Eſſiles by compoſition, that his Souldiers ſhould freely depart with bagge and baggage. So by theſe meanes the paſſages into Piemont doo remayne in the Kings power, and the countrey of Daulphine is limitted with his olde limits long before fortified by the French Kings during the warres of Italy.
               
                  Sonnes (generall of the Duke of Sauoy) had prouoked the Lord Morges his nephewe, to fight fiftie agaynſt fiftie on horſebacke, and appoynted the place: which thing the Lord Diguieres vnderſtanding, conducted the ſayd Morges vnto the place, where the ſayd Morges remayned with his forces readie to accept the offer from nine a clocke in the morning, vntill three a clocke in the euening, and at length came a Trompetter with a letter from the ſayd Sonnes carying an excuſe.
               The Lord Diguieres in attending the comming of ye enemie, had eſpied a paſſage néere Iallon, where the enemie had entrenched himſelfe, and there lodged eight companies vnder the conduct of Captaine Venuſt: and perceauing that there was no more hope of Sonnes comming to the combat appoynted; he determined to ſpend the reſt of that day in doing ſome exployt, and to aſſault the ſayd companyes, who did lye vpon the hanging of the mountayne betweene Suze and Noualize: and hauing found meanes to place one hundred Muſketters, who battered the enemie vpon the ſide of their fort, the trenches of the enemie were forced, and foureſcore of them ſlayne: among whom were Captaynes Venuſt, Gaſſard and Charband: Captayne Vilars with ſome other was taken priſoners, and foure companies of Senton (maſter of the Campe) were ſo ſcattered, that they came neuer  together agayne. This exployt was done the firſt of October.
               This being done, the Lord Diguieres returned again to Eſſiles, and ſent backe the foure Canons to Ambrun, and cauſed two great peeces to bee drawne from Gap to Barcelona, a place ſituated in the County of Nice, and pertayning to the Duke of Sauoy, hee ſent his forces before to beſiege the ſayd Barcelona: and when hee came himſelfe about the eleauenth day of October, and had made a breach, the ſame day the enemie did parley, and

yéelded themſelues with ſafetie of their liues, leauing behind them their armour, colours, horſes and baggage: the Captaines were permitted to depart  with their ſwords vpon an hackney. The inhabitants had graunted them to enioy their goods, abiding vnder the Kings obedience, as the reſt of his ſubiects, vpon condition to pay ſixe thouſand Crownes for the army, and the fraight of the Artillerie.
               The 13. day the gouernour called Coreloere departed with three ſouldiers with him, and as many of citizens and countrey men who repayred to their houſes vnder the Kings ſafegard.
               The 14. day the Lord Diguieres layd batterie before the Caſtle of Metans, which he ſlenderly battered the 15. day, only to view the enemies countenance. But they being greatly afrayed, the next night did ſteale away, and ſo ſaued themſelues, except thirtie of them, who were intercepted by the watch.
               In this way of Piemont, the Lord Diguieres had neuer aboue three hundred horſes and twelue hundred ſhot, and found no greater enemie then the inacceſſible height of the mountaynes, where ouer he was forced to paſſe the Canon, but chiefly in his iourney to Barcelona.
               
               The Citie of Grenoble in the land of Daulphine, notwithſtanding the truces and good entertaynment from time to time receaued of the Lord Diguieres, had been ſeduced after the King laſt deceaſed, and did hold ſtill after for the League, though not with ſuch deſperat madnes and inſolencie as many others had done.
               Now the L. Diguieres hauing well repreſſed the madnes▪ & chaſtized the raſhnes and folly of the D. of Sauoy, and hauing in a manner ſubdued and pacified that countrey, forſooke the Duke of Sauoy, and determined to ſcoure as much as he could, all the remnant and ragges of rebellion out of that prouince: which thing to bring to paſſe, he thought good to begin at the head, to wit, the Citie of Grenoble, and as by the euent which followed, it ſeemed that he did beſiege & diſtreſſe that Citie: which thing cauſed the inhabitants to conſider that the Lord Diguieres had in a manner all the land of Daulphine at commaundement: His power was increaſed, and returned out of Piemont with few victories of many: they weighed alſo how they were out of hope of any ſuccour, as well from the Duke de Mayne as from the Duke of Sauoy: who being taught by the ſchoolemaſter of fooles, which is experience, would not haue hereafter great luſt to returne in haſte into Daulphine. Theſe circumſtances cauſed them well to conſider the danger wherein they ſtoode, which thing moued them to make a motion of peace, by the which they were reduced to the dutifull obedience of their lawfull Soueraigne. This peace was concluded in the ſuburbs of Saint Laurence by Grenoble, the two and twentith of December, betweene the Lord des Diguieres, one of the kings priuie counſell

and of eſtate, captayne of a hundred men at armes of his Ordinances, and generall of the armie leuied for the kings ſeruice in the land of Daulphine 
                   on the one part: and the court of Parliament, the commonalties of the countie, and the Conſuls of the ſame.
               Firſt, that the exercize of the Romiſh Religion, ſhall remaine frée both within the towne and ſuburbs thereof, as hitherto it hath béen, and that the Cleargie in all the prouince ſhall enioy the full poſſeſſion of their goods in any place in the prouince vnder the kings protection.
               Secondly, that the frée exercize of the reformed Religion, may be publikely celebrated within Treſcloiſtre ſuburbs of the ſayd citie, without any let, trouble or moleſtation.
               Thirdly, that all dwellers in the ſame towne that will continue therein, ſhall perſonally proteſt and acknowledge Henrie the fourth, king of France and Nauarre for their Soueraigne, and ſhall yéeld to him the oth of fidelitie in like caſes requiſite, in the hands of the Lord Saint Andrew, preſident of the court of Parliament, and Chaſtelard, counſellor in the ſame court, in the preſence of the Lordes of Blemew and Calignon: and vpon the ſame oath taken, the ſayd inhabitants ſhall bée maintayned and reſtored in the full and peaceable enioying of their goods, offices, priuiledges and franchizes.
               Fourthly, if any man of whatſoeuer calling or condition ſoeuer it bée, ſhall be vnwilling to take the ſayde oath, and ſhall be deſirous thereupon to departe elſe where, hee ſhall be ſafely conducted to any place that they will go, and may enioy their goods, offices and dignities, either by ſale, or by receauing their annuall fruits or ſtipend thereof at their choyce, prouided alwayes that they enterprize nothing againſt the Kings ſeruice.
               Fiftly, that the cuſtodie and gouernment of the ſaid towne ſhall be referred to the Kings good pleaſure, who ſhall be requeſted to prouide it of ſuch a gouernour, and ſo ſufficient garriſon as he ſhall thinke meete for his ſeruice, and the preſeruation of the towne.
               Item, that in the meane time as the Lord Arbucy, hitherto gouernour of the ſayd towne, vpon ſome conſiderations, cannot as yet reſolue to take that oath, that the ſayd place ſhall remayne in gouernance of the Lord Rochegiron, and that the Lord Arbucy ſhall haue three moneths reſpit to reſolue vpon the ſame oath: which thing if hee doth, the King ſhall bee requeſted to graunt him againe the gouernment of the ſame towne.
               Sixtly, that generally all the inhabitants of whatſoeuer calling or degrée they bee, ſhall ſtand diſcharged and acquited of all leuying of the kings impoſt or coynes, bearing of armes, treaties and practizes, euen with Forreiners, or any other acts of hoſtilitie, and that the Lord Diguieres hath vndertaken, within two moneths to deliuer vnto them ſufficient

prouiſoes for the ſame from the King.
               Seuenthly, that the memorie of all the offences paſt in all theſe troubles,  ſhall be extinct, as matter not happened. And that the Lord Diguieres, with all other gentlemen of his partie doe promiſe, that by themſelues and by their meanes, ſuch matters ſhall neuer bee reuiued, and that it ſhall not be lawfull to call ſuch things to remembrance, and that it ſhall be forbidden to argue or quarrell about it, that al the kings ſubiects may liue together in peace, like brethren, friendes, and fellow citizens.
               Eightly, that for a more perfect vnion of the hearts of the Kings ſubiects, the Lords of the court of Parliament, who by the Kings commandement had retired, and are yet reſident at Rouan, or elſewhere, ſhall returne with conuenient ſpeede to Grenoble, there to follow and continue their charges.
               Laſt of all, that within two moneths, there ſhall be ſummoned a generall aſſembly of the ſtates, after the manner accuſtomed, for the haſting of the meanes to diſcharge and relieue the people, and eſtabliſh the common bodie of the countrey.
               Now Chriſtian reader, I beſeech thée to conſider, both the euident and ſencible mercie and iuſtice of God, & the difference which is betwéene the veſſels of glory & of wrath: for this honourable L. des Diguieres in all the wars of Daulphine, euer ſince the riſing of ye execrable League, hath neuer ſhewed any point of crueltie vpon his enemies, in which there might appeare any ſmall token of particular anger, or appetite of reuenge: but alwaies hath ſhewed good & gracious entertainmēt, euen vnto the very enemies, in whom he hath marked ſome ſimple dealing, & had not vſed any 
                     •
                  normities or proud inſolēcies. If he hath ſhewed ſomtime ſome extremity, yet did he neuer ſo much as he might haue iuſtly done, & hath knowen in ſuch, alwaies ſome notable iniuries, which he wt a iuſt & prudent wiſdome hath thought to haue deſerued ſome ſharpe puniſhment. To be ſhort, it may bée ſayd of him, In conſilijs ſapiens & prouidus, in aci
                        •
                      fortis, in pace & foederibus, iuſtus fidus & conſtans. Therefore the Lord hath guided his armes, hath made him victorious in all conflicts and méetings, and hath endued him with ſuch ſtrength of the bodie, as beyond all expectation, to haue ſurmounted the inacceſſible Alpes, and at length hath not onely ſuppreſſed and rooted out the naturall rebells of the countrey, out of Daulphine and Prouance, their confederates of Spayne, Italy and Piemont, but with an incredible felicitie, hath reſtored the afflicted ſtate of that countrey, and eſtabliſhed peace, iudgement and iuſtice.
               On the other ſide, whereas it is the dutie of Chriſtian Princes, not to rauiſh other mens kingdomes, to enuade their landes and principalities, to robbe, ſpoyle and murder their borderers and neighbours: but to gouern their Dominions in peace, with piety, iuſtice and diſcipline, to liue

friendly with their Neighbours, but ſpecially to relieue other Eſtates afflicted, to aſſiſt Princes neighbours, when through diſobedience and rebellion  of vnnaturall ſubiects they are diſquieted and tormoiled.
               But it fell ſo otherwiſe with France: for when through the ſinnes of the people, and euill counſell of Henry the third, the Kingdome was ſo torne with diſſentions and rebellions, that it ſeemed as in a ſhipwrack the pieces did flye abroad, expoſed to euery man that could catch & hold. Firſt the King of Spaine (who had beene this day a Muſcleman, and not a Catholike, if it had not beene for the kinges of France) with his Gold thought to haue all.
               Secondly, the Duke of Sauoy (who whithout the goodnes of the Valoys, had beene a pety and a poore Duke) made his reckoning to goe away with the Prouinces of Daulphin and Prouance, bordering vpon him, for his part.
               Thirdly, the Duke de Mayne (who without the gratious fauour of the Valoys, had layn obſcure in the Mountains of Lorrein, there a digging for braſſe in the cauerns thereof) made his accampt of ſome ſcambling among the other, as to haue carried away all that bordereth to Lorreyn: d' Aumale made his reckoning of Picardie, and Merccur of Britayn.
               
               Laſt of all, Fryer Sixtus, and after him Fryer Gregorie the fourtéenth thought by theſe meanes to maintayne their tyrannie in that Realme. All theſe I ſay were ſo farre from dooing the duties of Chriſtian Princes and Paſtors of the Church, in aſſiſting the right owner of the Crowne, and in preſeruing that Realme, as one of the chiefeſt members and ornament of Europe, that euen as the Edomites in the ſacking of Ieruſalem crieddowne with it, downe with it euen to the ground: ſo haue they not in words but in kindling and nouriſhing the flame of rebellion, & aſſaulting by all meanes the ſaid Realme, haue encreaſed the plagues and multiplyed the ſorrowes of that aflicted ſtate.
               Therefore behold the Lord hath accurſed their armes, and as for the Duke of Sauoy his owne hand hath weakened him, ſo that he durſt neuer come to ſee the ſaid Lord Diguieres in the face one way, but he is gone out of the field ſeauen waies. He did neuer in all theſe warres any thing with valour, but by treachery and treaſons, as the taking of Carmagnole, and his practiſes in Prouance doo teſtify: thouſands of his moſt approoued and ſkilfull Souldiours and Captains haue béen killed by few, not only in their inuaſions attempted in Daulphine & Prouance, but alſo at home, where the ſaid Lord Diguieres hath forced their ſtrong holds, hath put them to the ſword, and caſt their carcaſes on their mountains to bee meat for the beaſts of the field, and fowles of the ayre. See therefore how contrarie licours do flow out of contrary veſſels, and how the Lord protecteth the vertuous and iuſt, according to his promiſe, and clotheth the wicked with calamity, ſhame and diſhonor, as with a Cloude.
               Here endeth the eight Booke.
            
            
               
               THE NINTH BOOKE. 
               
               
                  I Haue declared in the former booke thoſe euents which happened in the yeare 1590. and how the King conducted very curteouſly the Duke of Parma, if he would haue taken it ſo, and how the ſayd King retyred to Saint Quintin in the beginning of December 1590. but what courſe he tooke, nor what coaſt he followed I haue nothing to ſpeake of for lacke of inſtructions, except wee may gather ſome thing by the euents.
               It ſeemeth therefore, that the King after he had ſoiorned ſome dayes in Picardie, hee returned to his army which he had leftin Normandie, where he tooke aduiſe concerning the citie of Chartres, great, mighty, ſtrong and riche, ſituated in the countrey of Beauſſe. This is that Citie whereunto K. Henry the third ſoiorned for a time after hee was put to flight from Paris in May 1588. This Citie is ancient and famous for the ancient ſuperſtition of the Druides, & in our dayes for the renowmed Idoll of our Ladie of Chartres: that Citie hath been therefore both with the Pagans, & with the Romaniſts a ſeat of moſt damnable Idolatrie, and of late one of them which rebelled firſt of all agaynſt Henry the third after the death of the Duke of Guyze, and had continued ſtill in the ſame rebellion.
               In the beginning of Ianuary therefore the King hauing prepared all thinges, determined to wreſt this Citie out of the tyrannous bondage of Leaguers, and to enforce the ſame to returne to theyr dutie.
               And for lacke of inſtructions of al the notable exploits done in that ſiege, wee haue to ſhew two things.
               Firſt, of a ſtratagem vſed by the King: and ſecondly of the yeelding of the ſame.
               This town of Chartres is very ſtrong both by art & nature, yet was it not very well prouided of Souldiers beſides the Citizens and Towneſmen.
               After that the King, acompanied with his owne forces and the Marſhal Biron, hauing laine long time about the ſaid Chartres, came to his campe, he perceaued that it would be very difficult to obtaine the ſame by force: therfore he aduiſed himſelfe to prooue what might be done by ſtratagem.

And about the fourtéenth of Februarie he ſeperated himſelfe from the Marſhall Biron, and faining to geue ouer that ſiege, marched towardes  
                  Dreux, geuing out that hee would goe to beſiege the ſame, and went but thrée miles from the ſaid Chartres.
               
               The Marſhall Biron in like manner ſéemed the next day (which was the fiftéenth of the ſaide moneth) to raiſe vp the ſiege, and to followe the King, as though he diſpaired to doe any good there.
               They of Chartres with ſuch forces as they had, ſeeing that, reſolued themſelues to make a ſally, and to ſet vpon the rereward of the Marſhall Biron, as hee was marching toward Dreux: vpon this determination they iſſued out of the towne, and roughly charged the Marſhals hinder troups.
               The Marſhall firſt ſeemed to make head againſt them, but ſoone after began to retire himſelfe, geuing place to the enemies.
               The enemies followed him amayne continually ſkirmiſhing, vntill they came about two miles from the Towne.
               In the meane time the King lying in ambuſh, when he ſaw his time got betweene the Towne and the men thereof that followed the Marſhall of Biron, and ſo couragiouſly charged them behind: and the Marſhall turning his face towards them agayne, that in leſſe then an hower that they fought he ſlew them all, except thirty cuiraſſes which hardly eſcaped.
               The King following the victorie, entred preſently one of the Suburbs of Chartres. The towneſmen ſeeing this, began to make a motiō of peace with him, and offered to deliuer him the towne, & fiftie thouſand crownes, vpon condition that hee would remooue his forces, and place no garriſon therein: which the King refuſed to doo, and thereupon prepared to batter the towne in two places, hauing reſolued not to leaue it vntill he were maſter of it.
               For lacke of inſtructions we omit here many particularities & exployts valiantly performed at that ſiege. During the which ſiege, the inhabitants (enforced by ye rebellious Leaguers which were many) ſhewed themſelues very malicious and obſtinate agaynſt him, refuſing to acknowledge him for their Soueraigne, with threatnings and breathing out moſt vnreuerent and vnnaturall ſpeaches agaynſt him.
               The King in that ſiege hauing made diuers times many breaches, gaue aſſaults vpon them, which they endured with great loſſes, vntill they ſaw theyr walls wonderouſly battered and beaten downe to the playn ground. Then offered they diuers times to yeeld vp vppon certayne conditions. But the King anſwered, that it was for him to giue them lawe, and for them to receaue it at his hands.
               The King did delay the ſharpnes of warre, hoping through conſideration of the extreame daunger, to bring them to reaſon and duetie. But when that would not preuaile, about the 16. day of April there was a great

and terrible aſſault giuen, which the inhabitants notwithſtanding ſuſtayned, but very hardly and with great loſſe. 
               
               The wiſeſt and beſt ſort of the inhabitants, conſidering that it was in vayne to with ſtand the King, and that in fewe ſuch feaſts all their citizens might bee ſpent, and yet the King neuertheleſſe would enioy the Citie by force, which would redound to their extreame perrill, agreed to yéeld themſelues to his gracious clemencie.
               There was a great number of Leaguers within the Citie, who vnderſtanding of this reſolution, ſhewed themſelues greatly offended at it, threatning the reſt that they would make them repent that euer they went about ſuch matter.
               The reſt of the citizens ſéeing this diſcontentation of the Leaguers, conſented that the ſayd Leaguers who were ſo obſtinately bent and ſo hot in the cauſe, at the next aſſault ſhould defend the breach. So the eight day a newe aſſault being giuen ſo hot, that a great number of them were there throughly cooled, and the reſt glad to retire and giue ouer, and with the reſt without any further diſputation did ſubmit themſelues, perceauing now that the League did nothing els but ſeeke the ruine and deſtruction of the countrey, and that in vayne they did reſiſt him whom God had ſayd ſhould raigne ouer them. Therefore they agreed to ſend to his maieſtie, offering to acknowledge him their onely King and Soueraigne, and to craue pardon for their diſobedience and vnnaturall rebellion, yéelding themſelues and their Citie to his accuſtomed gracious mercie.
               The King graunted their petition, and hauing ſeazed vpon the Citie by ſuch as were appoynted by his maieſtie, with his Princes and Nobles prepared to enter the towne.
               The ninth day of Aprill the citizens conſidering with thankfull mindes the Kings great and gracious fauour, who might haue had conquered them by force, and by lawe of armes iuſtly taken away from them their lands and goods, and for their rebellion put them to the ſword; they I ſay prepared themſelues in their degrees to attend his Maieſties comming. Firſt the whole Cleargie went before in their attyre and order: next vnto them the Magiſtrates with their robes, and after them the Citizens followed euery man according to his place, and all falling downe vppon their knees before the King, did acknowledge him their Soueraigne with this acclamation: God ſaue Henry of Bourbon our mercifull and gracious King, long may he liue the noble King of France, with great reuerence and ſubmiſſion crauing pardon, and ſhewing themſelues ſorrowfull for their rebellion and offences committed agaynſt his maieſtie.
               The King conſidering their repentance and ſubmiſſion, pardoned them with louing, gracious and comfortable words: whereupon were the keyes of their citie deliuered him, who receaued them with amiable countenance.

Theſe things being done, the Citizens marching before, the Magiſtrates after, and the Cleargie following them, conducted the King and his Princes  in moſt triumphant ſort to his lodging, the people ſaluting him all the way with this acclamation: Long liue Henry of Bourbon King of France and Nauarre.
               
               It is ſayd before, how the Lord Diguieres had pacified Daulphine, hath aſſaulted the Duke of Sauoy abroad and at home.
               The Duke of Sauoy ſéeing himſelfe hardly matched, aduiſed how to moleſt the ſayd Lord Diguieres, ſent to his good maſter the King of Spayne to bee reuenged: therefore they tooke this aduiſe, to ſend foure hundred light horſes of Naples, with ſome of the beſt of the olde garriſons there, into Piemont, which by reaſon of the ſwiftnes of their horſes, ſhould moleſt the land of Daulphine with daily courſes, roades and inuaſions.
               Theſe foure hundred Neapolitanes hauing taken counſell how to enter the land of Daulphine with a ſwift pace, had not determined with what pace they ſhould get out. They therefore ranne as ſwift as their horſes could goe as farre as the fort Bowe, where the Lord Diguieres méeting ſtayed them ſo, that they are not like to goe euer to Naples agayne, to tell newes vnto their Curtizans of their light horſes being there all ſlayne, only a fewe excepted.
               There it appeared to them, that the beſt warre is not in Italy, nor the beſt ſouldiour of Naples, and that there is a great difference betweene the ſouldier trayned vp in Militarie Diſcipline, and daily employed to great and waightie affayres, and him who vnder the name of ſouldier is moulten in filthie pleaſures in the Stewes of Curtizans, as theſe were. There appeared alſo how the horſe is but a vayne thing to ſaue a man in an vniuſt cauſe, and that they were but robbers who came to ſpoyle and moleſt them that had neuer proffered them wrong. This exployt was done about the beginning of March, as I can coniecture.
               The Lord Digueres hauing cut ſhort thoſe inſolent Italians, determined to purſue ſome forces which were retiring out of Daulphine into Sauoy againe, whome hee followed ſo ſhort, that hee entred the citie of Chamberie, Metropolitan of Sauoy. This is a great Citie, famous for the ſtraunge Idolatrie vſed in the ſame: There is an olde filthy ragge, ſome gowtie clowt of ſome gowtie Frier, they haue made the world beléeue (ſuch is the ſpirit of Idolatrie in them that know not God, and ſuch is the ſpirit of Auarice in them that applie religions to gaine) that it was the ſhrowd wherein Chriſt was buried, therefore certaine times of the yeare, there was a reſort of inf
                     •
                  nite m
                     •
                  ltitudes of people, of diuers countreys and nations, which came to worſhip that holy ragge, and pray holy 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  ora pro nobis.
               
               The Lord Diguieres hauing taken the ſame, ſacked and ſpoyled it: but

hauing not forces ſufficient to munit and keepe it, left it, and returned  home with a fat ſpoyle, without any loſſe.
               Whileſt the Lord Diguieres was in Sauoy, the Duke of Nemours, gouernour of Lyons, deſcended from Lyons with his forces into Daulphine, deſirous to haue ſurprized ſome townes in that Prouince, in the abſence of the Lord Diguieres. But the ſaid Diguieres in returning home from Sauoy met him, and ſo charged him, that after he had ſlaine moſt of his horſmen, put him to flight, and followed him ſo hard, that the inhabitants of the Citie cleane burned the ſuburb called Guiltiere, being very fayre, great and rich, fearing leaſt the ſayd Lord Diguieres would haue entrenched himſelfe in the ſayd Suburb.
               Whileſt theſe things did ſo paſſe in Daulphine, there happened in Prouance, that certaine great practizes were diſcouered to the loſſe of the autor, as the old ſaying is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               The Lord Dampuis, Lieftenant to the Duke of Sauoy in Prouance, being reſident at Aix the Metropolitan Citie there, had wrought a treaſon to ſurprize the Citie of Taraſcon, ſituated vpon the 
                     •
                  iuer Roſne, by the meanes of certaine Dominican Friers and thirtie or fortie of the inhabitants of the towne, to whome hee had made many fayre and large promiſes.
               The bargaine being made, the meanes and time muſt be ſought out, which were in this wiſe; about midnight the black diuels Friers ſhould riſe to ſing their holy mattens and black ſantus, and ſhould giue the watch word with three ſtrokes of the bell: whereupon the trayterous Citizens ſhould ſeaze vpon one of the gates, & the L. Dampuis ſhould haue come to the gate with fiue hundred Cuiraſſes, & 5. hundred Harquebuſieres, who ſhould haue entred by the meanes of the traytors who were within.
               This counſell could not be kept ſo cloſe, but it came to the eares of the Ladie of Oruano, and one captaine Corſes, by whoſe diligence and good order vſed, the treazon was diſappointed in the manner as followeth.
               The gouernour hauing intelligences of their intent, and whole platforme, cauſed the Friers and their complices 
                     •
                  he night before to be taken and layd in ſundry priſons: the night appoynted to worke the feate being come, an ambuſh of certaine ſouldiers of his companies was ſet out of the town in a conuenient place: the ſaid gouernour alſo had appointed a companie as well of his ſouldiers as of the faithfull citizens to ſtand in ſilence within the gate of the Citie, vntill the watch word agreed betweene the Friers and the enemies, ſhould be giuen with thrée ſtrokes of the bell.
               All things beeing in a readines, and the time come to worke, the Lord Dampuis came vnto the gate with his companies according to promiſe, harkening to heare the watch word, and to bee admitted into the Citie by the complices.
               
                  
Well the three ſtrokes of the bell were heard, the ambuſh began immediatly  behinde, and the towns men opening the gate before to aſſault them ſo furiouſly (not with the ſounding of the bell, but with ſound of the Harquebuze ſhot) that the enemies beeing compaſſed about, within halfe an hower were ſlayne in a manner all, and the Lord Dampuis taken priſoner, and ſo wounded, that two dayes after hee died of the woundes: ſo the Towne was preſerued from ſacking, and the people from murther and bondage, and both the towne and People reſerued to their kinges ſeruice: this was done about the end of March.
               About the ſelfe ſame time the Countie of Carces had wrought another ſuch practiſe alſo againſt the Towne of Tolon, by the treaſon of the chiefeſt Conſull and other Townes men, which was in like maner diſcouered, and the conſpiratours apprehended and chaſtiſed.
               We haue ſaid before, how the Senat of Aix in Prouance were rebels, who not onely had committed treaſon, but alſo ſolicited others to the like offence. The ſayd Citty had admitted the Duke of Sauoy for their Soueraigne, who had put in garriſons to keep them in ſubiection, and about the beginning of this yeare began alſo to build a citadel in the Citie: whereuppon the people fell to a mutiny, refuſed to receaue any more garriſons in his be hoofe.
               The Citie of Marſeilles is an ancient Colonie of the Greckes named Phocoei, who forſook their countrey, when Cyrus king of the Perſians did war and ſubdue Aſia the leſſer, that citie had been commended in the time of the Romans, by reaſon of learning and good diſcipline which floriſhed there. It is a Citie gouerned by their owne Magiſtrates, as Rochel is vnder the protection and obedience of the kings of France, and hath continued very long in their ſidelity, vntill now a dayes degenerating greatly from their ancient vertue, they haue ſhewed great inconſtancie in their duty of ſidelity vppon theſe occaſions.
               The king of Spayn hath beene greatly iealous of that Citie, and hath vſed all the meanes poſſible to reduce that Towne vnder his obedience, ſince that he dreamed of ſome poſſibility to inuade Frāce, ſuppoſing that it would haue been a fit Port, as a gate for him to paſſe and repaſſe, to goe in and out of France vppon all occaſions at pleaſure. To bee ſhort, to make it an Arſenall to ſubdue all thoſe Southernly Prouinces lying vppō the Mediterran Seas. Therefore at the beginning of the League this citie was one of the pledges that ſhould haue béen deliuered him by the Leaguers: which practiſes haue been put to execution twiſe all ready, but through the watchfull dilligence of ſome faithfull Citizens haue beene diſappoynted of their purpoſe.
               The King of Spayn notwithſtanding the great charges, which hee ſuſtayned by giuing great p
                     •
                  nſions vnto ſome Captayns and Inhabitants

there, to fauour his proceedings, ſeeing himſelfe ſtill diſappoynted, yet  would he not geue ouer, but began to worke another way, to wit, to continue, or rather increaſe his beneuolence towards the inhabitants, perſwading thē in the mean time to aſſociat themſelues to the League, and to accept the Duke of Sauoy their neighbour for their Protector, ſuppoſing by theſe meanes in time the faction of the League preuailing there, to make himſelfe maſter of that place.
               The Citizens corrupted with Spaniſh money, and otherwiſe greatly addicted to Popiſh vanity and ſuperſtition, to continue this Spaniſh liberality among them, and to pleaſe thus farre the king of Spayne at his requeſt, accepted the Duke of Sauoy for Protector of their City: and in ſigne that they were Leaguers, aduanced the Standerd of the holie League, and ſet it vppon their walles, which is an Idoll, which they called the Crucifix, in that ſtate they continued nigh a yeare.
               But now vnderſtanding the cogging and double dealing of the ſayd D. at Aix, in intending and attempting there to build a Citadell, and how both the nobillity of the Countrey had forſaken him, and the people reſiſted his attempts, pulled downe the Standerd of the League, and erected the armes of France, publiſhing that they would hold for the King of France.
               
               Wee haue left the King with his Princes at Chartres there to take poſſeſſion of that great, riche and floriſhing Citie, and haue walked through part of Piemont, Daulphine and Prouance.
               
               Now let vs returne to Chartres, there to know what the King doth, and ſhew alſo the proſperous ſucceſſe which haue followed the taking of this Cittie of Chartres.
               
               The Citie of Chartres beeing in the Kings power, the Pariſiens conceaued a great amazement and terror, knowing very well that this exploit would be a ſcourge vnto them.
               For as in the ancient time Alexandria and Sicilia were the Nurces of Rome, ſo the countrey of Beauſſe and this Citie of Chartres were the chiefeſt prouiders for the Cittie of Paris. Now therefore the carriage of any kind of victuals and prouiſions beeing ſtopped both aboue and beneath the riuer, from the North ſide and the South, and finding themſelues deſtitute of victuals, money, and all other warlike prouiſions for their ſtrength and ſuccour, they fall to their olde cuſtome: that is, to demaund bread of their Idols: therefore the Biſhop of Placentia, their Fryer Gregory the thirteenth his Legat, after the returne home of Fryer Henrico Caietano, Sponte inſanientes inſtigat, ſet them on to running and gadding about the ſtreetes, to carry their Idols with or a pro nobis, there is mourning, weeping and be
                     •
                  ayling, there is ſtridor dentium, horror 
                        •
                     empiternus and regnum tenebrarum. Yet the Fryers and I
                     •
                  ſuits do comfort them with ſeditious

ſermons, and bitter wordes as well as they can: but venter non habet aures.
               
               During the Kings ſoiourne at the ſiege of Chartres, the Duke de 
                   
                  Maine with ſuch power as he could make, went and layd the ſiege before Chaſteauthierij, ſituated vpon the riuer Marne. The gouernour which was within, ſ
                     •
                  nt word to the King that he would hold it againſt the enemie a whole moneth.
               The King hauing taken order of the ſafe kéeping of the Citie, about the twelfth day of Aprill remoued his armie from Chartres to Aulneaw and Macheuile, which townes were reduced to his obedience.
               About the fiftéenth day, the armie remoued to Dourdan, which towne immediately his armie entred by force, where was found great ſtore of victualls gathered, with intent to be conueighed to Paris.
               
               The ſixtéenth day, the caſtell a very ſtrong place, was aſſaulted and taken. So by this expedition Paris is diſappoynted of victuals and prouiſion, and diſtreſſed neerer and neerer.
               The ſame day the King ſeparated himſelfe from his armie, and leauing the ſame to the leading of the Marſhall Biron, with a great troup of horſemen took his iourney toward Chaſteauthierij, purpoſing to rayſe the ſiege, and to ſee his face, whome he had not ſeene many yeares before, and to craue more acquaintance.
               The Duke de Mayne aſhamed and afeard to ſhew his face, for the guiltines of rebellion and parricide, procured, had no great liking of that acquaintance, neither durſt be ſo bold to ſtay there, and contrarie vnto the, promiſe of the captaine of the place and the Kings expectation, the Caſtel being r
                     •
                  ndred to the ſayd de Maine, he fled as faſt as his horſe could cary him to the Citie of Reames.
               
               The King hearing not onely of the haſtie retire of the Duke de Maine from Chaſteauthierij, but alſo that he had deuided his armie into ſundry parts; and that they ſhould continue in that ſort for a certaine time, determined to ſtay at Sanlis, there to view the countenance of the enemie, and in the meane while to take the townes of Dowſerie and Claye where the enemies kept garriſon: which thing was ſpeedelie done. In this purſuite the king alſo tooke the towne of Tremblay by Mountfort, which is nowe a great hinderance fo the enemie by reaſon of the paſſage.
               The one and twentith day of Aprill, while the King purſued the enemies, the Duke Eſpernon, and the Lords d'Ho and Vicres vnderſtanding of a great number of boates as great as lighters, laden with corne, monie, and other prouiſion of war, going from Chaſteauthierij downe the riuer of Marne to victuall Paris, ſet forward with great diligence to ouertake them: which hauing done, with great ſpeede were ſunk in the middeſt of the riuer, to the number of fifteene of the greateſt ſorte, with all

the prouiſion that was therein, few ſmall boats of the leſſer ſort eſcaped towards Meaulx. 
                  
               
               The ſame day the King vnderſtanding of ſome companies of the enemies, who were lodged in certaine villages betwéene la Fere and Chaſteauthierij, being the greateſt part of the forces of the enemies, departed early from Senlis to Crespij, a towne in Valoys.
               
               But for all the Kings ſecret and ſudden departure, yet by that time he had paſſed fiue miles, he vnderſtoode that his comming vpon coniecture being blazed among the enemies, they had fled and paſſed beyond the riuer Marne, with great amaze and terror: this is according to the ſaying of the wiſe, that ſayth: that the Kings countenance ſcattereth the wicked.
               The 22. of Aprill, the King from Creſpij where he was returned, tooke his way to Chauny, intending to take the Caſtles of Manican and Genlis: and for the better effecting of his purpoſe, he cauſed two great Canons of Ordinance to be brought from Compiegne. But they who were in Manican Caſtle did not attende but left the place, and fled before hee arriued there.
               The 24. of Aprill, the King cauſed the ſaid Ordinance and more which was brought from S. Quintins, to bee brought before Genlis: but at the ſight of the Ordinance the ſayd Caſtle of Genlis yéelded vnto the King.
               About the ſame time, two regiments of garriſons of the Leaguers were repayring to the Duke de Mayne, whereof the Kings garriſon of Saint Goubin hauing intelligence, iſſued foorth vpon them and put many to the ſword.
               The Duke de Mayne had receaued ſeauen companies of Germanes, being nine Enſignes, who moſt wickedly as Mercenaries and ſlaues to their owne couetouſneſſe, had for money conſented to defend one of the moſt notable Rebellions that euer had béen, hated of God, and deteſted of all good Princes of the world.
               Them the Duke de Mayne in the diuiſion of his armie, as is aboue ſaid, had placed in certayne Villages betweene the riuers of Marne and Oyſe, intending to place them in Meaulx and Soyſſons: and as they marched they came to Couſſie, where they ſuppoſed to bee receaued: but the gates of the towne being kept faſt agaynſt them, and hearing a rumour of the Kings comming, ſuch a ſudden feare fell vpon them, that they fiercely ranne into the Foreſt, hoping thereby to ſaue themſelues.
               The garriſon of S. Goubin hearing of this amaze of the enemie, ſent fifcie men on horſebacke, conducted onely by a Sargeant, went foorth, and taking about foureſcore peaſants of the countrey with them, marched into the Foreſt.
               This ſmall company was greatly encouraged, by hearing of the arriuall

of the King from Genlis, and purſued after theſe companies, and charged them ſo roughly, terrifying them with this voyce; Viue le roy. Immediatly the enemie ſuppoſing the King to haue been there indeede, in great  terror fled away without any reſiſtance. This ſmall companie little thinking of any ſuch good ſucceſſe, couragiouſly purſued them, ſlewe them, and tooke them in a manuer all, except about threeſcore men, who flinging away their weapons and armour, the better to ſaue themſelues, retyred into the towne la Fere. Their Colonell was ſlayne, and all the Enſignes taken ſaue two onely.
               About 29. of Aprill, the Lord Humiers knowing that the companie of horſemen of Mountcaure had aſſembled in a Village not farre from Corbeil, departed out of the ſayd Towne of Corbeil to charge them. As he went about that exployt, he met by chaunce the companie of horſemen of Dourlay, whom he charged in that ſkirmiſh: moſt part of the enemies were ſlayne, part were taken priſoners, and few by flight ſaued themſelues.
               The company of Mountcaure were in ye village playing ſome at cardes, ſome at 
                     •
                  ice, ſome drinking, and ſome ſléeping, garded negligently with a ſmall watch: the Lord Humiers hauing done this exploit, ceaſed not to proſecute his former enterprize vpon the ſaid Mountcaure his companies, who marching forward and comming to the village where they were, ſet vpon them vnlooked for, like a ſodaine tempeſt which ſhould fall ſodainly from heauen, whom finding buſied (as is aforeſaid) eaſily diſcomfited them, killed them, and tooke them without any reſiſtance.
               The King hauing in a little ſpace eaſed that part of Picardie, which bordreth vpon Brie, of the inſuries of the rebels, beaten the enemies which executed intollerable oppreſſions, betweene the riuers of Oyſe and Marne, as is ſaid, was aduertiſed that the enemie was in fi
                     •
                  ld in Britaine: his Maieſtie tooke his iournie thetherward with a ſmall companie, and had there that ſucceſſe which followeth.
               The Lord Tremblay did commaund in a towne in Britaine, named  
                  Monconter, where is a caſtell of reaſonable ſtrength, wherin he had ſet a gariſon, and departed thence to goe to doe ſome exploit fifteene leagues off about the beginning of May.
               The enemie aduertized of the abſence of the ſaid L. Tremblay, tooke the ſaid Monconter, but they of the caſtell held out, attending the ſuccour which was com
                     •
                  ing from diuers parts vnto them.
               The L. Tremblay hauing ſpeedy intelligence of that which was paſt in Monconter, tooke his iourney with 50 light horſemen, reſolued with that ſmall companie to enter into the Caſtell with ladders, which he perfourmed. And after out of the ſayd Caſtell he made diuers iſſues vpon the enemies in the Towne with terrible ſlaughter of them.
               Many of the nobility of Britaine beeing then at Renes, vnderſtanding of

the ſturre of Monconter in the abſence of the Prince D'ombes, who was a little before ridden foorth about eighteene miles from the ſayde Renes, 
                   muſtered vp immediatly ſo many as they might procure vppon the ſudden, which was about one hundred and fiftie horſe men wel appointed, and commaunded ſtraight waies all the garriſons thereabout to march toward the ſayd Monconter, intending either to reſcue the ſaid towne out of the enemyes hand, or elſe to let their further enterpriſes: their forces came to two hundred footmen wel furniſhed: theſe companies bring in all three hundred and fifty men came about two furlougs from the ſaid towne of Monconter, there to ſtay for other companies, who came from other places for the ſame purpoſe.
               Whileſt theſe preparations were a making, the Lord Saint Laurence, Marſhall of the army of the rebels vnder Merceur, had entred into Monconter with three hundred horſemen well appointed, and one thouſand Harquebuziers, intending to fortife that towne agaynſt the King.
               But in the meane while, the King in proper perſon with ſixe ſcore horſes onely had marched ſo farre as Londiak, intending to ſearch out the enemy.
               The Lord Saint Laurence aduertiſed of the Kings comming, conſidering that there was muſtering round about, knowing in his conſcience the Kings iuſt cauſe and wiſedome, and miſtruſting the quarel of his ſide, conceaued a great terrour, and perceaued to haue caſt himſelfe ſo deeply into the Mire, that if pollicy doth not plucke him out, hee is like there to ſticke faſt a good while. Therefore conſidering the ſmall company which was about the King, determined to aſſault him with many: and for to bring to paſſe this his intent, ſuppoſing the better to depart frō 
                  Monconter in time, then to enioy it a while to his great domage: he departed from Monconter about 11. a clocke in the euening with two hundred and fifty horſemen, and ſixe hundred Harquebuziers, and trauelling all night came to Londiak by ſixe a clocke in the morning, beeing the twelft day of May.
               The King being at Londiak, & vnderſtanding of the enemies cōming, delayed no time, but went immediatly to the field to receaue the ſaid enemie. The enemie perceauing the K. to haue determined to bid him battel, & to be already in the field, left part of his footmen to force the trenches & barricadoes of Londiak: and this being done, the enemie brought his horſemen and part of his footmen into the field to encounter the King, there he deuided his companies into two troups, in the one there was fiftie horſemen, and in the other two hundred. The King had but ſix ſcore horſemen, whome he deuided likewiſe into two troupes, in the one thirty, and in the other 
                     •
                  oureſcore & ten horſmen. The King hauing ſet few footmen in battaile array, called with a feruent prayer vpon the name of the GOD of armies, and cheered vp his ſouldiers, encouraging them to ſhew themſelues men, in defending ſuch a iuſt cauſe as they had in hand,

which being done both armies ioyned, and the enemie hauing made a verie ſmall reſiſtance, was ſtrooken with a ſodaine terrour, as if it were  with a thunder-clap from heauen, ſo that they began to wauer. The Kings Souldiers perceauing this ſodaine dread vpon the enemie, gaue ſuch a freſh and hot charge, that they turned their backs and fled. The King purſued them two miles from Londiak, to a towne holden by their fauourers, where theſe horſemen ſaued themſelues. There were fiftie horſemen ſlayne, as many more taken priſoners, many footmen ſlaine on the place, and many both horſemen and footmen wounded. The reſt of the footemen ſaued themſelues by flight into the woods which were neere at hand, and there hid themſelues. Lo how there is neither ſtrength nor counſell againſt the Lorde: Lo howe the wicked is ſnared in his owne counſell.
               The news of this foyle being blazed abroad throughout the enemies troups, came alſo to Monconter, by meanes whereof there roſe ſuch a ſudaine feare among them, that immediatly they retyred from the ſaide Monconter with al poſſible ſpeed, leauing the town frée from any ſtrength of the enemie.
               The Lord Tremblay being in the Caſtell, and moleſting the enemies daylie by ſallies and ſlaughters of them as is ſayd, ſeing how wonderfully God had terrified that rebellious route, went foorth of the Caſtell with his forces, followed them, and immediatly charged them ſo roughly, that they were all ſlayne and taken priſoners, by meanes whereof hee got both bagge and baggage from the enemie: So was that accurſed company (enemies of mankind) vtterly rooted out.
               It is ſaid before how the Lord D'ombes had gone from Renes into haſe Britaine to a Towne called Quinpercorenten, and in departing out of the ſayd Towne to returne to Renes, the garriſons of the enemies in townes about holden by them, charged vpon the ſayd Prince, but were ſo receaued by him, that there was ſlaine of the enemies ſide three Captayns of name and of great eſtimation among the Rebels, ſeauen gentlemen of great account were taken priſoners, all the reſt in the purſuite were put to the ſword.
               Here thou mayſt ſee (Chriſtian Reader) that all theſe blowes, ſlaughters and ouerthrowes euery where receaued, cannot make theſe damned rebels conſider the wrongfulnes of the cauſe, which ſo obſtinatly agaynſt all lawes of nations, agaynſt nature and agaynſt God they do defend.
               As the rebels haue been beaten euen with a rod of yron by the Lords hand in his wrath both in Picardie and Britayn: ſo now haue wee to conſider an other example of Gods iuſtice executed vppon rebels in the Countrey of Caux in Normandie.
               
               In this Moneth of May, victuals beeing deare wares in the Citie of

                  Roan, one regiment appertayning to the Duke of Lorreine, and the other to the Lord de la Lownde departed out of Roan, & planted themſelues in a  village called Cinqcens, determining there to abide, and to ſurpriſe ſuch victuals for their maintenance as they could come by, vntill the next harueſt ſhould prouide more plenteouſly, there they fortifyed themſelues with Trenches and Barricadoes: this place is diſtant 9 Leagues from Diepe. They fearing to be moleſted from Diepe, had placed a troupe of horſemen in a wood diſtant two leagues from the place which they had fortifyed, being fully in the high way from Diepe, ſuppoſing if any forces ſhould come from Diepe vpon them, they might retire backe to geue intelligence vnto the ſayd Regiments, or elſe by making reſiſtance ſhould geue leaſure to prepare themſelues, and to procure a freſh ſupply from Roan, to back them if occaſion ſhould ſerue.
               The Lord Chartres commaunder of Malta, gouernour for the King in Diepe, and Sir Roger Williams an Engliſh gentleman of great valoure and experience in militarie affayres, who lately came thether, hauing receaued intelligence of that fortification of Cinqcens, and intent of the enemy, reſolued ſpeedily to depart from Diepe in the euening the 19. day of May, and trauailing all night came to the wood early in the next morning, hauing with them four hundred French men and three hundred Engliſhmen. There they found a troup of horſemen to ſtop their paſſage, vpon whom they made a very fierce aſſault. But they that came from Diepe gaue ſuch a hot charge vpon them, that all thoſe horſemen were ſo ſlaine, that none of them eſcaped any way. Thus they leauing the dead bodies of the horſemen in the wood, and taking ſome of their horſes, the Gouernor and Sir Roger Williams paſſed a long to Cinqcens, and beeing come thether before noone, they diſcryed the enemy with their Enſignes diſplayed within the Fort.
               The Gouernour of Deepe perceauing their fortification ſo ſtrong, alleaged that it was vnpoſſible to enter it, & therefore went about to perſwade Sir Roger to goe backe agayne, conſidering that the enemie was two to their one.
               Sir Roger anſwered, that it were a great diſhonour for him ſo to doo, and determined to ſet vpon them with his own thrée hundred men, though it ſhould coſt both him and them their liues: and with this reſolution aduanced his Colours, marching toward the enemie, intended (by the aſſiſtance of God to enter vpon them, or els to loſe his life in that place.
               The Lord Chartres ſeeing that moſt honourable reſolution of Sir Roger, was wonderfully encouraged to the enterpriſe: and thereupon proteſted to take part alſo in the ſayd attempt with his foure hundred Souldiers, whatſoeuer ſhould chaunce: and therevpon diſplayed his Enſigne, and together with Sir Roger vowed (by Gods aſſiſtance) to enter the

Barricadoes and to charge the enemie.
               The ſayd Lord vpon this reſolution chéered vp his Souldiers, and willed  them to fight in the behalfe of their lawful King, whoſe right they were bound to defend, and God doubtles will proſper the ſame to the confuſion of his enemies.
               Sir Roger in like ſort, like a true Chriſtian Knight, encouraged his Souldiers, ſhewing vnto them, that although fewe of their ſide haue to deale with a great multitude ſkilfull, ſtout, hardie, and trayned vp in Martiall Diſcipline: yet conſidering yt their cauſe is but an execrable rebellion agaynſt their Soueraigne, they are but a multitude of traytors, oppoſing themſelues to Gods ordinance, therfore condemned of God to a ſhamefull death, both here and in the world to come. He aſſured them that God will aſſiſt them in the execution of his ſentence pronounced agaynſt them: hée alleaged the common experience in all ages and Nations: hee concluded that the God of battailes will ſo fight for them, that their eyes ſhall haue their deſire vpon them, as vpon enemies of God, of man, ſocietie and nature. He aſſureth them, that in putting their confidence in GOD, not one haire of their heads ſhall fall: which when hee had finiſhed to ſpeake, hee prayeth vnto the Lord with great confidence. And when he had ended prayer, he made them to promiſe each vnto other to die euery man rather then they would flye one foote.
               Theſe things being done, they marched forward with great courage, diſplayed their Enſignes, ſtrooke vp their Drummes, & with their Trompets ſounded defiance, and with this reſolution full of confidence, theſe valiant Engliſh Souldiers gaue a fierce charge vpon the enemie, and aſſaulted them in ſuch ſort, as if they had not trauailed all night. This fight continued two houres ſpace, the Engliſh men ſtill hartening the Frenchmen. At length they entred the Barricadoes of the enemie. Sir Roger being one of the formoſt fought hand to hand with the chiefeſt gouernours of the enemies. The gouernour of Deepe on another ſide entring, did valiantly behaue himſelfe: at length the enemie began to recoyle backe, and being all encloſed within their Barricadoes, as a flocke of ſheepe in a Shéepcot, were all put to the ſword by the Engliſh and Frenchmen, ſuffering none to eſcape aliue.
               Hauing obtayned this wonderfull victorie, vpon their knees in the ſame place, gaue thankes vnto GOD which had ſubdued their enemies vnder foote, and with ſinging of Pſalmes gaue the praiſe vnto the higheſt.
               All that the Gouernour and Sir Roger Williams loſt, were not aboue eleauen men, and fewe wounded, but not very grieuouſly.
               This exployt being ſo proſperouſly done, the Generals tooke order not to ſtay there at any hand, but ſpeedily to returne to Deepe, leaſt ſome newe freſh ſupply ſhould come from Roan vpon them, or by caſting about ſhould

meete them in the midway homeward. They gaue order alſo that the Souldiers ſhould leaue the ſpoyle behind them, to the end they might not ouercharge themſelues with carriage. 
               
               The Souldiers obeying the counſell of their Commander, tooke nothing but that which was light and eaſie of carriage. Thus ſafely they returned to Deepe. The enemie as it was ſuppoſed came with a great power to meet them in the middeſt of the high way: but they had paſſed foure houres before, and ſo the enemie diſappoynted of his purpoſe returned backe.
               Wee haue ſhewed before how the King hauing had a proſperous ſucceſſe in chaſtiſing the Rebells in Picardie, went in perſon into Britaine, where likewiſe God proſpered his wayes.
               Whileſt the King was in Britaine, his armie ſoiourned for a time at Vernon, wayting to ſurpriſe the towne of Louiers, ſituated vpon the riuer Eure betweene Pont de larche and Eureux. The particularities of this ſurpriſe could I neuer heare, but ſuch as the King himſelfe did write vnto the Prince Countie, Gouernour for his Maieſtie in Anjou, Vendomoys, Toureyne, Poytow, Berry and Limoſin.
               
               The ſixt day of Iune, ten of the Kings men poſſeſſed themſelues with one of the gates of the towne, and as it is reported by others in this manner.
               There was a certayne Corporall in that Citie, who was in great credit with the gouernour of that towne called Fonteyne Martel. This Corporall conſidering the great wrong which the Rebels did to the King, and deſirous to doo to his Maieſtie ſome ſeruice of import, practiſed that there ſhould be at ſeuerall times by ſixe at once, a number of footmen and horſemen ſent into the Wood hard adioyning to the towne, and in the meane time hauing woon to himſelfe foure or fiue Souldiers of his owne companie, his time came of his watch.
               About noone day the ſayd gouernour being at dinner, and according to his ſigne giuen there came certaine horſemen of the Kings, which he eſpying went preſently to the gouernour who had the keyes lying on the table by him, and ſayd he marueiled that they ſat ſo long at dinner, ſhewing that there were ſome friends come vnto him. The gouernour commaunded the ſayd Corporall to take the key and let them enter, which he did.
               The King had cauſed the Baron of Byron to come néere with his forces, who ſoone alſo entred therein.
               
                  Fonteyne Martel had one hundred Cuiraſſes in that towne, beſide the inhabitants, who obſtinatly made a ſtrong reſiſtance to the King, which was cauſe of a terrible fight.
               The King himſelfe made one of the gates of the Citie to yeeld to him, whereto moſt part of the men of warr and the inhabitants withdrew themſelues

to reſiſt, yet at length the Towne was taken. There the Biſhop of Eureux, and Fonteyne Martel the gouernour of the place, were taken  priſoners.
               There was found great quantitie of Corne, Wine and Bacon, beſide other munitions, and as the report is, foure thouſand fat Oxen in the medowes. That towne was ſo fortified, that it might bee called one of the Forts of France. There the King loſt about eighteene or twentie men, among whom were fiue Captaines.
               At the ſelfeſame time that this exployt was done at Louiers, the Lord ſent proſperous ſucceſſe to the Kings affayres in other countreys.
               The Vicount de la Guerche, a moſt wicked rebell in Limoſin, had greatly troubled the Kings peace in that countrey, and about the beginning of Iune had beſieged Belak, (a towne in Lymoſin, famous in that countrey, for making a kinde of rough cloth like vnto Iriſh rugge) with two Canons, one Culuerine and a baſtard péece of Ordinaunce.
               The Prince Countie being come into Poytow with an armie for the Kings ſeruice, to purge that countrey beyond Loyre, of the oppreſſion and tyranny of ſome remnants of rebels which were ſpoyling that countrey, and being aduertized of the ſaid ſiege of Belak, marched directly thither to rayſe the ſiege, or to bid battaile to the ſaid Vicount, if he durſt ſtay his comming.
               The fift day of Iune, hauing marched a great dayes iourney, as far as Luſack, was giuen to vnderſtand, that the ſayd Vicount had withdrawn his ſiege, and with his horſemen had betaken himſelfe to Chauigny, a towne in Toureine, leauing his Canon and footmen at Montmorillon. The Prince ſéeing that he had miſſed the ſayd Vicount, determined to beſiege the town of Montmorillon, which the ſame day he cauſed to be ſummoned, but they within being not willing to giue any anſwere, the Prince commanded to giue certaine volleys of Canon: after which he cauſed them to be ſummoned agayn, but they ſtill continued i
                     •
                   their reſolution to keepe aloofe.
               The ſixt day of Iune at fiue a clock in the morning, his excellencie changed the battery, which continued very furious till ten a clock in the forenoone, at which time a breach being made, the Prince commaunded to giue the aſſault, which was done very couragiouſly on al ſides of the town, and continued the ſpace of three long houres together. But in the end, the Princes forces ſeazed vpon the high town, & compelled the enemy to retire into the low towne, which is ſeparated from the high by the riuer Vndre, which floweth through the middeſt of it, where they hid themſelues within a Chappell, from whence they greatly endomaged and moleſted the Princes Souldiers who were in the high towne: which thing when the Prince perceiued, he commaunded ſix or ſeauen vo
                     •
                  leys of the Canon 
                     ••
                  
                  
be diſcharged againſt the gate of the Chappell, which being immediatly broken, the enemie was compelled to forſake it, whome the Princes power  purſued, and poſſeſſed the whole towne of Montmorillon. There was ſlayne in the towne more than fiue hundred foo
                     •
                  men, and thrée ſcore Cuiraſſes, two maſters of the field, and all the captaines ſlayne, wounded or taken priſoners. The Prince cauſed many of theſe rebells to be hanged, to requite that which the Leaguers had done not long before at Saint Sauin.
               
               There were in that towne foure Canons taken from the enemie, and good ſtore of other munition, ſeauen Enſignes alſo were taken there.
               The Prince loſt in that exployt but one ſouldier of his guardes, and a Gentleman named S. Martin. The Marſhall of men at armes was hurt with an Harquebuſh ſhot, and very few Souldiers beſide wounded.
               The towne of Montmorillon being taken the ſeauenth day, the townes of Chauigny, Saint Sauin, and Blank en Berry were voluntarily yeelded to the Kings pleaſure, alſo the Caſtells Bourg, Archambault, Plaiſance, Belarbre, Auailles, Belawne, Angles & Biſſe, did voluntaryly ſubmit themſelues to the Kings obedience.
               Hauing layd downe the proſperous exployts done in Lymoſin and Toureyne, by the noble Prince County, we will alſo repreſent to the reader the attempts and vnluckie ſucceſſes of the rebells of Britaine.
               
               The great and famous Quéene of England, among other prince like vertues of a true Chriſtian Princeſſe, deſirous to reſtabliſh the afflicted ſtate of France, ſent vnto the King a new ſupply of forces to aſſiſt him in repreſſing of the rebellion of Britaine, vnder the conduct of that noble and valiant Captaine Sir Iohn Norris Knight, Generall of her Maieſties forces there.
               The rumour of engliſh forces flying in Britaine, had cauſed noblemen and Gentlemen about fiue hundred in number, with their wiues and children, and all their chiefeſt and moſt precious wealth, to retyre into the Citie of S. Guingcamp, ſtrong by Nature and Arte.
               There were within that citie beſides the ſayd nobilitie, three hundred good french Souldiers, with a great number of the inhabitants, able men and experienced.
               The renowmed Prince D'ombees, generall of the Kings forces in Britaine, accompanied with (to the terror of the rebells) the honourable Sir Iohn Norris, determined to lay ſiege before Guingcamp, there to take all theſe vn
                     •
                  aithfull, vnnaturall and baſtarde▪ Frenchmen, there heaped as if it were in a cubbe.
               They arriued before the towne the third day of Iune, and about three a clock in the after noone the ſayd valiant Norris hauing obtayned to geue the firſt aſſau
                     •
                  t, after certaine companies of French men had refuſed it, did

ſo preſſe the enemie for the ſpace of three howers vntill the night did ſeperat them, that after that day, they determined not to come any more to  ſuch a feaſt.
               The enemies within defended themſelues moſt valiantly, yet feeling ſo many woundes as they had, and ſeeing ſo many dead of theirs as they ſaw, determined the night following to talke of compoſition the next day.
               In this aſſault, Sir Iohn Norris loſt nine worthy ſouldiers, three valiane Captaynes, to wit, Denis, Herne, and Wolfe, and about fortie ſouldiers hurt.
               The fourth day of Iune in the morning the Lord Norris gaue a freſh aſſault, with that courage, that when the enemies had ſuſtayned it with much a doo leſſe then halfe an hower, the remembrance of the loſſe paſt put them in fear of that which was preſent before their eies, fearing to repent too late, they made a token of parley, determined to yeelde themſelues if they might find any reaſonable compoſition.
               The Generall making ſigne to his people, willingly harkened vnto them, and promiſed to vſe them well if they would freely yeeld themſelues. That ſeemed vnto them ſomewhat hard, therefore they couenauted that the citie ſhould not be ſacked, and that the ſouldiers within ſhould depart with their weapons and other furniture, and that they would bee content to pay any reaſonable ſumme of money.
               The aſſault being ſtayed, and the agreement concluded vpon the promiſe of the ſayd Generall: the nobilitie moſt willingly, and of their owne accord did yeeld themſelues, and ſwore obedience to the King, promiſing to withdraw themſelues preſently euery man to his own houſe, & to be ready to ſerue the King in any his buſines, and payed fifteene thouſand crowns, and the Citie 25. thouſand, which was farre leſſe then they did think they ſhould haue payed.
               The ſouldiers were permitted freely to depart according to the agreement, and the gates of the Citie ioyfully were ſet open.
               The Generall did not ſuffer any kind of iniuries to bee done to any maner of perſons. All theſe things beeing doue, hee cauſed thanks to be geuen to God for his gracious and fauourable protection.
               After the taking of Guingcampe, the purpoſe of the Prince was to haue aſſaulted the towne of Morlaix, to the end to reduce it, & the baſe Britayne, withall to the Kings obedience.
               But Merceur, Captaine of theeues, robbers and rebels, vnderſtanding the loſſe of the towne of Guingcamp, and of the reuolting of ſo many noble men and gentlemen as had ſworne to obay and ſerue the King, fel in a pelting Lorreine chafe, and ſwore by Saint Francis holy briech that he would be reuenged, and preſently remooued from Pontignie, where hee ioyned

with foure thouſand Spaniards, vnder the leading of Don Iuan de Lagula, whom he hath ſent for vppon the rumor of the loſſe of the ſayd Guyngcamp, 
                   and from thence began to march towards Morlaix by the way to Corlay.
               
               The Prince vnderſtanding of that, and diſcouering the enemies forces to be of ſeauen hundred horſes, foure thouſand Spaniards, and two thouſand Harquebuſiers French, conſidered howe daungerous a thing it was to engage his armie before a towne, vntill he were maſter of the field, the enemie being farre ſtronger, and fauoured of the countrey, who on a ſodaine might be aſſiſted with a multitude of Peſants, long before armed and addicted to him: conſidering all theſe difficulties, the ſayd prince made a ſtay about the towne of Guingcamp, as well to repayre the fortifications of the ſaid towne, as to attend the bringing of two Canons, and two Culuerines, drawen from Breſt to Lagnon, with certaine powder and munitions brought from England to Pinpoll, to the ende that theſe things being in place of ſafetie, the ſaid Prince might ſollow the better his other enterprizes.
               The ſeauenth of Iune the Duke Merceur arriued at Corlay, diſtant three Leagues from Guingcamp.
               
               There is a Caſtell belonging to the Lady Guimeney, ſiſter to Boyſdaulphine Lieftenaunt to the Duke Merceur, they fayned as though the ſayd Caſtell did holde for the King, intending thereby to haue drawne the Prince to ſome diſaduantage, for the eight day the Caſtell rendred without the ſight of the Canon, and the gouernour remayned with the enemie.
               From thence the Duke ſent a trompeter to the Prince, about certaine priſoners taken at Corlay, who ſignified to the ſayde Prince, that hee had charge from the Duke to entreate him to appoynt ſome day and place for the battaile.
               The Prince did greatly reioyce to heare theſe newes, and would not returne anſwere by the mouth of a Trompetter which might be diſanowed, but by his writing ſigned with his owne hand, in the which the ſaid Prince (leaſt the Duke ſhould alleage any matter, either to delay or auoid the battell) doth referre to him the choiſe of the place for the encounter: ſo that it might be able to receaue both armies.
               The Duke Merceur remooued from Corlay the eighth of Iune, and came to Saint Giles, two ſmall leagues from Chaſteau Laudran.
               
               The ſame day alſo the Prince departed from Guingcamp about three a clocke in the morning and lodged that night at Chaſteau Laudran, where the Duke Merceur his Trompetter met him, and deliuered an anſwer to the ſayd Prince from Merceur, ſigned with his owne hande, wherein this malapert companion hauing altogether troden vnder foote all reuerence of

ſuperiority ſheweth the cauſe of his rebellion to bee both to withſtand the Prince (called with lawfull vocation) and an hereticall King, for the defence  of the holy catholike religion, do aſſigne the thurſeday next at ten of the clocke in the morning, and the place moſt fit for that action betweene Corlay and Guingcamp.
               
               The Prince to prouoke this cowardly Captaine through impaciency or otherwiſe to battell, ſheweth the cauſes of his comming into Britayne, to be to puniſh him and his complices for their traiterous rebellion againſt the King, and for the opprobrious imputations and tearmes which he geueth to the King and to him, hee ſaith, that therein he lyeth: this was the ninth day.
               
                  Merceur hauing receaued this prouocation, fell to ſweare, fume & brag, that he within three dayes would geue the Prince battell. And on the ninth day of Iune beeing Wedneſday diſlodged, and that day encamped himſelfe at a Village called Quelnec, a league and a halfe from Chaſteau Laudran, ſituated at the foot of a hill, which by deepe ditches, hedges and incloſures bordereth vppon a little Heath of two miles compaſſe.
               The Prince hauing diſcouered the enemy mounted on horſebacke, and goeth to make choiſe of the place for the battell, & findeth about three quarters of a mile from the ſaide Quelenec a large playne ſkirted with copſes wt a little hill, and the ground rayſed with ditches aduantagious to the enemies, who by three large paſſages might enter into the ſame heath.
               The tenth of Iune, the enemie within a quarter of a league of the Heath, ſheweth his whole army in order of battaile, vpon the top of an hill.
               The Prince on the other ſide, put his troups in order within the heath, and by the aduiſe of Sir Ihon Norris diſpoſeth the ſame in three battails, wherof the Engliſh footemen made two, and the Launceknights the third: that day was ſpent in light ſkirmiſhes, wherin the Princes men followed the enemie euen into the maine of their armie.
               The eleuenth day the enemie drew his armie to the foote of the hill, and placed his artillerie vpon the ſide of the heath, in a place of ſuch aduantage, as commaunded the whole heath, and bordreth all the hedges with ſhotte.
               By that time the enemie had done all theſe things, the Princes armie marched into the heath in order of battaile, and preſently ſent two hundred footemen to view the enemies countenaunce, whome they charged, put them from their hedges and barricadoes, and ſlew diuers of them.
               Vpon the retraite of theſe two hundred men, the Duke put foorth fiue hundred Frenchmen, and three hundred Spaniards, to repoſſeſſe the places, whome he followed with the great of his armie.
               The Prince perceiuing this, and remayning on the heath with the L. Hunaulday, commaunding the auangard, hauing his regiment of horſe on the right hand, and Generall Norris, the Lords of Poigny, Pruneaux,
                  
                  Mommartin and Baſtenay, gaue order to put foorth three hundred footemen, commaunded by Captaines Anthony Wingfield and Murton, and  the Engliſh horſemen lead by Anthony Sherly.
               
               The Prince alſo commaunded to be drawen out of the battaillon of the Launce-knights, one hundred men ſhot and pikes, and one hundred and fiftie ſhot lead by the Baron Molak, backed with fortie light horſe, conducted by the Lord Tremblay, appoynted to force ye enemie from the place which they had taken. All theſe ſet valiantly vpon the enemie, whom they enforced to flee, many were ſlayn, and the reſt ſaued themſelues within the defence of their artillerie, where the whole ſtrength of the Spaniards with the reſt of the armie was placed.
               During this ſkirmiſh, there was a great number of ſhot placed vnder the hedges, which hauing meanes to doe hurte, ſtoode quiet as though they had fallen aſleepe, or elſe had béen placed there onely to keepe the hedges, leaſt the Prince ſhould come to cut them downe and cary them away.
               In this ſkirmiſh, don Roderigo chiefe marſhall of the Spaniards, and a Spaniſh captaine, two hundred French Souldiers, and threeſcore Spaniards were ſlaine.
               The Lord Tremblay tooke the Lord Guebrian, Colonell of the foote men of the enemie.
               This charge did ſo amazethe enemie, that the Princes men were ſuffered to diſarme the dead, and to leade away priſoners within ten paces of their canon, and retired at their 
                     •
                  aſe without any proffering to follow▪ 
                  Long, Lieftenaunt to Captaine Dolphin, receaued in his body fiue Harquebuſes ſhott: the Engliſh men behaued themſelues valiantly in that charge, the reſidue of that day they ſpent in light ſkirmiſhes.
               The twelfth day the enemie made a great ſhew to come foorth to battell, but at laſt ſent out ſome number of ſhot to ſkirmiſh, agaynſt whome Anthony Sherley with fifteene horſe and few footemen made head, and ſpeedely put them to flight, and followed them to their Barricadoes, where maſter Kemp a Gentleman of that Cornet was ſlayne, Anthony Sherleys horſe was ſhot in the head, and Charles Blunt his horſe was killed vnder him with the Canon, and he himſelfe ſomewhat wounded.
               The thirteenth day the enemie offered ſome light ſkirmiſhes, but ſeeing that he could get nothing by it he refuſed to bitte.
               The fourteene day the Prince expected the battell, as vndertaken by don Iuan de Lagula, generall of the Spaniards, in the worſhip of Saynt Iohn, whoſe day it was with them. But fearing that bonfires would bee made to their coſt and charges, they gaue quite ouer the game, prepared the ſame night to diſlodge, and the next day following repaſſed the hill: for hauing ſpent al their victuals, they muſt go forth to rob for more.
               
                  
The Prince ſtayed ſixe dayes vpon the Heath, and in the meane while the enemie durſt neuer preſume to draw his armie into the Heath.
               The ſixteenth day the Lord la Now with the troupe of the Countie  
                  Mongomery, and the Countie Chombourg, came vnto Chaſteau Laudran, whoſe arriuall giueth hope of good ſucceſſe in the Kings affayres.
               They yt haue written the hiſtory of wilde beaſts, which doth recite that there is a wild beaſt in Aſia named Pardalis, it yeeldeth ſuch a ſauour that the Woolfe hath a great delight to follow a farre off, but if it chance that this Pardalis dooth looke back, immediatly the Woolfe retyreth and flyeth away.
               So the Noble Princes of Bourbon doo yeeld ſweete ſauour of pietie, vertue and valiantnes: Merceur followeth them a farre off, but if they turne their face hee runeth away, as it hath appeared in the things which heretofore he hath attempted in Poytow.
               
               There is a towne in Picardy ſituated vpon the riuer Oyſe, called Noyon, commended (if there were none other cauſe) for being the place of the natiuitie vnto that man of God Iohn Caluin of bleſſed memory, whoſe name is written in the booke of life, and ſhall yeeld a ſweete ſauour to the true Church of God to the worldes ende, whatſoeuer Sathan doth rage againſt the name of this ſeruant of God.
               This towne was ſeduced long before from the Kings obedience by the Leaguers, and through rebellion was poſſeſſed by the Kings enemies. The King therefore after the taking of Louiers, thought expedient to remooue his armie from Vernon, and to draw Eaſtward, that doing ſtill ſome profitable exployt, he might expect and receaue the forces that came to him out of Germany: and conſidering that the ſayd towne of Noyon did lye betweene S. Quintin, Compeigne and Corbey, which were long before vnder his obedience, thought good there to ſtay for the approaching of the Germanes: and during the moneth of Iuly, hauing reduced the ſayd towne to great diſtreſſe, made his account ſhortly to be Lord of it.
               The Vicount Tauanes (head of the rebellion in the Citie of Roan, and moſt hatefulleſt enemie of any that the King had) enterpriſed to relieue the ſayd towne of Noyon, and for that intent in the beginning of Auguſt in the night ſeaſon departed from Roan, accompanied with foure hundred horſe, and fiue hundred footmen, with good hope either to ſuccour the ſaid towne, or els by ſurpriſe greatly to hinder the King.
               But the King hauing intelligences of his comming, met him about two or thrée leagues from Noyon, (as I haue heard reported) where his power was diſcomfited, ſlayne and taken priſoners, and he himſelfe after being wounded in the aſſault was alſo taken priſoner. So the Lord knoweth bow, where and when to ſtay his enemies.
               The newes of this ſorrowfull ſucceſſe of the Leaguers flying abroad,

cauſed the Duke Aumale to aſſemble as great forces as he could make in the towne of Han, which is ſituated vpon the riuer Some betweene Saint Quintin and Peronne, vndertaking either to amend the fault committed by  
                  Tauanes, or els to releaſe the towne of Noyon, accompanied with the Lord Largue and Lawney with all their forces, ioyned all with the light horſemen, the ſeauenth of Auguſt charged vpon the quarter of the Kings light horſe, where they were ſtoutly receaued: and after more then twelue charges giuen, the Kings companies (yet very like to haue the victorie of their enemies) began to retyre: at which retyre, that valiant man at armes the Lord Baron of Byron hauing twelue of his owne men did approach, and the Kings forces ſuppoſing he had brought a ſupply of freſh Souldiers, ſo ſoone as they heard him named, tooke a wonderfull courage, and ſeeing him in the middeſt of them, gaue a freſh charge vpon the enemie with ſuch force, that they did driue the enemie euen into the gates of Han. To whom there was alſo comming a new ſuccour and freſh ſupply of men, who perceauing the euill ſucceſſe of the reſt, retyred in agayne: ſo that ſome of the Kings forces followed them euen into their Barriars.
               In theſe ſo many charges geuen, there were a number of armed men ſlayne on the enemies ſide, and among them diuers of commandement. In the number of the dead were found Don Franciſco de Gueuara, the beſt Captayne of light Horſemen which the King of Spayne had in the low Countreys, alſo his lieutenant was ſlayne outright, with diuers other of great accompt.
               The Lord Longchamp (one of the beſt Captains of the rebels) was taken priſoner, with more then foure ſcore men at armes of account, and loſt aboue fifteene hundred of their beſt horſes.
               The King loſt in this ſkirmiſh about twelue horſe of his light horſemen, and among a few which were ſlayne the Marſhall of the light horſemen, whoſe death was greatly bewayled, beeing accompted a man of great valour.
               The ſame day the Duke de Mayne arriued at the ſaid towne of Han, with all his troups of horſemen which he could gather, which thing made the King thinke that he would goe about either to raiſe or to interrupt the ſiege, or attempt ſome thing.
               In the meane time he loſt no opportunity about this ſiege: for the ſame day that this exploit was done, to wit, the ſeauenth of Auguſt, the Canon began to beat a church that ſtandeth in the middeſt of the Suburbes, which together with a great ditch did ſtrongly defend the ſame.
               The ſayd Church beeing battered from the morning to three a clock in  the after noone, had by that time made a great breach in the ſame. And a fierce aſſault being geuen, there were ſlayne of the enemies about thirty, and about fifty of the Souldiers retired into the vaultes of the ſaid church.
               
                  
The ſayd Church beeing taken, and conſequently the Suburb (in a maner as ſtrong as the towne) gaue occaſion both to them that had retired into  the vaultes to yeeld to the Kings mercy, who ſent them away ſafe with bagge and bagage, and alſo to the Gouernor of the towne to mooue ſpeaches of compoſition.
               For the Gouernor (called the Lord Vile) conſidering how the Towne was ſlenderly furniſhed of all thinges, but ſpecially of men of armes, and that the moſt part of them had béene ſlayne in the aſſaults geuen to the Cittie, and how the King was ſtrong and not like to bee enforced to depart afore hee had the vpper hand ouer the ſayd Towne. And vnderſtanding that the Duke de Mayne was come to Han with Forces, in hope to relieue the ſayd diſtreſſed towne, and that the Lord Roſne, who led the Duke de Mayne his army towards Lorreine, was returning backe to Laon in Champaygne, he delayed the time of compoſition to ſee what ſuccor they would geue.
               But at length, ſeeing no reliefe comming, and the King vrging the towne, the ſayd Lord Vile concluded an agreement with the King in this maner following.
               The Lord Vile (as well for himſelfe as for the Gentlemen, Souldiers and inhabitants of Noyon) hath promiſed to yeeld the ſayd towne vppon monday next following, being the eighteenth of Auguſt, together with all the munition for warre, artillerie and victualls, which at this preſent was therein, conditionally if ſometime of the day the Duke de Mayne doo not giue him a battell, or by force put not within the towne one thouſand ſouldiers, or by ſome meanes doo not raiſe the ſiege. Alſo that the ſayd Ville, Gentlemen and Captains ſhall depart with armour, horſes and baggage, and the Souldiers with their weapons and horſe. And that the inhabitants ſhalbe receaued into the Kings fauour, & entreated as good ſubiects, in rendring him their duetifull obedience: but ſpecially and namely that the Lord of Ville his mother may freely remaine there & enioy her goods, in performing the ſubmiſſion of loyall fidelitie as other ſubiects.
               Item, that if any of the inhabitants be deſirous to depart, they ſhal ſafely paſſe among the men of warre.
               Item, that the Lord Ville ſhall be permitted to ſend the Lord of Brouly to the Duke de Mayne, to aduertiſe him of the condition of this capitulation, and that the King ſhall ſafely conduct him to that effect.
               And for the accompliſhing of the premiſes, the ſayd Lord Ville hath promiſed to ſende hoſtages to the King, the Lord Rieulx, the Abbot of Genlis, with foure of the towne, ſuch as the King ſhall chooſe, whom the King doth promiſe to deliuer vppon the performance of the ſayd conditions.
               The King alſo doth graunt to ſend two Captaynes into the towne to

keepe and ſee during the time, from labouring to the contrary.
               It had pleaſed the moſt famous and renowmed Queene of England, 
                   during this ſiege, to ſend a new ſupply of men to the King, to aſſiſt him in the recouering the poſſeſſion of his right, vnder the conduct of th
                     •
                   moſt honourable and famous Earle of Eſſex, whom the King leauing his power before Noyan, went to meet at Gyſors in Normandy, whom hee receaued in moſt courteous ſort, accepting moſt thankfull her moſt excellent Maieſties gracious fauour, and the ſaid Earle his good and readie will, for hazarding himſelfe in ſuch a dangerous iourney for his ſeruice.
               After the death of Frier Sixtus, which was haſtened by the Spaniſh faction with a little ſlubber ſauce, was elected a newe Vicar of Rome, of the houſe of Sfondraty, if I remember well, and is as much to ſay as burſt bellie, naming himſelfe Gregory the 14.
               This Frier Gregory being ſet on horſebacke, will ride (as the prouerbe is) vntil he breake his neck. Firſt in Ianuary he ſent a Legate into France, agaynſt whom the King procéeded as agaynſt an enemie of the publique peace of his ſubiects, and in March laſt the ſayd Frier Gregory pronounced a Bull agaynſt the King, his Princes, Nobles, ſubiects and realme. Then not long after it is reported that he ſent certain forces, muſtered out of the Stewes of Rome, to the Duke of Sauoy to inuade Prouance, conducted by ſome baſtard of his: and that Superſtition, Folly, iniury and wrong might goe together, he muſt coniure and charme the Standard of holy Church (as all the ſort of ſuch idolatrous Antichriſts haue bin Coniurers, poyſoners, and Sorcerers many yeares together). To play this Comedie, he ſitteth diſguiſed in his Pontificalibus, the Standard of holy Church holden before him, he hiſſeth, he bloweth, hee mumbleth, he croſſeth, he charmeth, he ſtinketh: but behold, he that did hold it (rather by ſome preſage and token of the fall of that idolatrous rabble, than by negligence) let the Standard fall vppon the brayneſicke Frier Gregories head, which not onely did beate downe his triple Crowne from of his head, but alſo gaue a knocke vppon his fooliſh pate. All theſe companies ſhortly after were cut to peeces, and the charmed Standard taken by the Lord des Diguieres, as is reported.
               Fryer Gregorie not content with all theſe iniurious prouocations, ſent one M. Marcilius Laudrianus, by name an Italian, by ſurname a Britaine, but by ſawcines and deſperatnes a Ieſuite, vnder the name of his Nuncio, to publiſh a certayne infamous libell, full of impietie hereſie and ſedition, vnder a Maſke of religion in forme of Bulls, againſt the King, his Princes, Nobles & ſubieces, but ſpecially agaynſt the French popiſh Church, which this ſawcie companion enterprized to publiſh at Pont de Larche in Normandie▪
                   whereupon the K. finding himſelfe ſore ini
                     •
                  ried at the hands of this tyrannous vſurper, commaunded his courts of Parliament

to proceede by law agaynſt theſe iniuries, and ſo the Kings generall attourney in his court of Parliament, holden at Caen in Normandie, 
                   requiring iuſtice to be done vnto the King, his Princes, Nobles and ſubiects.
               The court of Parliament therefore, al Chambers aſſembled, the third day of Auguſt did proceede agaynſt Fryer Gregorie his perſon, his vſurped tyranny, his Nuncio and his Bulls.
               Firſt, they doo declare the ſayde Fryer Gregorie, an enemie vnto the peace of Chriſtianitie, a troubler of the Catholick Romane▪ Religion, enemie to the King and Eſtate of France, a conſpiratour and aſſociate with the rebells within the realme, and acceſſary to the death of the late deceaſed King moſt trayterouſly murthered, a firebrand of ſedition, and ſtirrer vp of warres, and procurer of murthers.
               Secondly, they doe condemne his vſurped power vpon the ſtate and Church of France, to be vſurped, abuſiue and wrongful, contrary to Gods worde, holy decrees and liberties of the French Church, commaunding all Primates, Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Colledges, Couents, Chapters, Communalties, bodies of Cities, Curats, Parſons and ſeruing Prieſts, not to acknowledge any ſuperiority or power of the ſame Fryer Gregorie, nor to render him any obeiſance, neyther to aſſiſt or fauour anie excommunications, publications or readings of any thing that ſhould proceede from him.
               The court alſo dooth forbid, not to purſue or receaue of him, or anie other whatſoeuer qualitie or conditiō they be, his complices & adherents, any collations, confirmations, or prouiſions for benefices, graces, diſpenſations, or other expeditions, nor to anſwere, beare, or cauſe to be borne by way of banque or otherwiſe, any gold or ſiluer to ye court of Rome, neither to pay any thing or render obeiſance to the Archbiſhops, Biſhops, his adherents, who haue put in execution any of the pretended diffamatory libell, in forme of excommunication or interdiction, in payne of confiſcation of bodie and goods, as infringers and perturbers of the publique peace.
               The court doth commaund the Eccleſiaſticall perſons, by vertue of the Kings letters directed vnto them, that they ſhall not ſuffer the liberty of the French Church to be in any ſort diminiſhed: but beeing aſſiſted by their K. (their ſoueraigne Iuſtice) to oppoſe themſelues againſt all the Popes enterpriſes.
               Thirdly, the court doth declare the foreſayd Marcilius Ladrianus, Fryer Gregory his Nuncio, acommon enemy of al men, a kindler of hatred and a ſower of ſedition, commaunding the ſayd pretended Nuncio to be purſued, taken and apprehended, aliue or dead, and to be deliuered to iuſtice, if it bee poſſible, to receaue the puniſhment according to the greatnes of his offence.

But if he cannot bee apprehended, within three daye 
                     •
                  to be ſummoned by the voice of the publike Cryer in the towne of Pont de Larche, that  there it may bee proceeded againſt him according to the Lawes of the Realme.
               The order of the courts of France is, that after a man is ſummoned at 3. ſeuerall tymes, if he doth not appeare, he is condemned as conuicted, and then executed in picture.
               Laſt of al, the Court doth declare Fryer Gregory his excommunication and Bulles, infamous libels full of impiety, hereſie, deceit and ſlanders, & condemneth the ſame to betorne and burned publikly in the place of execution, by the publike executioner of iuſtice, forbidding all men to receaue, allow, reade, fauour or conceale the ſaid infamous libell, vppon payne to bee attainted, & conuicted of high treaſon: & commaundeth alſo all manner of perſons quickly to reueale to the court, if they ſhould know any ſuch to bee kept ſecretly on the paines aforeſaid.
               This ſentence of the Popes baniſhment, and of all his tyr
                     •
                  nnie out of France, was pronounced the third day of Auguſt at Caen in Normandie.
               
               The ſelfe ſame proceedinges were vſed in all Courtes of the Realme, whereuppon enſued the burning of the ſayd Bulles in diuers and ſundry places of the Realme, but diuerſly, but euery where in as infamous maner as could bee. It was burned at Tours in this maner.
               The Magiſtrats and the common people of Tours being aſſembled before the Pallace gate, there a piller was crected a little diſtant from the foot therof, there was a fire made by the common Hang-man of the town, then did he take the Bull and hanged it on the top of the Piller, which beeing done, he kindled another fire at the very foot of the Piller, which by degrees crept vp vntill it tooke hold of the Bull, which preſently was conſumed with fire, to the great ioy of all the beholders.
               Now Maſter Fryer, I ween you be one of them that did drop out of the horſes belly of Troy, but I will thinke rather that you dropped out of an Aſſes bellie, becauſe you haue an Aſſes head.
               Did not a little before your Standard reproue you to your face, and told you what would follow your ſaucines: and to put you in conſideration of your folly gaue you a ſouſe vpon the pate: And you beeing of Aſſes brood, will goe about to get Bulles, and lo, your Bulles bee turned into gydie Calues. You neuer read (for reading belongs not to your occupation, but ſcortari crebro, crebro conuiuarier) that it was writtē in the horſe of Troy, ſero ſapiunt Phryges, but it ſhal be hereafter in Aſino Romano, ſcriptum erit ſero ſapiunt Romanenſes. You knew not when you were well, now haue with you to Auignon.
               
               The towne of Noyan being ſurrendered, according to the agréement betwéene the King and the gouernour of the ſaide towne, the King went to

receaue the right honorable Lord Earle of Eſſex (as is ſaid) in the towne of Giſors, and from thence returned into Champaigne, to ioyn with the Germans,  who approached the borders of France, leauing the Marſhall Byron, to reconduct his army into Normandie. During the ſiege of Noyan, the Lord of Pierrefont had béen taken priſoner, and had promiſed vpon his deliuerance, to ſurrender the Caſtell Pierrefont, a place ſituated vpō a rock, and inacceſſable almoſt on euery ſide. The ſaid Lord of Pierrefont being a deſperat Leaguer, had rather breake his faith with diſhonor, then to fulfill his promiſe with honour: whereupon the Marſhall Byron layed the ſiege before the ſaide Caſtell, and battered it with nine ſkore ſhot of Ordinance, wherewith hee made but a very ſmall hole: the ſtuffe wherewith the ſaid Caſtell is builded, being of ſuch qualitie, as reſiſted the ſhot, euen to admiration, which cauſed the ſaid Marſhall Byron to breake off his enterpriſe, and march toward Normandie, who ioyned with the Engliſh forces, conducted by the right Honorable Lord, the Earle of Eſſex, the ninth of September, and the twenty one of the ſaid moneth, laide the ſiege before the towne of Gourney.
               
               It is ſaide before in the ſeauenth booke, how after the cruell death of King Henry the third, and laſt of the raſe of 
                     Ʋaloys, the authors of that murther, vnder the conduct of the Duke d'Mayne, with great bragges and confidence, went with a mighty army into Normandie, hoping to oppreſſe the King, who with a ſmall power had retyred to Diepe, for the cauſes there alleaged.
               It is ſaid alſo, how the Duke d'Mayne in that iourney, tooke the ſaid towne of Gourney, and the Lord Rubempre which his companie therein. This Towne is diſtant from Roan ten Leagues, from Giſors fiue, from Beauuoys ſixe, and by eſtimation ſomewhat bigger then Diepe.
               
               The Leaguers had fortified it with fortifications, munition of warre, and ſtrong garriſons, for Leagued Gentlemen of the Countrey, to the number of foure ſkore, and ſuch power as they thought good to entertaine, had ſettled themſelues therein, and from thence iſſuing dayly, made courſes to the gates of Mante, Vernon, Pont de larche, and Giſors, ſpoyling and waſting all that was in their way, and taking priſoners ſuch as trauailed on the high way to Diepe.
               
               This towne being beſieged, the enemy put on a ſtout countenance at the firſt, and being ſummoned to ſurrender the ſaid towne, they anſwered that they had receaued it of the Duke d'Mayne, and for him they intended to kéepe it, neither would they render it, but to him onely.
               This anſwer being giuen, the Engliſh forces intrenched themſelues within a ſtones caſt of the gate, and in making and kéeping the ſaid Trenches, they had ſixe men hurt, and one killed. The enemies attempted diuers times to put men into the towne, but they were in ſuch ſort looked to

by the Engliſh men, that they durſt neuer approach.
               The 25. day of September at night, the Marſhall Byron planted nine  pieces of Ordinance before the towne, & the 26. in the morning hee began to batter it, and a breach being made, the Engliſh men were called to the number of one hundred ſhot to giue the aſſault, who with great gladnes approached within ſixeſcore paſes of the wals, the breach was ſcarſe aſſaultable, the ditch was more then halfe full of water: it is reported that they had within certaine ſluces, which they might haue opened, and greatly moleſted the aſſaulters, the French men were very vnable to giue the aſſault, becauſe of their long toyling and wearines, yet on a ſuddaine the enemies demaunded parley, which being graunted, they yeeldéd to foure diſhonorable conditions: ſuch is the fainting of rebels.
               Firſt, that all Souldiours ſhould depart without bagage and armour, with a white rod in their hands. But the Lord Earle of Eſſex, excepted the Queenes Maieſties ſubiects: therein was found none but one Iriſh man, who was executed.
               The ſecond was, that the Gouernour, Captaines, Lieutenants and Gentlemen of quality, ſhould remaine to his mercy. It was thought that the Gouernour and ſome Captaines ſhould be executed.
               The third was, that the Citizens ſhould haue their liues, but their goods reſted at the Kings pleaſure.
               The fourth is, that they ſhould receaue ſuch garriſons as ſhould bee thought good. The taking of this towne is a great eaſe to the Countrey, and preparation for the ſiege of Roan.
               
               About the 28. the army tooke his way toward Caudebeck, a ſmal towne, ſituated vpon a rock, on the banck of Seyne, betweene Roan and Newhauen, entending to cleere all the coaſt round about Newhauen, of all filth of rebellion.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               ¶ Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Woodcock, and are to be ſould at his ſhop in Paules Churchyard, at the ſigne of the black Beare. 1591.
            
            
         
      
   